MARIE MAGDALENS FUNERAL TEARS.

Ieremiae. CAP. 6. VERSE, 26.

Luctum vnigeniti fac tibi planctum Amarum.

LONDON, Printed by I. W. for G. C. 1591.

To the worshipful and virtuous Gentlewoman, Mistres D. A.
YOur virtuous request to which your deserts gave the force of a com
mandement, won me to satisfy your devotion, in penning some little discourse
of the blessed Mary Magdalen. And among other glorious examples of this Saints
life, I have made choice of her Funeral Tears, in which as she most uttered
the great vehemence of her fervent love to Christ, so has she given therein
largest scope to dilate upon the same: a theme pleasing I hope unto your
self, and fittest for this time. For as passion, and especially this of love,
is in these days the chief commander of most men's actions, and the Idol to
which both tongues and pens do sacrifice their ill bestowed labors: so is
there nothing now more needful to be entreated, then how to direct these
humors unto their due courses, and to draw this flood of affections into the
right chanel. Passions I allow, and loves I approve, only I would wish that
men would alter their object and better their intent. For passions being
sequels of our nature, and allotted unto us as the handmaides of reason: there
can be no doubt, but that as their author is good, and their end godly: so there
use tempered in the mean, implies no offense. Love is but the infancy of true
charity, yet sucking natures teate, and swathed in her bands, which then
grows to perfection, when faith besides natural motives proposes higher and
nobler grounds of amitye. Hatred and anger are the necessary officers of
prowess and Justice, courage being cold and dull, and Justice in due revenge
slack and careless, where hate of the fault does not make it odious, and
anger seteth not edge on the sword that punishes or preuenteth wrongs. Desire
and hope are the parents of diligence and industry, the nurses of perseueraunce
and constancy, the seeds of valor and magnanimity, the death of sloth, and
the breath of all virtue. Fear and dislike are the sconces of discretion, the
herbingers of wisdom and policy, killing idle repentance in the cradle, and
curbing rashness with deliberation. Audacity is the armor of strength, and
the guide to glory, breaking the ice to the hardest exploites, and crowening
valor with honorable victory.

Sorrow is the sister of mercy, and a waker of compassion, weeping with others
tears, and grieved with their harms. It is both the salve and smart of sin,
curing that which it chasticeth with true remorse, and preventing need of new
cure with the detestation of the disease. Despair of success, is a bitte
against evil attempts, and the hearse of idle hopes ending endless things in
their first motion to begin. True Joy is the rest and reward of virtue,
seasoning difficulties with delight, and giving a present assay of future
happiness. Finally, there is no passion but has a serviceable use either in
the pursuit of good, or auoydance of evil, and they are all benefits of God
and helps of nature, so long as they are kept under virtues correction.

But as too much of the best is evil, and excess in virtue vice: so passions
let loose without limmits are imperfections, nothing being good thatwanteth
measure. And as the sea is unfit for traffic, not only when the winds are
too boisterous, but also when they are too still, and a middle gale and motion
of the waves serves best the sailers purpose: So neither too stormy nor too
calm a mind gives Virtue the freest course, but a middle temper between
them both, in which the well ordered passions are wrought to prosecute, not
suffered to pervert any virtuous endeavor. Such were the passions of this holy
Saint, which were not guides to reason, but attendantes upon it, and commanded
by such a love as could never exceed, because the thing loved was of infinite
perfection. And if her weakness of faith, (an infirmity then common to all
Christ's disciples) did suffer her understanding to be deceived, yet was her
will so settled in a most sincere and perfect love, that it led all her
passions with the same bias, recompensing the want of belief, with the strange
effects of an excellent charity. This love and these passions are the subject
of this discourse, which though it reach not to the dignity of Mary's deserts,
yet shall I think my endeavors well apaide, if it may woo some skilfuller pens
from unworthy labors, either to supply in this matter my want of ability, or
in other of like piety, (whereof the scripture is full) to exercise their
happier talents. I know that none can express a passion that he feels not,
neither does the pen deliver but what it coppieth out of the mind. And
therefore since the finest wits are now given to write passionat discourses, I
would wish them to make choice of such passions, as it neither should be shame
to utter, nor sin to feel. But whether my wishes in this behalf take effect
or not, I reap at the least this reward of my pains, that I have showed my
desire to answer your courtesy, and set forth the due praises of this glorious
Saint.

Your loving friend. S. W.

To the Reader.
Many suting their labors to the popular vain, and guided by the gale of
vulgar breath, have diuulged diverse patheticall discourses, in which if they
had showed as much care to profit, as they have done desire to please, their
works would much more have honored their names, and auailed the Readers. But
it is a just complaint among the better sort of persons, that the finest
wits loose themselves in the vainest follies, spilling much Art in some
idle fancy, and leaving their works as witnesses, how long they have been
in travail to be in fine delivered of a fable. And sure it is a thing greatly
to be lamented, that men of so high conceit should so much abase their
habilities, that when they have racked them to the uttermost endeavor, all the
praise that they reap of their employment, consists in this, that they have
wisely told a foolish tale, and carried a long lie very smoothly to the
end. Yet this inconvenience might find some excuse, if the drift of their
discourse leuelled at any virtuous mark, for in fables are often figured
moral trueths, and that covertly uttered to a common good, which without a
mask would not find so free a passage. But when the substance of the work
has neither truth nor probabilite, nor the purport thereof tends to any
honest end, the writer is rather to be pitied then praised, and his books
fitter for the fire then for the press. This common oversight more have
observed, then endeavored to salve, every one being able to reprove, none
willing to redress such faults, aucthorised especially by general custom:
And though if necessity (the lawless patron of enforced actions) had not
more prevailed, then choice, this work of so different a subject from the
usual vain, should have been no eyesore to those that are better pleased
with worse matters. Yet since the copies thereof flew so fast, and so false
abroad, that it was in danger to come corrupted to the print: it seemed a less
evil to let it fly to common view in the native plume, and with the own
wings, then disguised in a voate of a bastard feather, or cast off from the
fist of such a corrector, as might happily have perished the sound, and imped^n
some sick and sorry feathers of his own phansies. It may be that courteous
skill will reckon this, though eourse in respect of others exquisite labors,
not unfit to entertain well tempered humors, both with pleasure and profit,
the ground thereof being in scripture, and the form of enlarging it, an
imitation of the ancient doctors, in the same and other points of like
tenor. This commodity at the least it will carry with it, that the reader may
learn to love without improofe of purity, and teach his thoughts either to
temper passion in the mean, or to give the bridle only where the excess
cannot be faultic. Let the work defend it self, and every one pass his
censure as he sees cause. Many Carpes are expected when curious eyes come a
fishing. But the care is already taken, and the patience waits at the table,
ready to take away, when that dish is served in, and to make room for others
to set on the desired fruit.

S. VV.

MARY MAGDALENS Funeral Tears.
EMONGST other mourneful accidents of the passion of Christ, that love
presents it self to my memory, with which the blessed Mary Magdelen loving
our Lord more then her life, followed him in his journey to his death,
attending upon him when his Disciples fled, and being more willing to die
with him, then they to live without him. But not finding the favor to
accompany him in death, and loathing after him to remain in life, the fire of
her true affection enflamed her heart, and her enflamed heart resolved into
incessant tears, so that burning and bathing between love and grief, she led
a life ever dying, and felt a death never ending. And when he by whom she
lived was dead, and she for whom he died enforcedly left alive, she praised
the dead more then the living, and having lost that light of her life, she
desired to dwell in darkness, and in the shadow of death, choosing Christ's
Tomb for her best home, and his corse for her chief comfort. For Mary (as the
Evangelist says) Stood John 20.
without at the Tomb weeping.

But alas how unfortunate is this woman, to whom neither life will afforde a
desired farewell, nor death allow any wished welcome. She has abandoned the
living and chosen the company of the dead, and now it seems that even the
dead have forsaken her, since the corse she seeks is taken away from her. And
this was the cause that love induced her to stand, and sorrow enforced her to
weep. Her eye was watchful to seek, whom her heart most longed to enjoy, and
her foot in a readiness to run, if her eye should chance to espy him. And
therefore she stands to be still stirring, pressed to watch every way, and
prepared to go whether any hope should call her. But she wept because she
had such occasion of standing, and that which moved her to watch was the motive
of her tears. For as she watched to find whom she had lost, so she wept
for having lost whom she loved, her poor eyes being troubled at once with two
contrary offices, both to be clear in sight the better to seek him, and yet
cloudy with tears for missing the sight of him.

Yet was not this the entrance but the increase of her grief, not the
beginning but the renewing of her moan. For first she mourned for the
departing of his soul out of his body, and now she lamented the taking of his
body out of the grave, being punished with two wreckes of her only welfare,
both full of misery, but the last without all comfort. The first original of
her sorrow grew because she could not enjoy him alive: yet this sorrow had
some solace, for that she hoped to have enjoyed him dead.

But when she considered that his life was already lost, and now not so much
as his body could be found, she was wholly daunted with dismay, since this
unhappiness admitted no help. She doubted least the love of her master (the
only portion that her Fortune had left her) would soon languish in her cold
breast, if it neither had his words to kindle it, nor his presence to cherishe
it, nor so much as his dead ashes to rake it up. She had prepared her spices
and provided her ointments, to pay him the last Tribute of Joan. 19.
eternal duties. And though Joseph and Nichodemus had already bestowed a
hundred pounds of Mirthe and Aloes, which was in quantity sufficient, in
quality of the best, and as well applied as art and devotion could devise: yet
such was her love, that she would have thought any quantity too little, except
hers had been added, the best in quality too mean except hers were with it,
and no diligence in applying it enough, except her service were in it. Not that
she was sharp in censuring that which others had done, but because love made
her so desirous to do all her self, that though all had been done that she
could devise, and as well as she could wish, yet unless she were an Actor it
would not suffice, since love is as eager to be uttered in effects, as it is
zealous in true affection. She came therefore now meaning to enbalme his
corpse, as she had before anointed his feet, and to preserve the relics of
his body, as the only remnant of all her bliss. And as in the spring of her
felicity she had washed his feet with her tears, be wailing unto him the
death of her own soul: so now she came in the depth of her misery, to shed
them a fresh for the death of his body. But when she saw the grave open, and
the body taken out, the labor of embalming was prevented, but the cause of her
weeping increased, and he that was wanting to her obsequies, was not wanting to
her tears, and though she found not whom to anoint, yet found she whom to
lament.

And not without cause did Mary complain, finding her first anguishe doubled
with a second grief, and being surcharged with two most violent sorrows in
one afflicted heart. For having settled her whole affection upon Christ, and
summoned all her desires and wishes into the love of his goodness, as nothing
could equal his worthes: so was there not in the whole world, either a greater
benefit for her to enjoy then himself, or any greater damage possible then his
loss.

The murdering in his one death, the life of all life's, left a general death in
all living creatures, and his disease not only disrobed our nature of her most
royal ornaments, but impouerished the world of all highest perfections. What
marvel therefore though her vehement love to so lovely a Lord, being after
the wrecke of his life, now also deprived of his dead body, feel as bitter
pangues for his loss, as before it tasted joys in his presence, and open as
large an issue to tears of sorrow, as ever heretofore to tears of
contentment. And though tears were rather oil then water to her flame, apter
to nourish then diminish her grief: yet being now plunged in the depth of
pain, she yielded her self captive to all discomfort, carrying an
overthrown mind in a more enfeebled body, and still busy in devising, but
ever doubtful in defining what she might best do. For what could a seely
woman do but weep, that floating in a Sea of cares, found neither ear to
hear her, nor tongue to direct her, nor hand to help her, nor heart to pity
her in her desolate case? True it is that Peter and John came with her to the
tomb, and to make trial of her report were both within it: but as they were
speedy in coming, and diligent in searching, so were they as quick to depart,
and fearful of farther seeking. And alas, what gained she by their coming,
but two witnesses of her loss, two dismaiers of her hope, and two paterns of a
new despair? Love moved them to come, but their love was soon conquered, with
such a fear, that it suffered them not to stay. But Mary hoping in despair,
and perseuering in hope, stood without fear, because she now thought nothing
left that ought to be feared. For she had lost her master to whom she was so
entirely devoted, that he was the total of her loves, the height of her
hopes, and the uttermost of her fears, and therefore beside him, she could
neither love other creature, hope for other comfort, nor fear other loss. The
worst she could fear was the death of her body, and that she rather desired
then feared, since she had already lost the life of her soul, without which
any other life would be a death, and with which any other death would have been
a delight. But now she thought it better to die then to live, because she
might happily dying find, whom not dying she looked not to enjoy, and not
enjoying she had little will to live. For now she loved nothing in her life,
but her love to Christ, and if any thing did make her willing to live, it was
only the unwillingness that his Image should die with her, whose likeness
love had limmed in her heart, and treasured up in her sweetest memories. And
had she not feared to break the Table, and to break open the closet, to which
she had entrussed this last relic of her lost happiness, the violence of
grief would have melted her heart into inward bleeding tears, and blotted her
remembrance with a fatal oblivion. And yet nevertheless, she is no we in so
imperfect a sort alive, that it is proved true in her that Love is as strong as
Death. For what could death have done more in Mary then Love did. Her wits
were astonished, and all her senses so amassed, that in the end finding she did
not know, seeing she could not discern, hearing she perceived not, and more
then all this, she was not there where she was, for she was wholly where her
Master was, more where she loved then where she lived, and less in her self
then in his body, which notwithstanding, where it was she could not imagine.
For she sought, and as yet found it not, and therefore stood at the Tomb
weeping for it, being now altogether given to mourning and driven to misery.

But O Mary, by whose counsel, upon what hope, or with what heart, could
thou stand alone, when the Disciples were departed? Thou were there once before
they came, thou returnest again at their coming, and yet now thou staiest
when they are gone. Alas that thy Lord is not in the Tomb, thy own eyes have
often seen, the Disciples hands have felt, the empty Sindon does avouch, and
cannot all this win thee to believe it? No no, thou would rather condemn
thy own eyes of error, and both their eyes and hands of deceit, yea rather
suspect all testimonies for untrue, then not look whom thou have lost, even
there, where by no diligence he could be found. When thou think of other
places, and can not imagine any so likely as this, thou seek again in
this, and though never so often sought, it must still be a haunt for hope, for
when things dearly affected are lost, loves nature is, never to be weary of
searching even the oftenest searched corners, being more willing to think that
all the senses are mistaken, then to yield that hope should quail. Yet now
since it is so evident, that he is taken away, what should move thee to remain
here where the peril is apparent, and no profit likely? Can the witof one
(and she a woman) wholly possessed with passion, have more light to discern
danger, then two wits of two men, and both principal favorites of the
parent of all wisdom? Or if (notwithstanding the danger) there had been just
cause to encounter it, were not two together, being both to Christ sworn
companions, each to other affied friends, and to all his ennemies professed
foes, more likely to have prevailed, then one feminine heart, timorous by
kind, and already amassed with this dreadful accident?

But alas why do I urge her with reason, whole reason is altered into love,
and that judges it folly to follow such reason, as should any way impair her
love. Her thoughts were arrested by every thredde of Christ's Sindon, and she
was captive in so many prisons, as the Tomb had memories of her lost master,
Love being her Iailor in them all, and nothing able to ransom her, but the
recovery of her Lord. What marvel then though the Apostles examples drew her
not away, whom so violent a love enforced to remain, which prescribing laws
both to wit and will, is guided by no other law but it self? She could not
think of any fear, nor stand in fear of any force. Love armed her against all
hazardes, and being already wounded with the greatest grief, she had not
leisure to remember any lesser evil. Yea she had forgotten all things, and
her self among al things, only mindful of him, whom she loved above all
things. And yet her love by reason of her loss, drownev both her mind and
memory so deep in sorrow, and so busied her wits in the conceit of his
absence, that al remembrance of his former promises, was diuerted with the
throng of present discomforts, and she seemed to have forgotten also him
besides whom she remembered nothing. For doubtless had she remembered him as
she should, she should not have now thought the Tomb a fit place to seek
him, neither would she mourn for him as dead, and removed by others force,
but joy in him as revived, and risen by his own power. For he had often
foretold both the manner of his death, and the day of his resurrection. But
alas let her heaviness excuse her, and the vnwontednes of the miracle plead
her pardon, since dread and amazement has dulled her senses, distempered her
thoughts, discouraged her hopes, awaked her passions, and left her no other
liberty but only to weep.

She wept therefore, being only able to weep. And, As she was weeping, she
stouped down and looked John 20.
into the Monument, and she saw two Angels in white, sitting one at the head,
and an other at the feet, where the body of Jesus had been laid. They said
unto her, Woman why wepest thou?

O Mary, thy good hap exceeds thy hope, and where thy last sorrow was bred,
thy first succor springs. Thou did seek but one, and thou have found
two. A dead body was thy errand, and thou have light upon two alive. Thy
weeping was for a man, and thy tears have obtained Angels. Suppress now thy
sadness, and refresh thy heart with this good Fortune. These angels inuit thee
to a parlee, they seem to take pity of thy case, and it may be they have some
happy tidinges to tell thee. Thou have hitherto sought in vain, as one either
unseen, or unknown, or at the least unregarded, since the party thou seek,
neither tendereth thy tears, nor answers thy cries, nor relenteth with thy
lamentings. Either he does not hear, or he will not help, he has
peradventure left to love thee, and is loath to yield thee relief, and
therefore take such comfort as thou find, since thou art not so lucky, as to
find that which thou could wish. Remember what they are, where they sit,
from whence they come, and to whom they speak. They are Angels of peace,
neither sent with out cause, nor seen but of favor. They sit in the Tomb, to
show that they are no strangers to thy loss. They come from Heaven, from
whence all happy news descend. They spoke to thy self, as though they had
some special Embassage to deliver unto thee. Ask them therefore of thy
master, for they are likeliest to return thee a desired answer. Thou
knew him too well, to think that hell has devoured him, thou have long
sought, and have not found him in earth, and what place so fit for him as to be
in heaven. Ask therefore of those Angels that came newly from thence, and it
may be, their report will highly please thee? Or if thou art resolved to
continue thy seeking, who can better help thee then they that are as swift as
thy thought, as faithful as thy own heart, and as loving to thy Lord as thou
thy self? Take therefore thy good hap, least it be taken away from thee, and
content thee with Angels since thy master has given thee over.

But alas what means this change, and how happens this strange alteration?
The time has been that fewer tears would have wrought greater effect,
shorter seeking have sooner found, and less pain have procured more pity.
The time has ven that thy anointing his feet, was accepted and praised, thy
washing them with tears highly commended, and thy wyping them with thy hair,
most courteously construed. How then does it now fall out, that having brought
thy sweet oiles, to anoint his whole body, having shed as many tears, as
would have washed more then his feet, and having not only thy hair but thy
heart ready to serve him, he is not moved with all these duties, so much as
once to affoorde thee his sight. Is it not he that reclaimed thee from thy
wandering courses, that dispossessed thee of thy damned inhabitants, and from
the wilds of sin, recovered thee into the fold and family of his flock?
was not thy house his home, his love thy life, thy self his Disciple? did not
he defend thee against the Pharisee, plead for thee against Judas, and excuse
thee to thy sister? In sum, was not he thy patron and protector in all thy
necessities.

O good Jesus what has thus estranged thee from her? Thou have heretofore so
pitied her tears, that seeing them thou could not refrain thine. In one
of her greatest agonies for love of her, that so much loved thee, thou did
recall her dead brother to life, turning her complaint into unexpected
contentment. And we know that thou do not use to alter course without
cause, nor to chastise without desert. Thou art the first that inuitest, and
the last that forsakest, never leaving but first left, and ever offering, til
thou art refused. How then has she forfaited thy favor? Or with what
trespass has she earned thy ill will? That she never left to love thee, her
heart will depose, her hand will subscribe, her tongue will protest, her tears
will testify, and her seeking does assure. And alas is her particular case so
far from all example, that thou should rather alter thy nature, then she
better her Fortune, and be to her as thou art to no other? For our parts since
thy last show of liking toward her, we have found no other fault in her, but
that she was the eareliest up to seek thee, readiest to anoint thee, and
when she saw that thou were removed, she forthwith did weep for thee, and
presently went for help to find thee. And whereas those two that she
brought, being less careful of thee, then fearful of themselves, when they
had seen what she had said, suddenly shrunk away, behold she still staieth,
she still seeks, she still weepeth. If this be a fault, we cannot deny but
this she does and to this she persuades, yea this she neither means to
amend, nor requesteth thee to forgive: if therefore thou recko^nest this as
punishable, punished she must be, since no excuse has effect where the fact
pleads guilty. But if this import not any offense but a true affection, and
be rather a good desire then an evil desert, why art thou so hard a Judge to so
soft a creature, requiting her love with thy loss, and suspending her hopes in
this unhappiness? Are not those thy words? I love those that love me, and
who watches early for me shall find me. Why then does not this woman find
thee, that was up so early to watch for thee? Why do thou not with like
repay her, that bestows upon thee her whole love, since thy word is her
warrant, and thy promise her due debt? Art thou less moved with these tears
that she sheddeth for thee her only Master, then thou were with those that
she shed before thee for her deceased brother? Or does her love to thy
servant more please thee then her love to thy self? Our love to others must
not be to them but to thee in them. For he loves thee so much the less, that
loves anything with thee, that he loves not for thee. If therefore she then
deserved well for loving thee in an other, she deserves better now for loving
thee in thy self, and if in deed thou love those that love thee, make thy
word good to her, that is so far in love with thee. Of thy self thou have
said, that thou art The way, the truth and the life, If then thou art a way
easy to find and never erring, how does she miss thee? If a life giving life
and never ending, why is she ready to die for thee? If a true promising truth
and never failing, how is she bereaved of thee? For if what thy tongue did
speak, thy truth will auerre, she will never ask more to make her most
happy. Remember that thou said to thy sister, that Mary had chosen the best
part which should not be taken from her. That she choose the best part is out
of question, since she made choice of nothing but only of thee. But how can
it be verified, that this part shall not be taken from her, since thou that art
this part art already taken away? If she could have kept thee, she would not
have lost thee, and had it been in her power, as it was in her will, she
would never have parted from thee: and might she now be restored to thy
presence, she would try all Fortunes rather then forgo thee. Since therefore
she seeks nothing but what she choose, and the loss of her choice is the
only cause of her comber, either vouchsafe thou to keep this best part that
she choose in her, or I see not how it can be true, that it shall not be
taken from her. But thy meaning happily was, that though it be taken from her
eyes, yet it should never be taken from her heart, and it may be thy inward
presence supplieth thine outward absence: yet I can hardlye think, but that if
Mary had thee within her, she could feel it, and if she felt it, she would
never seek thee. Thou art too hoate a fire to be in her bosom, and not to
burn her, and thy light is too great, to leave her mind in this darkness if
it shined in her. In true lovers every part is an eye, and every thought a
look, and therefore so sweet an object among so many eyes, and in so great a
light, could never lie so hidden but love would epsy it. No no if Mary had
thee, her innocent heart never taght to dissemble, could not make complaint,
the out side of a concealed comfort, neither would she turn her thoughts to
pasture in a dead man's tomb, if at home she might bid them to so heavenly a
banquet. Her love would not have a thought to spare, nor a minute to spend, in
any other action then in enjoying of thee, whom she knew too well, to abridge
the least part in her from so high a happiness. For her thirst of thy presence
was so exceeding, and the Sea of thy ioies so well able to afforde her a full
draught, that though every parcel in her should take in a whole tide of thy
delights, she would think them too few to quiet her desires. Yea doubtless
if she had thee within her, she would not envy the Fortune of the richest
Empress, yea she would more rejoice to be thy to^be in earth then a throne in
heaven, and disdain to be a Saint if she were worthy to be but thy shrine.

But peradventure it is now with her mind, as it was with the Apostles eyes,
and as they seeing thee walk upon the sea, took thee for a Ghost, so she
seeing thee in her heart, deemeth thee but a fancy, being yet better
acquainted with thy bodily shape, then with thy spiritual power.

But O Mary it seems too strange that he whom thou seek, and for whom
thou weepest should thus give thee over, to these painful fittes, if in thee
he did not see a cause for which he will not be seen of thee. Still thy plaint
and stint thy weeping, for I doubt there is some trespass in thy tears, and
some sin in thy sorrow: do thou not remember his words to thee and to
other women, when he said: Daughters of Jerusalem weep not upon me, but
weep upon your selves and upon your children. What meanest thou then to
continue this course? Does he forbid thy tears, and wilt not thou forbear
them? Is it no fault to infringe his will, or is not that his will, that his
words do import? The fault must be mended, ere the penance be released, and
therefore either cease to weep or never hope to find. But I know this Logic
little pleases thee, and I might as soon win thee to forbear living, as to
leave weping.

Thou will say that though he forbad thee to weep for him, yet he left thee
free, to weep for thy self, and since thy love has made thee one with him,
thou wepest but for thy self when thou weepest for him. But I answer thee
again, that because he is one with thee, and thy weeping for him has bin
forbidden thee, thou can not weep for thy self, but his words will condemn
thee. For if thou and he are one, for which soever thou weepest it is all one,
and therefore since for him thou may not weep, forbear all weeping least it
should offend.

Yea but (say thou) to bar me from weeping, is to abridge me of liberty,
and restraint of liberty is a penalty, and every penalty supposes some
offense: but an offense it is not to weep for my self, for he would never
command it, if it were not lawful to do it. The fault therefore must be, in
being one with him, that makes the weeping for my self, a weeping also for
him. And if this be a fault, I will never amend it, and let them that think it
so, do penance for it, for my part, since I have lost my mirth, I will make
much of my sorrow, and since I have no joy but in tears, I may lawfully shed
them. Neither think I his former word, a warrant against his latter deed. And
what need had he to weep upon the Cross, but for our example, which if it
were good for him to give, it can not be evil for me to follow. No no it is
not my weeping that causes my loss, since a world of eyes, and a sea of
tears, could not worthily bewail the miss of such a master.

Yet since, neither thy seeking finds, nor thy weeping prevails satisfy thy
self with the sight of Angels. Demanding the cause of their coming, and the
reason of thy Lords remove, and since they first offer the occasion of parley,
be not thou too dainty of thy discourse. It may be they can calm thy storms,
and quiet thy unrest, and therefore conceal not from them thy sore, least
thou loose the benefit of their emplaister. But nothing can move Mary to admit
comfort, or entertain any company, for to one alone and for ever she has
vowed her self, and except it be to him, she will neither lend her ear long
to others, nor borrow others help, least by seeking to alay her smart, she
should lessen her love. But drawing into her mind all pensive conceits, she
museth and pineth in a consuming languor, taking comfort in nothing but in
being comfortless.

Alas says she, small is the light that a star can yield when the Sun is
down, and a sorry exchange to go gather crummes after the loss of a heavenly
repast. My eyes are not used to see by the glims of a spark: and in seking the
sun it is either needeles or booteles to borrowe the light of a candle, since
either it must bewray it self with the self light, or no other light can ever
discover it. If they come to disburden me of my heaviness, their coming will
be burdensome unto me, and they will load me more while they labor my relief.
They cannot persuade me, that my Master is not lost, for my own eyes will
disprove them. They can less tell me where he may be found, for they would not
be so simple, to be so long from him: or if they ran forbear him, surely they
do not know him, whom none ca^ truly know and live long without him. All their
demurres would be tedious, and discourses irksome. Impair my love they might,
but appay it they could not, to which he that first accepted the debt, is the
only payment. They either want power, will or leave to tell me my desire, or
at the first word they would have don it, since Angels are not used to idle
speeches, and to me al talk is idle, that does not tell me of my master. They
know not where he is, and therefore they are come to the place where he last
was, making the tomb their heaven, and the remembrance of his presence the
food of their felicity. Whatsoever they could tell me, if they told me not of
him, and whatsoever they should tell me of him, if they told me not where he
were, both their telling and my hearing were but a wasting of time. I neither
came to see the^, nor desire to hear them. I came not to see Angels, but him
that made both me and Angels, and to whom I owe more then both to men and
Angels.

And to thee I appeal O most loving Lord, whether my afflicted heart do not
truly defray the tribute of an undivided love. To thee I appeal whether I
have joined any partner with thee in the small possession of my poor self.
And I would to God I were as privy where thy body is, as thou art, who is only
Lord and owner of my soul.

But alas sweet Jesus, where thou were thou art not, where thou art I know not:
wretched is the case that I am in, and yet how to better it I cannot imagine.
Alas O my only desire, why have thou left me wavering in these uncertainties,
and in how wild a maze wander my doubtful and perplexed thoughts? If I stay
here where he is not I shall never find him. If I would go farther to seek,
I know not whether. To leave the tomb is a death, and to stand helpeles by it
an incurable disease, so that all my comfort is now concluded in this, that I
am left free to choose whether I will stay without help, or go without hope,
that is in effect, with what torment I will end my life. And yet even this were
too happy a choice for so unhappy a creature. If I might be chooser of my own
death, O how quickly should that choice be made, and how willingly would I
run to that execution? I would be nailed to the same cross, with the same
nails, and in the same place: my heart should be wounded with his spear, my
head with his thorns, my body with his whips: Finally I would taste al his
torments, and tread all his embrued and bloody steps.

But O ambitious thoughts, why gaze you upon so high a felicity? why think you
of so glorious a death, yt are privy to so infamous a life? death alas I
deserve, yea not one but infinite deaths. But so sweet a death, seasoned with
so many comforts, the very instruments whereof were able to raise the deadest
corpse, and depure the most defiled soul, were too small a scourge for my great
offenses. And therefore I am left to feel so many deaths, as I live hours, and
to pass as many pangues, as I have thoughts of my loss, which are as many as
there are minutes, and as violent as if they were all in every one. But since I
can neither die as he died, nor live where he lies dead, I will live out my
living death by his grave, and die on my dying life by his sweet tomb. Better
is it after loss of his body to look to his sepulcher, then after loss of
the one, to leave the other to be destroyed. No no, though I have been robbed
of the Saint, I will at the least have care of the shrine, which though it be
spoiled of the most sovereign host, yet shall it be the Altar where I will
daily sacrifie my heart, and offer up my tears.

Here will I ever lead, yea here to I mean to end my wretched life, that I
may at the least be buried by the tomb of my Lord, and take my iron sleep
near this couche of stone, which his presence has made the place of sweetest
repose.

It may be also that this empte Sindon lying here to no use, and this to^be
being open without any in it, may give occasion to some merciful heart, that
shall first light upon my unburied body, to wrap me in this shroud, and to
interre me in this tomb.

O too fortunate lot, for so unfortunate a woman to crave: no no, I do not
crave it. For alas I dare not, yet if such a sinful oversight should be
committed, I do now beforehand forgive that sinner, and were it no more
presumption to wish it alive then to suffer it dead, if I knew the party that
should first pass by me, I would woe him with my tears, and hire him with my
prayers, to bless me with this felicity. And though I dare not wish any to do
it, yet this without offense I may say to all, that I love this Syndon above
all clothes in the world, and this tomb I esteem more, then any princes
monument: yea, and I think that corse highly favored, that shall succeed my
Lord in it, and for my part as I mean, that the ground where I stand shall be
my deathbed, so am I not of Jacobs mind to have my body buried far from
the place where it dies, but even in the next and readiest grave, and that as
soon as my breath fails, since delays are bootlesse, where death has won
possession.

But alas I dare not say any more: let my body take such fortune as befalls
it: my soul at the least shall dwell in this sweet Paradise, and from this
britle case of flesh and blood, pass presently into the glorious tomb of God
and man. It is now enwrapped in a mass of corruption, it shall then enjoy a
place of high perfection: where it is now it is more by force then by choice,
and like a repining prisoner in a loathed gayle. But there in little room it
should find perfect rest, and in the prison of death, the liberty of a
joyful life.

O sweet tomb of my sweetest Lord, while I live I will stay by thee: when I
die, I will cleave unto thee: neither alive nor dead, will I ever be drawn
from thee. Thou art the altar of mercy, the temple of truth, the sanctuary of
safety, the grave of death, and the cradle of eternal life. O heaven of my
eclipsed sun, receive into thee this silly star, that has now also lost
all wished light. O Whale that have swallowed my only Jonas, swallowe also me
more worthy to be thy pray, since I, and not he, was the cause of this bloody
tempest. O Cesterne of my innocent Joseph, take me into thy dry bottom, since
I, and not he, gave just cause of offense to my enraged brethren. But alas, in
what cloud have thou hidden the light of our way? Upon what shore have thou
cast up the preacher of all truth? or to what Ismaelite have thou yielded the
purueyour of our life?

O unhappy me, why did I not before think of that which I now ask? why did I
leave him when I heard him, thus to lament him now, that I have lost him? If I
had watched with perseverance, either none would have taken him, or they
should have taken me with him.

But through too much preciseness in keeping the law, I have lost the
lawmaker, and by being too scrupulous in observing his ceremonies, I am proved
irreligious in loosing himself, since I should rather have remained with the
truth then forsaken it, to solemnize the figure. The Sabbath could not have
bin profaned in standing by his corse, by which the prophanest things are
sanctified, and whose couch does not defile the clean, but cleanses the most
defiled.

But when it was time to stay, I departed: When it was too late to help, I
returned: and now I repent my folly, when it cannot be amended. But let my
heart dissolve into sighs, mine eyes melt in tears, and my desolate soul
languish in dislikes: yea let all that I am and have, endure the deserved
punishment, that if he were incensed with my fault, he may be appeased with my
penance, and return upon the amendment that fled from the offense.

Thus when her timorous co^scienec had indicted her of so great an omission, and
her tongue enforced the evidence with these bitter accusations, Love, that was
now the only vmpier in all her causes, condemned her eyes to a fresh shower
of tears, her breast to a new storm of sighs, and her soul, to be perpetual
prisoner to restless sorrows.

But O Mary, thou deceiuest thy self in thy own desires, and it well
appears, that excess of grief, has bred in thee a defect of due providence.

And would thou indeed have thy wishes, come to pass, and thy words
fulfilled? Tell me then, I pray thee if thy heart were dissolved, where
would thou harbor thy Lord? what would thou offer him? how would thou
love him?

Thy eyes have lost him, thy hands cannot feel him, thy feet cannot follow
him, and if he be at all in thee, it is thy heart that has him, and would
thou now have that dissolved, from thence also to exile him? And if thy eyes
were melted, thy soul in languor, and thy senses decayed, how would thou
see him, if he did appear? how should thou hear him, if he did speak?
how could thou know him, though he were there present?

Thou think happily that he loves thee so well, that if thy heart were
spent for his love, he would either lend his own heart unto thee, or create a
new heart in thee, better then that which thy sorrow took from thee. It may
be, thou imaginest, that if thy soul would give place, his soul wanting
now a body, would enter into thine, with supply of all thy senses, and
release of thy sorrows.

O Mary thou did not mark what thy master was wont to say, when he told
thee, that the third day he should rise again. For if thou had heard him, or
at the least understood him, thou would not think, but that he now uses
both his heart and soul in the life of his own body. And therefore repair to
the angels, and enquire more of them, least thy Lord be displeased, that
coming from him thou will not entertain them.

But Marie whose devotions were all fixed upon a nobler Saint, and that had so
straightly bound her thoughts to his only affection, that she rather desired
to unknow whom she knew already, then to burden her mind with the knowledge
of new acquaintance, could not make her will, long since possessed with the
highest love, stoop to the acceptance of meaner friendships, And for this
though she did not scornefully reject, yet did she with humility refuse the
Angels company, thinking it no discourtesie to take her self from them, for to
give her self more wholly to her Lord, to whom both she and they were wholly
devoted, and ought most love and greatest duty. Sorrow also being now the
only interpreter of all that sense, delivered to her understanding, made her
conster their demand in a more doubtful then true meaning.

If (says she) they come to ease my affliction, they could not be ignorant of
the cause: and if they were not ignorant of it, they would never ask it: why
then did they say, Woman why weepest thou?

If their question did import a prohibition, the necessity of the occasion
does countermand their counsel, and fitter it were they should weep with
me, then I in not weeping obey them.

If the Sun were ashamed to show his brightness, when the father of all
lights was darkened with such disgrace: If the heavens discoloring their
beauties, suited themselves to their makers fortune; If the whole frame of
nature were almost dissolved to see the author of nature so unnaturally
abused: why may not Angels, that best knew the indignity of the case, make
up a part in this lamentable consort: And especially now, that by the loss of
his body, the cause of weeping is increased, and yetthe number of mourners
lessened: since the Apostles are fled, all his friends afraid, and poor I left
alone to supply the tears of all creatures?

O who will give water to my head, and a fountain of tears unto my eyes that
I may weep day and night, and never cease weeping? O my only Lord thy grief
was the greatest that ever was in man, and my grief as great as ever happened
to woman: for my love has carved me no small portion of thine, thy loss has
redoubled the torment of mine own, and all creatures seem to have made over
to me theirs, leaving me as the vice-gereut of all their sorrows. Sorrow with
me at the least thou O Tomb, and thawe into tears you hardest stones. The
time is now come, that you are licensed to cry, and bound to recompense the
silence of your Lords Disciples, of whom he himself said to the Pharisees,
that if they held their peace, the very stones should cry for them. Now
therefore since fear has locked up their lips, and sadness made the^ mute,
let the stones cry out against the murderers of my Lord, and bewray the
robbers of his sacred body.

And I fear that were it well known, who has taken him away, there is no
stone so stony, but should have cause to lament.

It was doubtless the spite of some malicious Pharisee or bloody Scribe, that
not contented with those torments, that he suffered in life (of which every one
to any other would have bin a tirannicall death) has now stolen away his dead
body, to practice upon it some savage cruelty, and to glutte their pitiless
eyes, and brutish heart with the unnatural usage of his helples corpse. O ye
rocks and stones if ever you must cry out, now it is high time, since the
light, the life, and the Lord of the world, is thus darkened, massacred, and
outragiously missused.

Does not this tongue, whose truth is infallible, and whose word omnipotent,
commanding both winds and seas, and never disobeyed of the most insensible
creatures, promise to arm the world, and to make the whole earth to fight
against the senseless persons, Sap. 5.
in defense of the just? And who more just then the lord of justice? who more
senseless then his barbarous murderers, whose insatiable thirst of his
innocent blood, could not be staunched, with their cruel butchering him at his
death, unless they proceeded farther in this hellish impiety to his dead body?
Why then do not all creatures address themselves to revenge so just a
quarrel, upon so senseless wretches, left of all reason, forsaken of
humanity, and bereaved of all feeling both of God and man?

O Mary, why do thou thus torment thy self with these tragical surmises?
Do thou think that the Angels would sit still, if their Master were not
well? Did they serve him after his fasting, and would they despise him after
his dicease? Did they comfort him before he was apprehended, and would none
defend him when he was dead? If in the garden he might have had twelve Legions
of them, is his power so quite dead with his body, that he could not now
command the^? Was there an Angel found to help Daniel to his dinner, to save
Tobye from the fish, yea and to defend Balaa^s poor beast from his Masters
rage, and is the Lord of Angels of so little reckonning, that if his body
stood in need, never an Angel would defend it? Thou see two here present
to honor his Tomb, and how much more careful would they be to do homage to
his person? Believe not Mary that they would smile, if thou had such
occasion to weep. They would not so gloriously shine in white, if a black and
mourning weed did better become them, or were a fitter livery for their
Master to give, or them to wear. Yield not more to thy uncertain fear, (...)
deceived love, then to their assured ^^^wledge, and never erring charity. (...)
a material eye see more then a ^^^uenly spirit, or the glimmering of (...)
twilight give better aim then the beams of their eternal Sun? Would they,
think thou, wait upon the winding sheet, while the corse were abused, or be
here for thy comfort, if their Lord did need their service? No no, he was
neither any thieves bootye, nor Pharisees pray, neither are the Angels so
careless of him, as thy suspicion presumes. And if their presence and demeanor
can not alter thy conceit, look upon the clothes and they will teach thee
thine error, and clear thee of thy doubt.

Would any thief think thou have been so religious, as to have stolen the
body and left the clothes? yea would he have been so venturous, as to have
stayed the vnshrowding of the corse, the well ordering of the sheets, and
folding up the napkins? Thou know that mirrhe makes linen cleave as fast,
as pitch or glue: and was a thief at so much leisure, as to dissolve the
mirrhe and unclothe the dead? what did the watch while the seals were broken,
the Tomb opened, the body unfolded, al other things ordered as now thou see?
And if all this cannot yet perswad thee, believe at the least thy own
experience? when thy master was stripped at the cross, thou know that his
only garmont being congealed to his goary back, came not off without many
parts of his skin, and doubtless would have torn off many more, if it had
been anointed with mirrhe: Look then into the sheet, whether there remain
any parcel of skin, or any one hair of his head: and since there is none to
be found, believe some better issue of thy masters absence, then thy fear
suggesteth. A guilty conscience doubts want of time, and therefore dispatcheth
hastily. It is in hazard to be discovered, and therefore practices in darkness
and secrecy. It ever works in extreme fear, and therefore has no leisure
to place things orderly. But to vnwrappe so mangled a body, out of mirrhed
clothes, without tearing of any skin, or leaving on any mirrhe, is a thing
either to man impossible, or not possible to be done with such speed, without
light or help, and with so good order. Assure thy self therefore, that if
either of malice, or by fraud, the corse had been removed, the linen and
mirrhe should never have been left, and neither could the Angels look so
cheerfully, nor the cloths lie so orderly, but to import some happier accident,
then thou conceiuest.

But to free thee more from fear, consider those words of the Angels, Woman
why weepest thou? For what do they signify but as much in effect as if they
had said: Where Angels rejoice it agrees not that a woman should weep, and
where heavenly eyes are witnesses of joy, no mortal eye should control them
with testimonies of sorrow? With more then a manly courage thou did before
thy coming, arm thy feet to run among swords, thy arms to remove huge
loads, thy body to endure al tirants rage, and thy soul to be sundred with
violent tortures: and art thou now so much a Woman that thou can not command
thy eyes to forbear tears? If thou were a true Disciple, so many proofs
would persuade thee, but now thy incredulous humor, makes thee unworthy of
that style, and we can affoorde thee no better title then a Woman, and
therefore O Woman and too much a Woman, why weepest thou?

If there were here any corse, we might think that sorrow for the dead
enforced thy tears, but now that thou find it a place of the living, why
do thou here stand weeping for the dead?

Is our presence so discomfortable, that thou should weep to behold us? or
is it the course of thy kindness with tears to entertain us? If they be
tears of love to testify thy good will, as thy love is acknowledged, so let
these signs be suppressed. If they be tears of anger to denounce thy
displeasure, they should not here have been shed where all anger was buried
but none deserved. If they be tears of sorrow and duties to the dead, they
are bestowed in vain where the dead is revived. If they be tears of joy,
stilled from the flowers of thy good Fortune, fewer of these would suffice, and
fitter were other tokens to express thy contentment. And therefore O Woman
why do thou weep? Would our eyes be so dry, if such eye streams were
behoouefull? Yea would not the heavens rain tears if thy suppossals were
truths? Did not Angels always in their visible semblaunces, represent their
lords invisible pleasure, shadowing in their shapes the drift of his
intentions? When God was incensed they brandished swords: When he was
appeased, they sheathed them in scabbards: When he would defend, they
resembled soldiers, when he would terrify they took terrible forms, and when
he would comfort, they carried mirth in their eyes, sweetenes in their
countenance, mildenes in their words, favor, grace and comeliness in their
whole presence. Why the^ do thou weep, seeing us to rejoice? Do thou
imagine us to degenerate from our nature, or to forget any duty, whose state is
neither subject to change, nor capable of the least offense? Art thou more
fervent in thy love, or more privy to the counsel of our eternal God, then
we that are daily attenda^ts at his throne of glory? O Woman deem not amiss
against so apparaunt evidence, and at our request exchange thy sorrow for our
joy.

But O glorious Angels, why do ye move her to joy, if you know why she
weepeth? Alas she weepeth for the loss of him without whom all joy is to her
but matter of new grief. While he lived, every place where she found him,
was to her a Paradise: every season wherein he was enjoined, a perpetual
spring: every exercise wherein he was served a special felicity: the ground
whereon he went seemed to yield her sweeter footing: the air wherein he
breathed, becam to her spirit of life, being once sanctified in his sacred
breast. In sum, his presence brought with it a heaven of delights, and his
departure seemed to leave an Eclipse in all things. And yet even the places
that he had once honored with the access of his person, were to her so many
sweet pilgrimages, which in his abse^ce she used, as chapels and altars, to
offer up her prayers, feeling in them long after, the virtue of his former
presence. And therefore to feed her with conjectures of his well-being, is but
to strengthen her fear of his evil, and the alleging of likelyhoodes, by
those that know the certainty, imports the case to be lamentable, that they
are unwilling it should be known. Your obscure glancing at the truth, is no
sufficient acquittance of her grief, neither can she out of these disioyned
ghesses, spell the words that must be the conclusion of her complaint. Tell
her then directly what is become of her lord, if you mean to deliver her out of
these dumpes, since what else soever you say of him, does but draw more humors
to her sore, and rather anger it, then any way assuage it.

Yet hearken O Mary, and consider their speeches. Think what answer thou will
give them, since they press thee with so strong perswassons. But I doubt that
thy wits are smothered with too thick a miste, to admit these unknowen
beams, of their pale light. Thou art so wholly inherited by the bloody tragedy
of thy slaughtred Lord, and his death and dead body have gotten so absolute a
conquest over all thy powers, that neither thy sense can discern, nor thy
mind conceive, any other object then his murdered corse.

Thy eyes seem to tell thee that every thing inuiteth thee to weep, carrying
such outward show, as though all that thou see were attired in sorrow to
solemnize with general consent the funeral of thy Master. Thy ears persuade
thee, that all sounds and voices are tuned to mourning notes, and that the
Echo of thy own wailings, is the cry of the very stons and trees, as though
(the cause of thy tears being so unusual) God to the rocks and woods, had
inspired a feeling of thine and their common loss. And therefore it sounds
to thee as a strange question, to ask thee why thou weepest, since all that
thou see and hear, seems to e^duce thee, yea to enforce thee to weep.

If thou see any thing that bears a color of mirth, it is unto thee like
the rich spoils of a vanquished kingdom, in the eye of the captive Prince,
which put him in mind what he had, not what he has, and are but vpbraidinges
of his loss, and whetstones of sharper sorrow Whatsoever thou hear, that
moves delight, it represents the miss of thy masters speeches, which as
they were the only harmony that thy ears affected, so they being now stopped
with a deathfull silence, all other words and times of comfort are to thee but
an Israelites music upon Babylon bancks, memories of a lost felicity, and
proofs of a present unhappiness. And though love increased the conceit of
thy loss which endeereth the meanest things, and doubleth the estimate of
things that are precious: yet thy faith teaching thee, the infinite dignity
of thy master, and thy understanding being no dull scholar, to learn so well
liked a lesson, it fell out to be the bitterest part of thy misery, that thou
did so well know how infinite the loss was that made thee miserable.

This is the cause that those very angels in whom all things make
remonstrance of triumph and solace, are unto thee occasions of new grief. For
their gracious and lovely countenances, remember thee, that thou have lost the
beutie of the world, and the highest mark of true loves ambition. Their sweet
looks and amiable features tell thee, that the heaven of thy eyes which was the
reverend Majesty of thy masters face, once shined with far more pleasing
graces, but is now disfigured with the dreadful forms of death. In sum they
were to thee, like the glistering sparks of a broken Diamond, and like
pictures of dead and decayed beauties, signs, not salues of thy calamity,
memorials, not medicines of thy misfortune.

Thy eyes were to well acquainted with the truth, to accept a supply of
shadows, and as comeliness, comfort, and glory were never in any other so
truly at home, and so perfitly in their prime, as in the person and speeches
of thy Lord: so cannot thy thoughts but be like strangers in any foreign
delights. For in them all thou see no more, but some scattered crummes, and
hungrymorsels of thy late plentiful banquets, and find a dim reflection of
thy former light, which like a flash of lightning, in a close and stormy night,
serves thee, but to see thy present infelicitie, and the better to know the
horror of the ensuing darkness.

Thou think therefore thy self blameless, both in weeping for thy loss,
and in refusing other comfort Yet in common courtesy afford these Angels an
answer, since their charity in visiting thee, deserves much more, and thou
(if not too ungrateful) can allow them no less.

Alas (says she) what needs myanswere, where the misery it self speaks,
and the loss is manifest. My eyes have answered them with tears, my breast
with sighs, and my heart with trouble, what need I also punish my toonge, or
wound my soul with a new rehear sall of so doleful a mischance. They have
taken away, O unfortunate word. They have taken away my Lord.

O afflicted woman, why think thou this word so unfortunate? It may be the
Angels have taken him more solemnly to entombe him, and since earth has done
her last homage, happily the Quires of heaven are also descended to defray unto
him, their funeral duties.

It may be that the Centurian and the rest, that did acknowledge him on the
cross to be the son of God, have been touched with remorse, and goared with
the prick of conscience, and being desirous to satisfy for their heinous
offense, have now taken him, more honorably to interre him, and by their
service, to his body sought forgiveness, and sued the pardon of their guilty
souls.

Peradventure some secret Disciples, have wrought this erploit, and maugre the
watch taken him from hence, with due honor to preserve him in some fitter
place: and therefore being yet uncertain who has him, there is no such cause
to lament, since the greater probabilities, march on the better side, why do
thou call sorrow before it comes, without which calling, it comes on thee
too fast? yea why do thou create sorrow where it is not, since thou have true
sorrows enough, though imagined sorrows help not? It is folly to suppose
the worst where the best may be hoped for, and every mishappe brings grief
enough with it, though we with our friends do not go first to meet it.
Quiet then thy self, till time try out the truth, and it may be thy fear
will prove greater then thy misfortune.

But I know thy love is little helped with this lesson: for the more it loves
the more it fears: and the more desirous to enjoy, the more doubtful it is
to loose. It neither has measure in hopes, nor mean in fears: hoping the
best upon the least surmises, and fearing the worst upon the weakest grounds.
And yet both fearing and hoping at one time, neither fear withholdeth hope
from the highest atte^pts, nor hope can strengthen fear against the smallest
suspicions: but maugre all fears, loves hopes will work to the highest pitch,
and maugre al hopes, loves fears will stoop to the lowest downcome. To bid
thee therefore hope, is not to forbid thee to fear, and though it may be for
the best, that thy Lord is taken from thee, yet, since it may also be for the
worst, that will never content thee.

Thou think hope does enough to keep thy heart from breaking, and fear
little enough to force thee to weeping, since it is as likely that he has been
taken away upon hatred by his enemies, as upon love by his friends.

For hitherto (say thou) his friends have all failed him, and his foes
prevailed against him, and as they yt would not defend him alive, are less
likely to regard him dead, so they that thought one life too little to take from
him, are not unlikely after death to wreake new rage upon him.

And though this doubt were not, yet whosoever has taken him, has wronged me,
in not acquainting me with it: for to take away mine, without my consent, can
neither be offered without injury, nor suffered without sorrow. And as for
Jesus he was my Jesus, my Lord, and my master. He was mine because he was
given unto me, and borne for me: he was the author of my being, and so my
father, he was the worker of my well doing, and therefore my Savior, he was
the price of my ransom, and thereby my redeemer: He was my Lord to command
me, my master to instruct me, my pastor to feed me. He was mine because his
love was mine, and when he gave me his love, he gave me himself, since love is
no gift except the giver be given with it, yea it is no love, ^^lesse it be as
liberal of that it is, as of that it has. Finally, if the meat be m^^^ that
I eat, the life mine wherewith I live, or he mine, all, whose life labors and
death were mine, then dare I boldly say that Jesus is mine, since on his body I
feed, by his love I live, and to my good without any need of his own, has
he lived, labored, and died. And therefore though his Disciples, though the
Centurion, yea though the Angels have taken him, they have done me wrong, in
defeating me of my right, (since I never mean to resign my interest.

But what if he has taken a way himself, will thou also lay injustice to his
charge? Though he be thine, yet thine to command, not to obey, thy Lord to
dispose of thee, and not to be by thee disposed: and therefore as it is no
reason, that the servant should be master of his masters secrets, so might
he, and peradventure so has he, removed without acquainting thee whether
reviving himself with the same power, with which he raised thy dead brother,
and fulfilling the words, that he often uttered of his resurrection.

It may be thou will say, that a gift once given, cannot be revoked, and
therefore though it were before in his choice, not to give himself unto thee,
yet the deed of gift being once made, he cannot be taken from thee, neither
can the doner dispose of his gift without the possessors priuitie. And since
this is a rule in the law of nature, thou may imagine it a breach of
equity, and an impeachment of thy right to convey himself away without thy
consent.

But to this I will answer thee with thine own ground. For if he be thine by
being given thee once, thou art his by as many gifts, as days, and therefore
he being absolute owner of thee, is likewise full owner of whatsoever is
thine, and consequently because he is thine, he is also his own, and so
nothing liable unto thee, for taking himself from thee.

Yea but he is my Lord (say thou) and in this respect, bound to keep me, at
the least bound not to kill me: and since killing is nothing but a seuering of
life from the body, he being the chief life both of my soul and body, cannot
possibly go from me, but he must with a double death kill me. And therefore he
being my Lord, and bound to protect his servant, it is against all laws that I
should be thus forsaken.

But O cruel tongue, why pleadest thou thus against him, whose case I fear me
is so pitiful, yt it might rather move all tongues to plead for him, being
peradventure in their hands, whose unmerciful hearts, make themselves merry
with his misery, and build the triumphs of their impious victory, upon the
doleful ruins of his disgraced glory. And now (O grief) because I know not
where he is, I cannot imagine how to help, for they have taken him away, and I
know not where they have put him.

Alas Mary why do thou consume thy self with these cares? His father knows
and he will help him. The Angels know and they will guard him. His own soul
knows and that will asist him. And what need then is there that thou seely
woman should know it, that can no way profit him? But I feel in what vain
thy pulse beats, and by thy desire I discover thy disease. Though both heaven
and earth did know it, and the whole world had notice of it, yet except thou
also were made privy unto it, thy woes would be as great, and thy tears as
many. That others see thy Sun, does not lighten thy darkness, neither can
others eating satisfy thy hunger. The more there be that know of him, the
greater is thy sorrow, that among so many thou art not thought worthy to be
one. And the more there be that may help him, the more it greeueth thee that
thy poor help is not accepted among them. Though thy knowledge needs not,
thy love does desire it, and though it avail not, thy desire will seek it. If
all know it thou would know it with all: if no other, thou would know it
alone, and from whom soever it be concealed, it must be no secret to thee.
Though the knowledge would discomfort thee, yet know it thou will, yea though
it would kill thee, thou could not forbear it.

Thy Lord to thy love is like drink to the thirsty, which if they cannot have,
they die for drouht, and being long without it, they pine away with longing.
And as men in extremity of thirst are still dreaming of fountains, brooks,
and springs, being never able to have other thought, or to utter other word but
of drink and moisture: so lovers in the vehemence of their passion, can neither
think nor speak but of that they love, and if that be once missing, every
part is both an eye to watch, and an ear to listen, what hope or news may be
had of it. If it be good they die till they hear it, though bad yet they cannot
live without it. Of the good they hope that it is the very best, and of the
evil they fear it to be the worst, and yet though never so good they pine til
it be told, and be it never so evil, they are importunate to know it. And when
they once know it, they can neither bear the joy, nor brook the sorrow, but as
well the one as the other is enough to kill them.

And this O Mary I guess to be the cause why the Angels would not tell thee
thy Lords estate. For if it had been to thy liking, thou would have died for
joy, if otherwise thou would have suncke down for sorrow. And therefore they
leave this news for him to deliver, whose word if it give thee a wou^d, is
also a salve to cure it, though never so deadly.

But alas afflicted soul, why does it so deeply grieve thee, that thou
know not where he is? Thou can not better him if he be well, thou can as
little succor him if he be ill: and since thou fear that he is rather ill
then well, why would thou know it, so to end thy hopes in mishappe, and thy
great fears in far greater sorrows. Alas to ask thee why, is in a manner to
ask one half starued why he is hungry. For as thy Lord is the food of thy
thoughts, the relief of thy wishes, the only repast of all thy desires: so is
thy love a continual hunger, and his absence unto thee an extreme famine. And
therefore no maruail though thou art so greedy to hear, yea to devour any be
it never so bitter notice of him, since thy hunger is most violent, and nothing
but he able to content it. And albeit the hearing of his harms, should work
the same in thy mind, that unwholesome meat, works in a sick stomach: yet
if it once concern him that thou love, thy hungry love could not temper it
self from it, though after with many wringing gripes, it did a long and
vnplesaunt penance.

But why does thy sorrow quest so much upon the place where he is? were it
not enough for thee to know who had him, but that thou must also know in what
place he is bestowed? A worse place then a grave no man will offer, and many
far better titles will allow: and therefore thou may boldly think, that
where so ever he be, he is in a place fitter for him then where he was.

Thy sister Martha confessed him to be the Son of God, and with her
confession agreed thy belief. And what place more convenient for the Son,
then to be with his Father, the business for which he has been so long from
him, being now fully finished?

If he be the Messiah as thou did once believe, it was said of him, That he
should ascend on high and lead our captivity captive. And what is this height*
but heaven, what our captivity but death? Death therefore is become his
captive, and it is like that with the spoils thereof, he is ascended in
triumph to eternal life.

But if thou can not lift thy mind to so favorable a belief, yet may thou
very well suppose that he is in Paradise. For if he came to repair Adams
ruins, and to be the common parent of our redemption, as Adam was of our
original infection: reason seems to require, that having endured al his life
the penalty of Adams exile, he should after death reenter possession of that
inheritance which Adam lost: that the same place that was the nest, where sin
was first hatched, may be now the childbed of grace and mercy. And if sorrow
at the cross did not make thee as deaf, as at the tomb it makes thee
forgetful, thou did in confirmation hereof hear him self say to one of
the thieves, that the same day he should be with him in Paradise. And if it be
reason that no shadow should be more privileged then the body, no figure in
more account then the figured truth, why should thou believe, that Elias and
Enoch have bin in Paradise these many ages, and that he whom they but as tipes
resembled, should be excluded from thence? He excelled them in life, he
surpassed them in miracles, he was far beyond them in dignity: Why then
should not his place be far above, or at the least equal with theirs, since
their prerogatives were so far inferior unto his?

And yet if the baseness and misery of his passion, have laid him so low in
thy conceit, that thou think Paradise too high a place to be likely to have
him: the very lowest room that any reason can assign him, can not be meaner
then the bosom of Abraham: and since God in his life did so often acknowledge
him for his Son, it seems the slendrest pre-eminence, that he can give him
above other men, that being his holy one, he should not in his body see
corruption, but be free among the dead, reposing both in body and soul, where
other Saints are in soul only. Let not therefore the place where he is
trouble thee, since it cannot be worse then his grave, and infinite conjectures
make probability, that it cannot but be better.

But suppose that he were yet remaining in earth, and taken by others out of
his tomb, what would it auail thee to know where he were? If he be with such
as love and honor him, they will be as wary to keep him, as they are loath he
should be lost: and therefore will either often change, or never confess the
place, knowing secrecy to be the surest lock to defend so great a treasure.
If those have taken him, that malice and malign him, thou may well judge him
past thy recovery, when he is once in the possession of so cruel owners.

Thou would happily make sale of thy living, and seek him by ransom. But it
is not likely they would sell him to be honored that bought him to be
murdered.

If price would not serve, thou would fall to prayer. But how can prayer
soften such flint hearts? and if they scorned so many tears offered for his
life, as little will they regard thy entreaty for his corse.

If neither price nor prayer would prevail, thou would attempt it by force.
But alas seely soldier thy arms are too weak to manage weapons, and the issue
of thy assault, would be the loss of thy self.

If no other way would help, thou would purloine him by stealth, and think
thy self happy in contriuing such a theft. O Mary thou art deceived, for
malice will have many locks, and to steal him from a thief, that could
steal him from the watch, requires more cunning in the art, then thy want of
practice can affoorde thee.

Yet if these be the causes that thou inquire of the place, thou she west the
force of thy rare affection, and deseruest the Laurel of a perfect lover.

But to feel more of their sweetness, I will pound these spices, and dwell a
while in the peruse of thy resolute fervor.

And first, can thy love enrich thee when thy goods are gone, or dead corse
repay the value of thy ransom? Because he had neither bed to be borne in, nor
grave to be buried in: will thou therefore rather be poor with him, then rich
without him.

Again, if thou had to sue to some cruel Scribe or Pharisee, that is to a
heart boiling in rancor, with a heart burning in love, for a thing of him above
all things detested, of thee above all things desired: as his enemy to whom
thou suelt, and his friend for whom thou intreatest: can thou think it
possible, for this suit to speed? Could thy love repair thee from his rage, or
such a tyrant stoop to a woman's tears?

Thirdly, if thy Lord might be recovered by violence, art thou so armed in
complete love, that thou think it sufficient harness? or does thy love
indue thee with such a ludithes spirit, or lend thee such Sampsons locks,
that thou can break open huge gates, or foil whole armies? Is thy love so
sure a shield, that no blow can break it, or so sharp a dint, that no force
can withstand it? Can it thus alter sex, change nature, and exceed all Art?

But of all other courses would thou adventure a theft to obtain thy
desire. A good deed must be well done, and a work of mercy without breath of
justice. It were a sin to steal a profane treasure, but to steal an
anointed prophet can be no less then a sacrilege. And what greater stain to
thy Lord, to his doctrine, and to thy self, then to see thee his Disciple,
publicly executed for an open theft?

O Mary unless thy love have better warrant then common sense, I can hardly
see how such designementes can be approved.

Approved (says she) I would to God the execution were as easy as the
proof, and I should not so long bewail my unfortunate loss.

To others it seems ill to prefer love before riches, but to love it seems
worse to prefer any thing before it self. Cloth him with plates of silver,
that shiuereth for cold, or fill his purse with treasure, that pineth for
hunger, and see whether the plates will warm him, or the treasure feed him. No
no, he will give all his plates for a woollen garment, and all his money for a
meals meat. Every supply fitteth not with every need, and the love of so
sweet a Lord has no corresponde^ce in worldly wealth. Without him I were
poor, though Empress of the world. With him I were rich, though I had
nothing else. They that have most are accounted richest, and they thought to
have most, that have all they desire: and therefore as in him alone is the
uttermost of my desires, so he alone is the sum of all my substance. It were
too happy an exchange, to have God for goods, and too rich a poverty, to
enjoy the only treasure of the world. If I were so fortunate a beggar, I would
disdain Solomon's wealth, and my love being so highly enriched, my life should
never complain of want.

And if all I am worth would not reach to his ransom, what should hinder me to
saek him by entreaty? Though I were to sue to the greatest tyrant, yet the
equity of my suit is more then half a grant. If many drops soften the
hardest stones, why should not many tears supple the most stony hearts?
what anger so fiery that may not be quenched with eye water, since a weeping
suppliant, rebateth the edge of more then a Lions fury?

My suit it self would sue for me, and so doleful a corse would quicken
pity in the most iron hearts. But suppose that by touching a ranckled sore,
my touch should anger it, and my petition at the first incense him that heard
it: he would percase revile me in words, and then his own injury would
recoyle with remorse, and be unto me a patron to proceed in my request. And if
he should accompany his words with blows, and his blows with wounds, it may
be my stripes would smart in his guilty mind, and his conscience bleed in my
bleeding wounds, and my innocent blood so entender his adamant heart, that his
own inward feelings would plead my cause, and peradventure obtain my suit.

But if through extremity of spite, he should happen to kill me, his offense
might easily redound to my felicity. For he would be as careful to hide whom
he had unjustly murdered, as him whom he had felonously stolen, and so it is
like, that he would hide me in the same place where he had laid my Lord, and as
he hated us both for one cause, him for challenging, and me for acknowledging
that he was the Messiah: so would he use us both after one manner. And thus
what comfort my body wanted, my soul should enjoy, in seeing a part of my
self partner of my Masters miserye: with whom to be miserable, I reckon a
higher fortune, then without him to be most happy.

And if no other means would serve to recover him but force: I see no reason
why it might not very well become me? None will bar me from defending my life,
which the least worm in the right of nature has leave to preserve. And since
he is to me so dear a life that without him, all life is death, nature
authoriseth my feeble forces to employ their uttermost in so necessary an
attempt* Necessity adds ability, and love doubleth necessity, and it often
happens that nature armed with love, and pressed with need, exceeds it
self in might and surmounteth all hope in success. And as the equity of the
cause, does breath courage into the defendors, making them the more willing to
fight, and the less unwilling to die: so guilty consciences are ever timorous,
still starting with sudden frights, and afraid of their own suspicions, ready
to yield before the assault, upon distrust of their cause, and despair of
their defense. Since therefore to rescue an innocent, to recover a right, and to
redress so deep a wrong, is so just a quarrel, nature will enhable me, love
encourage me, grace confirm me, and the judge of all justice fight in my
behalf.

And if it seem unfitting to my sex in talk, much more in practice to deal
with martial affairs: yet when such a cause happens, as never had pattern,
such effects must follow as are without example. There was never any body of a
God but one, never such a body stolen but now, never such a stealth unrevenged
but this. Since therefore the Angels neglect it, and men forget it, O Judith
lend me thy prowess for I am bound to regard it.

But suppose that my force were unable to win him by an open enterprise, what
scruple should keep me from seeking him by secret means: yea and by plain
stealth It will be thought a sin, and condemned for a theft. O sweet sin why
was not I the first that did commit thee? Why did I suffer any other sinner to
prevent me? for stealing from God his honor I was called a sinner, and under
that title was spread my infamy. But for stealing God from a false owner, I was
not worthy to be called a sinner, because it had been too high a glory. If
this be so great a sin, and so heinous a theft, let others make choice of
what titles they will: but for my part, I would refuse to be an Angel, I would
not wish to be a Saint, I would never be esteemed either just or true, and I
should be best contented if I might both live and die such a sinner, and be
condemned for such a theft. When I heard my Lord make so comfortable a promise
to the thief upon the cross, that he should that day be with him in
Paradise, I had half an envy at that theefes good Fortune, and wished my self
in the theefes place, so I might have enjoyed the fruit of his promise. But if
I could be so happy a thief, as to commit this theft, if that wish had takeu
effect, I would now un wish it again, and scorn to be any other thief then
my self, since my booty could make me happier, then any other theefes felicity.
And what though my felony should be called in question, in what respect should
I need to fear? They would say that I loved him too well. But that were soon
disproued, since where the worthiness is infinite, no love can be enough. They
would object that I stole an others goods: and as for that many sure titles of
my interest would aucree him to be mine, and his dead corse would rather speak
then witnesses should fail to depose so certain a truth. And if I had not a
special right unto him, what should move me to venture my life for him? No no,
if I were so happy a felone, I should fear no temporal araignme^t. I should
rather fear that the Angels would cite me to my answer, for preventing them
in the theft, since not the highest Seraphin in heaven, but would deem it a
higher style, then his own, to be the thief that had committed so glorious a
robbery.

But alas thus stand I devising what I would do, if I knew any thing of him,
and in the mean time I neither know who has him, nor where they have bestowed
him, and still I am forced to dwell in this answer, that They have taken away
my Lord, and I know not where they have put him.

While Marie thus lost her self in a Laberinth of doubts, watering her words
with tears, and warming them with sighs, seeing the Angels with a kind of
reverence rise, as though they had done honor to one behind her: She turned
back, and she saw Jesus standing, but that it was Jesus she knew not.

O Marie is it possible that thou have forgotten Jesus? faith has written him
in thy understanding, love in thy will, both fear and hope in thy memory: and
how can all these registers be so cancelled that so plainly seeing, thou
should not know the contents. For him only thou tyrest thy feet, thou
bendest thy knees, thou wringest thy hands. For him thy heart throbbeth, thy
breast sigheth, thy tongue complains. For him thy eye weepeth, thy thought
sorroweth, thy wholebody faints, and thy soul languisheth. In sum, there
is no part in thee, but is busy about him, etc notwithstanding all this, have
thou now forgotten him? His countenance auourheth it, his voice assures it,
his wounds witness it, thy own eyes behold it, and do thou not yet
believe that this is Jesus? Are thy sharp seeing eyes become so weak sighted,
that they are dazeled with the sun, and blinded with the light?

But there is such a shower of tears between thee and him, and thy eyes are
so dimmed with weeping for him, that though thou see the shape of a man, yet
thou can not discern him. Thy ears also are still so possessed with the
doleful Echo of his last speeches, which want of breath, made him utter in a
dying voice, that the force and loudness of his living words, makes thee
imagine it the voice of a stranger: and therefore as he seems unto thee so
like a stranger, he asks this question of thee, O woman why weepest thou,
whom seek thou?

O desire of heart, and only joy of her soul, why demandest thou why she
weepeth, or for whom she seeks? But a whilesince she saw thee her only hope
hanging on a tree, with thy head full of thorns, thy eyes full of tears, thy
ears full of blasphemies, thy mouth full of gall, thy whole person mangled and
disfigured, and do thou ask her why she weepeth? Scarce three days
passed, she beheld thy arms and legs, racked with violent pulles, thy hands and
feet boared with nails, thy side wounded with a spear, thy whole body torn
with stripes and goared in blood, and do thou her only grief ask her why
she weepeth? She beheld thee upon the cross with many tears, and most
lamentable cries, yielding up her ghost, that is thy own ghost, and alas ask
thou why she weepeth? And now to make up her misere, having but one hope alive,
which was, that for a small relief of her other afflictions, she might have
anointed thy body, that hope is also dead, since thy body is removed, and she
now stands hopeless of all help, and demandest thou why she weepeth, and
for whom she seeks? Full well thou know, that thee only she desires,
thee only she loves, all things besides thee she contemns, and can thou
find in thy heart to ask her whom she seeks? To what end, O sweet Lord,
do thou thus suspend her longinges, prolong her desires, and martyr her with
these tedious delays? Thou only art the fortress of her faint faith, the
anchor of her wavering hope, the very center of her vehement love: to thee she
trusts, upon thee she relieth, and of her self she wholly dispaireth. She is
so earnest in seeking thee, that she can neither seek nor think any other
thing: and all her wits are so busied in musing upon thee, that they draw
all attention from her senses, wherewith they should discern thee. Being
therefore so attentive to that she thinks, what marvel though she mark not
whom she sees, and since thou have so perfect notice of her thought, and she
so little power to discover thee by sense, why demandest thou for whom she
seeks, or why she weepeth? Do thou look that she should answer, for thee
I seek, or for thee I weep? unless thou will unbend her thoughts, that her
eyes may fully see thee, or while thou will be concealed, do thou expect yt
she should be able to know thee?

But O Mary, not without cause does he ask thee this question. Thou would
have him alive, and yet thou weepest because thou do not find him dead.
Thou art sorry that he is not here, and for this very cause thou should
rather be glad. For if he were dead, it is most likely he should be here,
but not being here, it is a sign that he is alive. He rejoices to be out
of his grave, and thou weepest because he is not in it. He will not lie any
where, and thou sorrowest for not knowing wherehe lies. Alas why bewaylest
thou his glory, as an injury: the reviving of his body as the robbery of
his corse? He being alive, for what dead man mournest thou, and he being
present, whose absence do thou lament? But she taking him to be a Gardener,
said unto him, O Lord if thou have carried him from hence, tell me where thou
have laid him, and I will take him away.

O wonderful effects of Mary's love, if love be a languor how lives she by
it? If love be her life, how dies she in it? if it bereued her of sense, how
did she see ye Angels? if it quickened her sense, why knew she not Jesus?
do thou seek for one, whom when thou have found thou know not, or if
thou do know him when thou find him, why do thou seek when thou have
him?

Behold Jesus is come, and the party whom thou seek, is he that talks
with thee. O Mary call up thy wits, and open thine eyes. Has thy Lord lived
so long, labored so much, dyed with such pain, and shed such showers of
blood to come to no higher preferment then to be a Gardener? And have thou
bestowed such cost, so much sorrow, and so many fears, for no better man then
a silly Gardener? Alas is this soarie Garden the best inheritance, that thy
love can afford him, or a Gardiners office the highest dignity that thou will
allow him? It had bin better he had lived to been Lord of thy castle, then with
his death so dearly to have bought so small a purchase.

But thy mistaking has in it a farther mystery. Thou think not amiss though
thy sight be deceived. For as our first father, in the state of grace and
innocence, was placed in the garden of pleasure, and the first office allotted
him, was to be a Gardener: so the first man that ever was in glory, appears
first in a Garden, and presents himself in a gardeners likeness, that the
beginnings of glory, might resemble the entrance of innocence and grace. And
as a Gardener was the foil of mankind, the parent of sin, and author of
death: so is this Gardener, the raysor of our ruins, the ransom of our
offenses, and the restorer of life. In a Garden Adam was deceived, and taken
captive by the devil. In a Garden Christ was betrayed and taken prisoner by
the Jews. In a Garden Adam was condemned to earn his bread with the sweat of
his brows. And after a free gift of the bread of Angels in the last supper in
a Garden Christ, did earne it us with a bloody sweat of his whole body. By
disobedient eating the fruit of a tree, our right to that Garden was by Adam
forfeited, and by the obedient death of Christ upon a tree, a far better
right is now recovered. When Adam had sinned in the garden of pleasure, he was
there apparelled in dead beasts skins, that his garment might betoken his
grave, and his liuerie of death agree with his condemnation to die. And now to
defray the debt of that sin, in this garden Christ lay clad in the dead man's
shroud, and buried in his Tomb, that as our harms began so they might end,
and such places and means as were the premises to our misery, might be also
the conclusions of our misfortune. For this did Christ in the canticles, inuit
us to a heavenly banquet, after he was come into this garden, and had reaped
his myrrh, and his spices, to forewarne us of the joy, that after this harvest
should presently ensue, namely when having sowed in this garden, a body, the
mortality whereof was signified by those spices, he now reaped the same,
neither capeable of death, nor subject to corruption. For this also was Mary
permitted to mistake, that we might be informed of the mystery, and see how
aptly the course of our redemption did answer the process of our condemnation.

But though he be the gardener that has planted the Tree of grace, and
restored us to the use and eating of the fruits of life. Though it be he that
sows his gifts in our souls, quickening in us the seeds of virtue, and
rooting out of us the weeds of sin: Yet is he nevertheless the same Jesus
he was, and the borrowed presence of a mean laborer, neither altreth his
person, nor diminishes his right to his divine titles.

Why then can thou not as well see what in truth he is, as what in show he
seems, but because thou see more then thou did believe, and find
more then thy faith served thee to seek: and for this though thy love was
worthy to see him, yet thy faith was unworthy to know him. Thou did seek
for him as dead, and therefore do not know him, seeing him alive, and because
thou beleeuest not of him, as he is, thou do only see him as he seems to
be.

I cannot say thou art faultlesse, since thou art so lame in thy belief: but
thy fault deserves favor, because thy charity is so great, and therefore O
merciful Jesus, give me leave to excuse whom thou art minded to forgive.

She thought to have found thee, as she left thee, and she sought thee as
she did last see thee, being so ouercom with sorrow for thy death, that she
had neither room nor respite in her mind, for any hope of thy life, and being
so deeply interred in the grief of thy burial, that she could not raise her
thoughts to any conceit of thy resurrection.

For in the grave where Joseph buried thy body, Mary together with it entombed
her soul, and so straightly combined it with thy corse, that she could with
more ease sunder her soul from her own body that lives by it, then from thy
dead body, with which her love did bury it: for it is more thine and in thee,
then her own or in herself: and therefore, in seeking thy body, she seeks
her own soul, as with the loss of the one, she also lost the other. What
marvel then though sense fail, when the soul is lost, since the lantern
must needs be dark when the light is out?

Restore unto her therefore her soul that lies imprisoned in thy body, and
she will soon, both recover her sense, and discover her error. For alas it
is no error, that proceeds of any will to err, and it rises as much of
vehemence of affection, as of default in faith. Regard not ye error of a woman
but the love of a disciple, which supplieth in it self what in faith it wants.

O Lord (says she) If thou have carried him hence, tell me where thou have
laid him, and I will take him away.

O how learned is her ignorance, and how skilful her error? She charged not
the Angels with thy remoning, nor seemed to mistrust them for carrying thee
away, as though her love had taught her that their help was needelesse where
the thing removed was remouer of it self. She did not request them to
enfourme her where thou were laid, as if she had reserved that question for
thy self to answer. But now she judges thee so likely to be the author of
her loss, that half supposing thee guilty, she sueth a recovery, and
desires thee to tell her where the body is, as almost fully persuaded that thou
art as privy to the place, as well acquainted with the action. So that if she
be not altogether right, she is not very much wrong, and she erreth with such
aim, that she little misseth the truth. Tell her therefore O Lord what thou
have done with thy self, since it is fittest for thy own speech to utter, that
which was only possible for thy own power to perform.

But O Mary since thou art so desirous to know where thy Jesus is, why do
thou not name him, when thou ask for him? Thou said to the Angels that
they had taken away thy Lord, and now the second time, thou ask for this
him. Are thy thoughts so visible, as at thy only presence to be seen, or so
general, that they possess all when they are once in thee? when thou speak
of him, what him do thou mean, or how can a stranger understand thee when
thou falkest of thy Lord? Has the world no other Lords but thine? or is the
demanding by no other name but (him) a sufficient notice for whom thou
demandest.

But such is the nature of thy love, thou iudgest that no other should be
entitled a Lord, since the whole world is too little for thy Lords possession,
and that those few creatures that are, cannot choose but know him, since all the
creatures of the world are to few to serve him. And as his worthies can appay
all loves, and his only love content all hearts, so thou deemest him to be so
well worthy to be owner of all thoughts, that no thought in thy conceit, can
be well bestowed upon any other.

Yet thy speeches seem more sudden then sound, and more peremptory, then
well pondered. Why do thou say so resolutely without any further
circumstance, that if this gardener have taken him, thou will take him from
him. If he had him by right in taking him away thou should do him wrong. If
thou supposest he wrongfully took him, thou laiest theft to his charge, and
howsoever it be thou either condemnest thyselfe for an usurper, or him for a
these And is this an effect of thy zealous love, first to abase him from a God
to a Gardener, and now to degrade him from a Gardener to a these?

Thou should also have considered whether he took him upon love or malice.
If it were for love, thou may assure thy self that he will be as wary to
keep, as he was ventrous to get him, and therefore thy policy was weak in
saying; thou would take him away, before thou knew where he was, since
none is so simple to bewray their treasure to a known thief. If he took him
of malice, thy offer to recover him; is an open defiance, since malice is as
obstinate in defending, as violent in offering wrong, and he that would be
cruel against thy masters dead body, is likely to be more furious against his
living disciple.

But thy love had no leisure to cast so many doubts. Thy tears were
interpreters of thy words, and thy innocent meaning was written in thy doleful
countenance. Thy eyes were rather pleaders for pity* then Heralds of wrath, and
thy whole person presented such a pattern of thy extreme anguish, that no man
from thy presence could take in any other impression. And therefore what thy
words wanted, thy action supplied, and what his ear might mistake, his eye
did understand.

It may be also that he wrought in thy heart, that was concealed from thy
sight, and happily his voice, and demeanor did import such compassion of thy
case, that he seemed as willing to afford, as thou desirous to have his
help. And so presuming by his behavior, that thy suit should not suffer
repulse, the tenor of thy request does but argue thy hope of a grant.

But what is the reason, that in all thy speeches, which since the miss of thy
master, thou have uttered (where they have put him) is always apart? So thou
saydst to the Apostles, the same to the Angels, and now thou do repeat it
to this supposeo gardener: very sweet must this word be in thy heart, that is
so often in thy mouth, and it would never be so ready in thy tongue, if it
were not very fresh in thy memory.

But what marvel though it fast so sweet, that was first seasoned in thy
masters mouth, which as it was the treasury of truth, the fountain of life,
and the only quire of the most perfect harmony, so whatsoever it delivered,
thy ear devoured, and thy heart locked up. And now that thou want
himself, thou have no other comfort, but his words, which thou deemest so
much the more effectual to persuade, in that they took their force from so
heavenly a speaker. His sweetness therefore it is, that makes this word so
sweet and for love of him thou repeatest it so often, because he in the like
case said of thy brother, where have you put him. O how much do thou affect
his person that find so sweet a feeling in his phrase? How much desire
thou to see his countenance, that with so great desire pronouncest his words?
And how willingly would thou kiss his sacred feet, that so willingly
vtterest his shortest speeches?

But what meanest thou to make so absolute a promise, and so boldly to say I
will take him away? Joseph was afraid, and durst not take down his body from
the cross but by night, yea and then also not without Pilats warrant. But thou
neither staiest till night, nor regardest Pilat, but stoutly promisest, that
thou thy self wilt take him away. What if he be in the Palace of the high
Priest, and some such maid as made Saint Peter deny his master to begin to
question with thee, will thou the^ stand to these words I will take him away? Is
thy courage so high above thy kind, strength so far beyond thy sex, and thy
love so much without measure, that thou neither remembrest that al women are
weak, nor that thou thy self art but a woman? Thou exemptest no place, thou
preferrest no person, thou speak without fear, thou promisest without
condition, thou make no exception: as though nothing were impossible that thy
love suggesteth. But as the darkness could not fright thee from setting forth
before day, nor the watch fear thee from coming to the Tomb: as thou did
resolve to break open the seals, though with danger of thy life, and to
remove the stone from the graves mouth, though thy force could not serve thee:
so what marvel though thy love being now more incensed with the fresh wound
of thy loss, it resolve upon any, though never so hard adventures? Love is not
ruled with reason, but with love. It neither regards what can be, nor what
shall be done, but only what it self desires to do. No difficulty can stay
it, no impossibility appale it. Love is title just enough, and armor strong
enough for all assaults, and it self a reward of all labors. It asks no
recompense, it respects no commodity. Loves fruits are loves effects, and the
gaynes, the pains. It considers behoof, more then benefit, and what in
duty it should, not what in deed it can.

But how can nature be so mastered with affection, that thou can take such
delight and carrye such love to a dead corse? The mother how tenderly soever
she loved her child alive. yet she can not choose but loath him dead. The
most loving spouse can not endure the presence of her deceas^d husband, and
whose embracements were delightsom in life, are ever most hateful after death.
Yea this is the nature of all, but principally of women, that the very
conceit, much more the sight of the departed, strikes into them so fearful
and ugly impressions, and stirs in them so great a horror, that
notwithstanding the most vehement love, they think long till the house be
rid of their very dearest friends, when they are once attired in deaths
unlovely liueries. How the^ can thou endure to take up his corse in thy
hands, and to carry it thou know not thy self how far, being especially so
torn and mangled, and consequently the more likely in so long time to be
tainted.

Thy sister was unwilling that the grave of her own brother should be opened,
and yet he was shrouded in sheets, embalmed with spices, and died an ordinary
death, without any wound, bruise or other harm, that might hasten his
corruption. But this corse has neither shroud nor spice, since these are all to
be seen in the Tomb, and there is not a part in his body but had some help
to further it to decay, and art not thou afraid to see him, yea to touch him,
yea to embrace and carry him naked in thy arms?

If thou had remembered Gods promise, that His Saints should not see
corruption: If thou had believed, that his Godhead remaining with his body,
could have preserved it from perishing, thy faith had been more worthy of
praise, but thy love less worthy of admiration, since the more corruptible thou
did conceive him, the more combers thou did determine to overcome, and
the greater was thy love in being able to co^quer them. But thou would have
thought thy ointments rather harms then helps, if thou had been settled in
that belief, and for so heavenly a corse embalmed with God, all earthly spices
would have seemed a disgrace. If likewise thou had firmly trusted upon
his resurrection, I should less maruail at thy constant designement, since all
hazards in taking him should have been with usury repaid, if lying in thy lap,
thou might have seen him revived, and his disfigured and dead body
beautified in thy arms with a divine majesty. If thou had hoped so good
Fortune to thy watery eyes, that they might have been first cleared with the
beams of his desired light, or that his eyes might have blessed thee with the
first fruits of their glorious looks: If thou had imagined any likelihood
to have made happy thy dying heart, with taking in the first gaspes of his
living breath, or to have heard the first words of his pleasing voice: Finally
if thou had thought to have seen his injuries turned to honors, the marks
of his misery to ornaments of glory, and the depth of thy heaviness to such a
height of felicity, what so ever thou had don to obtain him, had been but a
mite for a million, and too slender a price for so sovereign a peniworth.

But having no such hopes to uphold thee, and so many motives to plunge thee in
despair, how could thy love be so mighty, as neither to feel a woman's fear
of so deformed a corse, nor to think the weight of the burden too heavy for
thy feeble arms, nor to be amated with a world of dangers that this attempt
did carry with it?

But affection can not fear whom it affects, love feels no load of him it
loves, neither can true friendship be frighted from rescuing so affied a
friend.

What meanest thou then O comfort of her life, to leave so constant a well,
willer so long vncomforted, and to punish her so much, that so well deserves
pardon? Dally no longer with so known a love, which so many trials avouch most
true. And since she is nothing but what it pleases thee, let her taste the
benefit of being only thine. She did not follow the tide of thy better
Fortune, to shift sail when the stream did alter course. She began not to
love thee in thy life, to leave thee after death: Neither was she such a guest
at thy table, that meant to be a stranger in thy necessity. She left thee
not in thy lowest ebb, she revolted not from thy last extremity: In thy life
she served thee with her goods: In thy death she departed not from thy
cross: after death she came to dwell with thee at thy grave. Why then do
not thou say with Noemi: Blessed be she of our Lord, because what courtesy
she afforded to the quick, she has also continued toward the dead. A
thing so much the more to be esteemed, in that it is most rare.

Do not sweet Lord any longer delay her. Behold she has attended thee these
three days, and she has not what to eat, nor wherewith to foster her
famished soul, unless thou by discovering thy self, do minister unto her
the bread of thy body, and feed her with the food, that has in it all taste
of sweetness. If therefore thou will not have her to faint in the way,
refresh, her with that which her hunger requires. For surely she cannot long
enjoy the life of her body, unless she may have notice of thee, that art the
life of her soul.

But fear not Mary for thy tears will obtain. They are too mighty orators,
to let any suite fall, and though they pleaded at the most rigorous bar, yet
have they so persuading a silence, and so conquering a complaint, that by
yielding they overcome, and by entreating they command. They tie the tongues
of all accusers, and soften the rigor of the seuerest Judge. Yea they win the
invincible, and bind the omnipotent. When they seem most pitiful, they have
greatest power, and being most for saken they are most victorious. Repentant
eyes are the Cellers of Angels, and penitent tears their sweetest wines, which
the savor of life perfumeth, the taste of grace sweetneth, and the purest
colors of returning innocence highly beautifieth. This dew of devotion never
falls, but the sun of justice draws it up, and vpo^what face soever it
droppeth, it makes it amiable in Gods eye. For this water has thy heart been
long a limbecke, sometimes distilling it out of the weeds of thy own offenses
with the fire of true contrition. Sometimes out of the flowers of spiritual
comforts, with the flames of contemplation, and now out of the bitter herbs of
thy Masters miseries, with the heat of a tender compassion. This water has
better graced thy looks, then thy former alluring glaunces. It has settled
worthier beauties in thy face, then all thy artificial paintings. Yea this
only water has quenched Gods anger, qualified his justice, recovered his
mercy, merited his love, purchased his pardon, and brought forth the spring of
all thy favors. Thy tears were the proctors for thy brothers life, the inuiters
of those Angels for thy comfort, and the suitors that shall be rewarded with
the first sight of thy revived Savior. Rewarded they shall be, but not
refrained: altered in their cause, but their course continued Heaven would
weep at the loss of so precious a water, and earth lament the absenee of so
fruitful ^owers. No no, the Angels must still bathe themselves in the pure
streams of thy eyes, and thy face shall still be set with this liquid pearl
that as out of thy tears, were stricken the first sparks of thy Lords love,
so thy tears may be the oil, to nourishe and feed his flame. Till death
damme up the springs, they shall never cease running: and then shall thy soul
be ferried in them to the harbor of life, that as by them it was first passed
from sin to grace, so in them it may be wasted from grace to glory. In the
mean time, reere up thy fallen hopes, and gather confidence both of thy
speedy comfort, and thy Lords well being.

Jesus says unto her, Maria, She turning, said unto him: Rabboni.

O loving master, thou did only defer her consolation, to increase it,
that the delight of thy presence, might be so much the more welcome, in that
through thy long absence it was with so little hope, so much desired. Thou were
content she should lay out for thee so many sighs, tears, and plaints, and
did purposely adiorne the date of her payment, to requite the length of
these delays with a larger loan of joy. It may be she knew not her former
happiness, till she was weaned from it: nor had a right estimate in valuing
the treasures, with which thy presence did enriche her, until her extreme
poverty taught her their inestimable rate. But now thou she west by a sweet
experience, that though she paid thee with the dearest water of her eyes, with
her best breath, and tenderest love, yet small was the price that she bestowed
in respect of the worth that she received. She sought the dead, and imprisoned
in a stony gayle: and now she finds thee both alive and at full liberty.
She sought the shrined in a shroud, more like a leaper then thy self, left as
the model of the vitermost misery, and the only pattern of the bitterest
unhappiness: And now she finds thee invested in the robes of glory, the
president of the highest, and both the owner and giver of all felicity.

And as all this while she has sought without finding, weept without
comfort, and called without answer: so no we thou satisfiest her seeking
with thy coming, her tears with thy triumph, and al her cries with this one
word Marie. For when she heard thee call her in thy woonted manner, and with thy
usual voice, her only name issuing from thy mouth, wrought so strange an
alteration in her, as if she had been wholly new made, when she was only
named. For whereas before the violence of her grief had so benumbed her, that
her body seemed but the hearse of her dead heart, and her heart the cophin of
an vnliuing soul, and her whole presence but a representation of a double
funeral of thine, and of her own: now with this one word her senses are
restored, her mind lightened, her heart quickened, and her soul revived.

But what marvel though with one word he raise the dead spirits of his poor
disciple, that with a word made the world, and even in this very word shows
an omnipotent power?

Marie she was called as well in her bad as in her reformed estate, and both
her good and evil, was all of Mary's working. And as Marie signifies no less
what she was, then what she is: so is this one word by his virtue that speaks
it, a repetition of all her miseries, an Epitome of his mercies, and a memorial
of all her better fortunes. And therefore it laid so general a discovery of
her self before her eyes, that it awaked her most forgotten sorows, and
mustered together the whole multitude of her joys, and would have left the
issue of their mutiny very doubtful, but that the presence and notice of her
highest happiness decided the quarrel, and gave her joys the victory. For as
he was her only sun, whose going down, left nothing but a dumpishe night of
fearful fancies, wherein no star of hope shined, and the brightest plannets
were changed into dismal signs: so the serenitie of his countenance, and
authority of his word, brought a calm and well tempered day, that chasing
away all darkness, and disperpling the clouds of melancholy, cured the
letargie, and breaks the dead sleep of her astonished senses.

She therefore ravished with his voice, and impatient of delays, takes his
talk out of his mouth, and to his first and yet only word, answered but one
other calling him Rabboni that is Master. And then sudden joy rowsing all
other passions, she could no more proceed in her own, then give him leave to
go fore ward with his speech.

Love would have spoken, but fear enforced silence. Hope frames the words,
but doubt melts them in the passage: and when her inward conceits striued to
come out, her voice trembled, her tongue faltered, her breath failed,. In fine
tears issued in liew of words, and deep sighs in stead of long sentences, the
eye supplying the mouths default, and the heart pressing out the vnsillabled
breath at once, which the conflict of her disagreeing passions, would not
suffer to be sorted into the several soundes of intelligible speeches.

For such is there estate that are sick with a surfeit of sudden joy, for the
attaining of a thing vehementlye desired. For as desire is ever vshered by
hope, and waited on by fear, so is it credulous in entertaining conjectures,
but hard in grounding a firm belief. And though it be apt to admit the
least shadow of wished comfort, yet the hotter the desire is to have it, the
more perfect assurance it requires for it: which so long as it wants the
first news or apparaunce of that which is in request, is rather an Alarm to
summon up all passions, then a retraite to quiet the desire. For as hope
presumes the best, and inuiteth joy to gratulate the good success: so fear
suspecteth it too good to be true, and calls up sorrow to bewail the
uncertainty. And while these enterchange objections and answers, sometimes
fear falls into despair, and hope rises into repining anger, and thus the
skirmishe still continues till evidence of proof conclude the controversy.

Mary therefore though she suddenly answered upon notice of his voice, yet
because the nouelty was so strange, his person so changed, his presence so
vnerpected, and so many miracles laid at once before her amazed eyes, she
found a sedition in her thoughts, till more earnest vewing him erempted them
from all doubt.

And then though words would have broken out, and her heart sent into his, the
duties that she ought him, yet every thought striving to be first uttered,
and to have the first room in his gracious hearing, she was forced as an
indifferent arbitrer among the^, to seal them up al under silence by
suppressing speech, and to supplye the want of words, with more significant
actions. And therefore running to the haunt of her chiefest delights, and
falling at his sacred feet, she offered to bath them with tears of joy, and
to sanctify her lips with kissing his once grieuons, but now most glorious
wounds,

She stayed not for any more words, being now made blessed with the word
himself, thinking it a greater benefit, at once to feed al her wishes, in
the homage, honor, and embracing of his feet, then in the often hearing of his
less comfortable talk.

For as the nature of love coueteth not only to be united, but if it were
possible wholly transfourmed out of it self into the thing it loves: So does
it most affect that which most unites, and prefers the least conjunction
before any distant contentment. And therefore to see him did not suffiss her,
to hear him did not quiet her, to speak with him was not enough for her, and
except she might touch him, nothing could please her. But though she humbly
fell down at his feet to kiss them, yet Christ did forbid her saying. Do
not touch me for I am not yet ascended to my Father.

O Jesus what mystery is in this? Being dead in sin she touched thy mortal
feet that were to die for her sake, and being now alive in grace, may she not
touch thy glorious feet, that are no less for her benefit revived? She was
once admitted to annointe thy head, and is she now unworthy of access to thy
feet? Do thou now command her from that for which thou were wont to
commend her, and by praising the deed did move her often to do it? Since
other women shall touch thee, why has she a repulse, yea since she her self
shall touch thee hereafter, why is she now rejected? what meanest thou O Lord
by thus debarring her of so desired a duty, and since among al thy disciples
thou have vouchsafed her with such a prerogative, as to honor her eyes with
thy first sight, and her ears with thy first words, why deniest thou the
privilege of thy first embracing? If the multitude of her tears have won
that favor for her eyes, and her longing to hear thee so great a recompense
to her ears, why do thou not admit her hands to touch, and her mouth to
kiss thy holy feet, since the one with many plaintes and the other with their
readiness to all services, seem to have earned no less reward.

But notwithstanding all this thou preuentest the effect of her offer, with for
bidding her to touch thee, as if thou had said.

O Mary know the difference between a glorious and a mortal body, between
the condition of a momentary and of an eternal life. For since the immortality
of the body, and the glory both of body and soul, are the endowments of an
heavenly inhabitant, and the rights of an other world, think not this favor to
se me here ordinary, nor leave to touch me a common thing. It were not so great
a wonder to see the stars fall from their Sphers, and the Sun forsake
heaven, and to come within the reach of a mortal arm, as for me, that am not
only a citizen, but the soueraign of saints, and the sun whose beams are
the Angels bliss, to show my self visible to the pilgrims of this world, and
to display eternal beauties to corruptible eyes. Though I be not yet ascended
to my father, I shall shortly ascend, and therefore measure not thy demeanor
toward me by the place where I am, but by that which is due unto me. And then
thou will rather with reverence fall down a far off, then with such
familiarity presume to touch me. Do thou not believe my former promises?
have thou not a constant proof by my present words? are not thy eyes and
ears sufficient testimonies, but that thou must also have thy hands and face
witnesses of my presence? Touch me not O Mary for if I do deceive thy sight,
or delude thy hearing, I can as easily beguile thy hand, and frustrat thy
feeling. Or if I be true in any one, believe me in all, and embrace me first in
a firm faith, and then thou shall touch me with more worthy hands. It is now
necessary to weane thee from the comfort of my external presence, that thou
may learn to lodge me in the secrets of thy heart, and teach thy thoughts
to supply the offices of outward senses. For in this visible shape I am not
here long to be seen, being shortly to ascend unto my Father: but what thy
eye then sees not, thy heart shall feel, and my silent parley will find
audience in thy inward ear. Yet if thou fear least my ascending should be
so sudden, that if thou do not now take thy leave of my feet, with thy
humble kisses and loving tears, thou shall never find the like oportunitye
again, license from thee that needeles suspicion. I am not yet ascended to my
Father, and for all such duties there will be a more convenient time. But now
go about that which requires more have, and run to my brethren and inform
them what I say, that I will go before them into Galilee, there they shall see
me.

Mary therefore preferring her lords will, before her own wish, yet sorry that
her will was worthy of no better event, departs from him like a hungry infant
pulled from a full teat, or a thirsty Heart chased from a sweet fountain. She
judged her self but an unlucky messenger of most joyful tidings, being
banished from her Masters presence, to carry news of his resurrection. Alas
(says she) and cannot others be happy without my unhappiness, or cannot
their gains come in, but through my losses? Must the dawning of their day be yt
evening of mine, and my soul robbed of such a treasure, to enrich their ears?
O my heart return thou to enjoy him, why go thou with me, that am enforced
to go from him? In me thou art but in prison, and in him is thy only
Paradise. I have buried thee long enough in former sorrows, and yet now when
thou were half revived, I am constrained to carry thee from the spring of
life. Alas go seek to better thy self in some more happy breast, since I
evil deserving creature am nothing different from that I was, but in having
taken a taste of the highest delight, that the knowledge and want of it might
drown me in the deepest misery.

Thus duty leading, and love withholding her, she goes as fast backward in
thought as forward in pace, ready eftsoons to faint for grief, but that a
fit me hope to see him again did support her weakness. She often turned
toward the tomb to breath, deeming the very air that came from the place
where he stood to have taken virtue of his presence, and to have in it a
refreshing force above the course of nature. Sometimes she forgets her
self, and love carries her in a golden distraction, making her to imagine that
her Lord is present, and then she seems to demand him questions, and to
hear his answers: she dreameth that his feet are in her folded arms, and
that he gives her soul a full repast of his comfortes. But alas when she
comes to her self, and finds it but an illusion, she is so much the more
sorry, in that the only imagination, being so delightful, she was not worthy
to enjoy the thing it self. And when she passes by those places where her
master had been. O stones (says she) how much more happy are you then I
most wretched caitiffe, since to you was not denied the touch of those blessed
feet, whereof my evil deserts have now made me unworthy? Alas what crime have
I of late committed that has thus cancelled me out of his good conceit, and
estranged from me his accustomed courtesy? Had I but a lease of his love, for
term of his life, or did my interest in his feet expire with his decease? In
them with my tears I write my first supplication for mercy, which I pointed
with sighs, foulded up in my hair, and humbly sealed with the impression of
my lips. They were the doors of my first entrance into his favor, by which I
was graciously entertained in his heart, and admitted to do homage unto his
head, while it was yet a mortal mirror of immortal majesty, an earthly
seat of a heavenly wisdom, containing in man a Gods felicity.

But alas I must be contented to bear a lower sail, and to take down my
desires to far meaner hopes, since former favors are now too high marks for me
to aim at.

O my eyes why are you so ambitious of heavenly honors? He is now too bright a
sun for so weak a sight: your looks are limited to meaner light, you are
the eyes of a bat, and not of an Eagle: you must humble your selves to the
twylight of inferior things, and measure your sightes by your slender
substance. Gaze not too much upon the blaze of eternity, least you loose your
selves in too much self delight, and being too curious in sifting his
majesty, you be in the end oppressed with his glory. No no, since I am
rejected from his feet, how can I otherwise presume, but that my want of faith
has dislodged me out of his heart, and thrown me out of all possession of his
mind and memory. Yet why should I stoop to so base a fear? when want of
faith was agreeued with want of all goodness, he disdained not to accept me
for one of his number: and shall I now think that he will for my faint
belief so rigorously abandon me? And is the sincerity of my love, wherein he
has no partner, of so slender account, that it may not hope for some little
spark of his woonted mercy? I will not wrong him with so unjust a suspicion,
since his appearing improueth it, his words over throw it, his countenance
does dissuade it: why then should I suck so much sorrow out of so vain a
surmise.

Thus Mary's travailing phansies, making long voyages in this short journey, and
wavering between the joy of her vision, and the grief of her denial
entertained her in the way, and held her parley with such discourses, as are
incident into minds, in which, neither hope is full master of the field, nor
fear has received an utter overthrow.

But as she was in this perplexed manner, now falling, now rising in her own
uncertainties, she finds on the way, the other holy women, that first came
with her to the grave, whom the angels had now assured of Christ's resurrection.
And as they passed all forwards toward the Disciples: Behold Jesus met them,
saying: All hayle. But they came near, and took hold of his feet, and adored
him. Then Jesus said unto them, fear not. Go tell my brethren, that they go
into Galilee, there they shall see me.

O Lord how profound are thy judgments, and unsearchable thy councels? does her
sorrow sit so near thy heart, or thy repulse rebound with such regret by
seeing her wounded love bleed so fast at her eyes, that thy late refusal must
so soon be requited with so free a grant? Is it thy pity, or her change,
which cannot allow that she should any longer fast from her earnest longing?

But O most mild physician, well know thou that thy sharp corrosie, with
bitter smarte angered her tender wound, which being rather caused, by un witting
ignorance then wilful error, was as soon cured as known. And therefore thou
quickly appliest a sweet lenity, to assuage her pain, that she might
acknowledge her forbidding rather a fatherly check to her unsettled faith, then
an austere rejecting her for her fault. And therefore thou admittest her to
kiss thy feet, the two conduits of grace, and seals of our redemption,
renewing her a charter of thy unchanged love, and accepting of her the vowed
sacrifice of her sanctified soul.

And thus gracious Lord have thou finished her fears, assured her hopes,
fulfilled her desires, satisfied her loves, stinted her tears, perfited her
joys, and made the period of her expiring griefs, the preamble to her now
entering, and never ending pleasures.

O how merciful a father thou art, to left Orphans, how easy a judge to
repentant sinners, and how faithful a friend to sincere lovers? It is
undoubtedly true, that thou never leauest those that love thee, and thou love
such as rest their affiance in thee. They shall find thee liberal above
desert, and bountiful beyond hope: a measurer of thy gifts, not by their
merits, but by thy own mercy.

O christian soul take Mary for thy mirror, follow her affection that like
effects may follow thine. Learn O sinful man of this once a sinful woman,
that sinners may find Christ, if there sins be amended. Learn that whom
sin loses, love recouereth, whom faintness of faith chaseth away, firmnes
of hope recalleth, and that which no other mortal force, favor or policy can
compass, the continued tears of a constant love, are able to obtain. Learn
of Mary for Christ to fear no encounters, out of Christ to desire no comforts,
and with the love of Christ to overrule the love of all things. Rise early in
ye morning of thy good motions, and let them not sleep in sloth, when
diligence may perform them. Run with repentance to thy sinful heart which
should have been the temple, but through thy fault, was no better then a
Tomb for Christ, since having in thee no life to feel him, he seemed unto thee
as if he had been dead. Roll away the stone of thy former hardness, remove all
the heavy loades yt oppress thee in sin, and look into thy soul, whether
thou can there find thy Lord. If he be not within thee, stand weeping
without, and seek him in other creatures, since being present in all, he may be
found in any. Let faith be thy eye, hope thy guide, and love thy light. Seek
him, and not his: for himself, and not for his gifts. If thy faith have found
him in a cloud, let thy hope seek to see him. If hope have led thee to see
him, let love seek further into him. To move in thee a desire to find, his
goods are precious: and when he is found, to keep thee in a desire to seek his
treasures are infinite. Absent he must be sought to be had, being had, he must
be sought to be more enjoyed. Seek him truly, and no other for him. Seek him
purely, and no other thing with him. Seek him only and nothing beside him. And
if at the first search he appear not, think it not much to persevere in tears,
and to continue thy seeking. Stand upon the earth, treading under thee all
earthly vanities, and touching them, with no more then the soals of thy feet,
that is with the lowest and least part of thy affection. To look the better in
the tomb, bow down thy neck to the yoke of humility, and stoop from lofty
and proud conceits: that with humbled and lowly looks thou may find, whom
swelling and haughty thoughts have drawn away. A submitted soul soonest
wins his return, and the deeper it sinketh in a self contempt, the higher
it climeth in his highest favors. And if thou perceiuest in the tomb of thy
heart, the presence of his two first messengers, that is at the feet sorrow of
the bad that is past, and at the head, desire to a better that is to come:
entertain them with sighs, and welcome them with penitent tears: yet
reckoning them but as herbingers of thy Lord, cease not thy seeking till thou
find himself. And if he vouchsafe thee with his glorious sight, offering
himself to thy inward eyes, presume not of thy self to be able to know him,
but as his unworthy suppliant prostrate thy petitions unto him, that thou
may truly discern him, and faithfully serve him. Thus preparing thee with
diligence, coming with speed, standing with high lifted hopes, and stouping
with inclined heart: if with Marie thou crauest no other solace of Jesus but
Jesus himself, he will answer thy tears with his presence, and assure thee
of his presence with his own words, that having seen him thy self, thou
may make him known to others: saying with Marie. I have seen our Lord, and
these things he said unto me.

Laus Deo.
Faults escaped in the Printing.
IN the Epistle fol. 2. b. lin. 2. sconces, read scoutes. To the Reader, four
lines before the end. and the patience, read and patience.

FOl. 2. b. lin. 23 eternal, read external. fol. 3. b. l. 19. summoned, read
summed. Fol 4. a. l. 3. disease, read decease. Fol. 6. a. l. 21., for read.
For. Fol. 6. b. l. 15. companions, read champions. Fol. 7. a. l. 22. drouen,
read drowned. Fol. 7. b. l. 7. should, read would. Fol. 11. b. l. 7. to thy,
read to her. Fol. 14. a. l. 24. demanding, read demand. Fol. 18. b. l. 22. I
heard, read I had. Fol. 19. a. l. 14. couch, read touch, Fol. 22. b. l. 1.
heart, read hearts. Ibid. l. 8. this, read his. Fol. 23. a. l. 10. dicease, read
decease. Fol. 26. b. l. 14. enjoined read enjoyed. Fol. 29. b. l. 12. trouble,
read throbbes. Ibid. l. 21. without which calling it comes, read which
without calling comes. Fol. 31. a. l. 9. to weeping, read to no more then
weeping. Fol. 35. a. l. 25. better titles, read better, many titles. Fol. 44.
a. l. 12. misere, read misery. Fol. 51. b. l. 25. to, read do Fol. 52. a. l.
3. kind, strength, read kind, thy strength. Fol. 53. b. l. 7. His Sayts, read
His holy one. Fol. 58. b. l. 21. breaks, read brake. Fol. 66, a. l. 14.
lenity, read lenitiue. Ibid. l. 20. kiss thy, read kiss in thy


