portrait of Maurice of Nassau, Prince of Orange MAVRITIUS PRINCEPS ORANGIAE
COMES NASSAVIAE. ETC.


A discourse more at large of the late overthrow given to the King of Spaines
army at Turnehaut, in January last, by Count Morris of Nassawe, assisted with
the English forces:

Wh^^^^o is adioined certain inchauntments and prayers in Latin, found about
diverse of the Spaniards, which were slain in the same conflict:

Translated out of French according to the copy printed in the Low Cou^^^ies,
(...) and allowed.

P S
ET V^^^^ ^D N^^^^ V^RI^^^ TVA printer's device, consisting of an open book
surrounded by beams of light and motto "Et usque ad nubes veritas tua," with
the initials of the printer Peter Short (1589-1603) below

Printed at London, and are to be sold in Paul's Churchyard, at the sign of
the black Bear. 1597.

A discourse of the victory which it pleased God to give unto the Prince of
Nassaw, captain general of the united Provinces of the Low countries, in the
overthrow of the Army of the king of Spain, at Turnhaut in Brabant, the 24.
of January last.
Tandem bona causa Triumphant.
IF the events of the affairs of the world did succeed according to the
judgments and reason of men, it would fall out by an infallible maxim, of
that which we call the order and reason of things, that the smallest should
be surmounted of the greatest, the most simplest, poor and meekest, by the
most craftiest, subtilest and richest, and the weakest by the strongest. But
when we see the contrary to happen, that the smallest or poorest, the most
simple and weakest to overcome the greatest, the most subtle, richest, and
most mightiest, it is an evident sign whereby the Atheists and contemners of
the providence of God, may acknowledge the actions of men to be governed by a
higher power, then their weak discourses can reach unto: and likewise to
Princes which profess themselves to be Christians, an advertisement not to
ground themselves upon their own greatness and worldly wisdom, but
narrowly to examine themselves, whether the foundation of their wars be
just, holy, necessary, and void of all tyrannical passions, not opposing
themselves obstinately without yielding to any thing, under hope that their
great extraordinary means will bring under those, who by comparison have not
the hundredth part in respect of themselves. But that great God which does
sustain those whose causes are just, how weak soever they be, knows well how
to abase their hauty presumptions and envy, in making their determinations
vain and to consume like smoke, whereof we might allege infinite examples of
times past, if one which is presented unto us in this age would not suffice.
We see the Spanish Nation so puffed up with ambition, and overwhelmed with
desire of conquering almost all the world, for the great treasures which
yearlie he draws to himself, that not finding any thing impossible, he does
undertake at once to conquer three or four Realms, by way of arms, besides
this heavy war which he has against the united provinces of the Low
countries. And albeit that these Spaniards in this pursuit of conquest, have
unprofitably consumed in two of their principal enterprises, as much treasure,
and received as much damage as ever did any prince that rained these thousand
years in Christendom: yet notwithstanding as in despite of their mines of
gold, they continue to force themselves again to strike on the rocks which
have caused their shipwreck.

Is it to be found in any history whatsoever these thousand years, that one
prince in one only exploite or enterprise, has employed so many millions of
gold as the king of Spain has done in France a few years since, during
those follies of the league, for to catch or rather dismember that goodly
realm, one of the ornaments not of Europe but of the world? In all the
streets of the legued towns, every tenth man did scarce receive wages of the
Spaniard, and at every receipt thereof were two or three mutinies at the least.
As for that proud and extraordinary army by Sea prepared the year eighty
eight, and set forth with so great charges, was there ever the like by any
Christian prince these thousand years? Notwithstanding all that, the king of
Spain as I say more obstinate then ever or rather entering into a reproved
course of judgment) does he not yet prepare another the like? Whereof howbeit
that he has already lost almost the one half, yet does he repair it without
any sparing of charges, for to ariue at a place where it shall be I assure my
self better received then welcome. He does levy great and extraordinary
forces for this next summer, to the end to overthrow and destroy all France.
France I say, which is at this present so defensible an estate, as it was at
that time when as the Emperor Charles the fifth his father employing all his
forces for to make a breach in it, and those of an host of the princes of
Germany was constrained to return as shamefullie as he did enter
courageously, and with hope to swallow up the goodly estate of France I say
again, which is at this present commanded by a king so brave, worthy,
warlike and wise as ever it has had, under color that his armies being
conducted the last summer past by his nephewe and brother in law the Cardinal
of Austria have had some favorable successes by the taking of two Towns in
France, and one on this side, the which notwithstanding he has bought dearly
and with his just valor, and given money inoughe for either of them: and yet
is the cardinal puffed up with so high imaginations, and filled him with so
great desseins, that esteeming the Frenchmen as people made of straw or snow,
and as they say, not understanding the affairs of estate, do cast as they
think dust in their eyes, by the means of trifling propositions of peace or
truce, thinking this next summer, to enter far into their realm, and so to
make a breach into the united Provinces. But that God (as I said at the
beginning) which can overthrow the paradoxes of their tyrannical and arrogant
powers, has already made it appear by a notable event in this beginning of
the year, that their determinations take not such effect as they bear
themselves in hand, for that his best regiments of men of arms have bin clean
overthrown and cut in pieces by the Prince Maurice of Nassau, which had
atchiued such aduenturous deeds of war to the good success of the Cardinal,
and of the earl of Fueintes, and amongst others, those Rodomons soldats,
Neapolitans of the regiment of the marquis of Treuicques and of Borlot, which
are said to tear armed men with their teeth. This victory then, is as happy,
honorable, and profitable for us, as it befell unto them shameful and
domageable the 24. of this month of January 1597. in the Province of Brabant
at Turnhaut, in manner as follows:

The Cardinal during the season of Winter, did think that he might being
favored by the ice and frost, attempt some notable thing in the parts of
Holland and Zeland, resolved with himself to send unto the said Turnhaut a
good troop of his best foot and horse, commanded by the earl of Varas,
heretofore named the Baron of Balanchon, great master of the K. of Spains
ordinance, and brother to the marquis of Waranbon, insomuch that being at
Turnhout, he beheld those Isles on the right and left hand where his
determination was, the which he judged of such importance for their affairs,
that in some of their towns they used great solemnity in their churches, and
very triumphant processions, to the end that it would please God speedily to
send great frosts. But God did dispose otherwise of the matter: for the Prince
Maurice full of valor and industry, and one likewise that lets not pass
any opportunity when it represents it self, having intelligence of the
assembly of these forces, and that it was to g^ue him a check upon the ice,
resolved with himself to force them to defend themselves who furiouslye
prepared to assail him, and to this effect, he caused to come secretly with
good order to a place named a rendez-vous, some thousand horse, and five
thousand foot, with certain pieces of Ordinance, to use as occasion should
serve, and as he had foreseen, and so marched toward Turnehout in good order
and resolution the 24. lodging himself at Rauels half a mile from the enemy,
who were greatly astonished, understanding the prince to be upon such a sudden
come so near them: being thus perplexed and uncertain, they resolved for the
best, to make their retrait toward Herentals, the nearest walled town to them
held by the Spaniard, beginning at four of the clock in the morning to march
forward with their baggage, and then with their men of arms. His ex. at the
very same instant, marched toward Turnhout to set upon the enemy, and found
him removed, but yet not far from thence, which made him to resolve to pursue
the enemy, and to fight with him in plain field: and for to begin the order,
two C. English Musketeers did advance themselves, to the end that they holding
continual skirmish with the enemy, he might not so easily proceed on his way,
and in the meanewhile the rest of his company had opportunity to join with
him, for coming out of the town, the way was very bad and full of water: then
he advanced his horssemen, which kept themselves still coasting the enemy, who
not long after was discried to approach toward the end of that great plain and
ready to enter into a strait both narrow and troblesome, where the horse lost
their advantage and the foot did win it: then was it resolved, that his Ex.
should no longer delaie but to come to the matter: howbeit the greatest part
of the footmen were far behind. This thus resolved, the charge was given in
this order.

The earl of Hoenloo his brother in law, a brave and resolute nobleman,
accompanied with the earl of Solms, charged the enemy in the forefront, where
was a regiment of Almaines of xiii. companies making the vangard: sir Robert
Sidney governor of Flushing, and sir Frances Vere Colonel of an english
regiment, a knight both valiant and wise, who besides their intertaining of
the enemy in skirmish; set upon the rereward where the Neapolitans were: other
troops were commanded to charge the flank, where were the regiments of the L.
of Hachicourt, which were hertofore those of Mounsieur de la Motre, compounded
of old soldiers, and those of the Colonel a Barlotte, and almost all at one
instant. The cauallery of the enemy issued with five of their best cornets: to
wit, three of Spaniards, of Don Iuan de Cordua, Don Iuan de Gouzman, and Don
alonce de Mondragon, one Albanoice du S. Nicolas Baste, one of the oldest and
sufficientest captains, and the other of the Low countries of the L. of
Grobendonc, seeing our men come to charge them, they began to fly without
any other fight, forsaking their companio^s on foot, the which after very
little resistance by the means of ours were broken and overthrown: his Ex.
being accompanied with the L. Admiral of Nassau and Colonel Moray were
reserved to sustain the cauallerie if need had required. The true number of
those that were slain, were to the number of twoe thousand and two hundred,
with their general the arle of Varas and other personages of quality. There
were 38. Ensigns, one cornet of horse, and five hundred prisoners taken, and
among them one of the earls of Mansfield, twelve chief captains, and many
other officers: many escaped, which had for their pasportes blows on the heads
with Coutelaces.

His Ex. according to his natural clemency and courtesy, had discharged the
prisoners except some few which he would have retained for the perfourmance of
the ransomes of the rest, had it not been that some alleged, that the
Cardinal commanded his people to break the quarter: he retained them until he
was resolved of his intent, to the end to order things the better hereafter.

Among the dead they did find certain relics which did warrant men from the
danger of war, enchanted papers, coniurations of souls, and prayers which
the preests do use to sell for money, so contrary to the form of praying to
God, and that which he does require of man, that we may well say as did S.
Barnard in his time, that the ministers of Christ did service to Antichrist,
and that they did overthrow the foundation of the church, transporting the
Ecclesiastical dignities into an infamous gain, and showing themselves to be
replenished with power but not with justice. It is here, where I would pray my
masters the Catholics (I mean the abused, not the abusers, the which know
best how to open their eyes and understandings) laying aside al passion, to
consider if there be in the holy scriptures any thing which does approach to
these prayers. We do see in the Psalms of David, that an infinite sort of the
servants of God went to the wars, but we cannot find any like unto these
enchantments and prayers in Latin, which are translated at the end of this
discourse.

Behold the end of this journey in steed of entering the Isles as they assured
themselves: nay, soft and fair, such cats are not to be caught without
muffles, and not so easily overcome without danger of well drinking, as did
those which heretofore attempted to enter into the country of Yo^e, and the
Spaniards which were conducted by the late earl Char. of Mansfield into
Bommelweert, in time likewise of frost. These Rodomon soldiers thought the
waters to be no more difficult then the land, where fortune sometime did smile
on them: but the Spaniards (as cats which have once wet their feet) are wiser,
then to undertake such things themselves, but send others. The Jesuits may
preach their bellies full before they can persuade them. So likewise, the
Cardinal is not like so easily to conquer these Isles as he thought: nay, he
is rather busied to prepare to defend himself this summer, having so much work
cut out, that of long time cannot be made up in those places where he thought
to triumph.

France as it is at this day, would not willingly receive the last lie, she
will not endure you so to carry away her fair feathers as you did the tempest of
the civil wars being not yet paste: you deceive your selves, if you think
your stratagems of truce shall serve you to abuse the French: no, they will
throw away their rackets the game being so fair: they know your disease and
where to begin with you, and will show themselves not to be of so vile and
bastard courage, as you think them to be. So likewise those of Orthois and
Heinault, do not look for any other thing, then their own miserable overthrow
and utter undoing, for having served the insatiable ambition of the Spaniard.
There are in those Provinces men of courage and not yet degenerated, who
finding their own grief, do know the remedy, and that of necessity they
must purge the offensive humor for to save the whole body: they I say,
seeing my lords the Estates of the united provinces, to appear unto them so
happily flourishing in all sorts of blessings that God may send to men, and to
govern themselves with so many good policies and rules of discretion, causing
so sweet and happy a quietness among the people, as in no country in the
world soever, where men in reason may find more occasion to content
themselves then there. A thing not to be maruailed at, since that we evidently
know by so many events past, that it is GOD which does guide and warrant them,
as heretofore he did his people against the Syrians, Egyptians, Assyrians,
Medes and others: and it is not to be doubted but that he will continue his
favor, seeing the foundation of their quarrel is his glory and the
conservation of natural liberty, which ought to be as dear unto us as our
lives; being void of all passions and revenge in their conquest of towns,
where specially it might seem they should have used the same to serve for
examples to others, in respect of some which were revolted, which is an evident
show of their benignity and true christian government, instead of confusion
and cruelty with the which their enemies would charge them. And as I have
said, their foundation is so strong, as we may believe that the hammars
which are prepared to break this anuile, shall be battered, bruised and broken,
as they have bin hitherto. We will rest our selves then upon the promises
which our great God has made, to conserve those which do seek his honor,
and glory, and extermine al those who oppose themselves against the kingdom
of his son Jesus.

FINIS.
Quicunque hanc suprascriptam orationem secu^ portauerit, nullum inimicum
timeat, nec gladij, nec sagitta, nec aliqua arma sibi nocere poterunt: nec
insidiae diaboli, nec arma incantantium, nec venenorum, nec immundus spiritus
sibi nocere poterunt, in omni te^pore, and in omni loco saluus erit:
BArnasa leutias buccella buccella agla agla tetra grammaton adonay Domine Deus
magne and mirabilis adiuua famulum tuum N: indignum ab omni periculo mortis,
corporis, and animae, and ab omnibus insidijs inimicorum, visibilum and
inuisibilium. December sunt nomina, quibus appellatur Deus, in quocunque nomen
Deus Crux ely eloy ela adonay corpus Christi cogi sabaot nomina crux haec
prosint famulo Dei N. hoc est enim corpus meum, vt diligat me, Amen.

ORATION.
COniuro vos omnia arma cum quibus occisi sunt omnes sancti Martyrs, praecipio
vobis per merita sanctorum omnium, vt non habeatis potestatem scindendi carnem
meam, nec sanguinem meum spargendi, nec offendendi me famulum Dei N. nec in
aliquo laedendi. Crux and passio domini nostri Jesus Christi sit in memoria and
in defensione mea, pax and benedictio domini sit semper mecum: o sagitta sta
per virtutem beatae Mariae Virginis, and per caput sancti Ioannis Baptistae,
per Apostolos, Martyrs, Confessores, Virgins and Viduas: per Angelos and
Archangelos: o sagitta sta per annunciatione^ Domini nostri Jesus Christi, o
sagitta sta per coronam spineam; quae portata fuit in capite Domini nostri Jesus
Christi. o sagitta sta per captionem and flagellationem Domini nostri Jesus
Christi, O sagitta per clauos, qui perforauerunt manus and pedes Domini nostri
Jesus Christi, o sagitta sta per vulnera Domini nostri Jesus Christi, per
resurrectionem Domini nostri Jesus Christi: vt non possis laedere me famulum Dei
N. In nomine Patris, and Filij, and spiritus sancti, Amen.

ORATION.
Obsecro te Domine fili Dei viui per sanctam crucem tuam; vt dimittas peccata
mea, per sanctam crucem tuam custodi caput meum, per venerabilem crucem tuam
custodi pedes meos and omnia me^bra mea, and tribue mihi veniam and vitam
aeternam; sancte Deus sanctifica me, fortis Deus fortifica me, immortalis Deus
miserere mei famuli tui N. quia peccata mea multa sunt apud te, and non su^
dignus vocari seruus tuus propter iniquitates meas quae sunt innumerabiles:
propterea deprecor te, vt mittas in cor meum amorem caelestem. Qui viuis and
regnas deus per omnia secula seculorum, Amen.

ALIA ORATION.
Abba Pater miserere mei, o Fili, o sancte spiritus mecum sis: erue me ab
omnibus aduersariis meis, coniuro te gladium per S. sacerdotem veteris
testamenti, qui introduxit Mariam and Dominum nostrum Iesum Christum in templum
dicentem: tuam ipsius animam doloris gladius pertransibit, vt non possit
laedere famulum Dei N. Coniuro vos lapides per beatum Stephanum protomartyrem,
quem Iudaei lapidauerunt, qui statuit pro suis persecutoribus exorare, dicens:
N. Ne statuas illis hoc peccatum, quia nesciunt quid faciunt, vt non possint
laedere me famulum Dei N.] In nomine Patris and Filij, and spiritus sancti,
Amen.

Whosoever shall carry about him this prayer here under written, let him not
fear any enemy, neither can any weapon anoy him, neither darts nor other
warlike instrument: neither the weapons of the inchanters, nor poisons, neither
can the wicked spirit annoy him: he shall be safe at all times, and in all
places.
BArnasa leuitas buccella buccella agla agla tetra grammaton adonay. Lord,
great and admirable God, help thy unworthy servant, N. from all danger of
death of the body and soul, and from all the assaults of enemies, visible and
invisible. There be ten names with the which God is named, in whom they name
God Crux ely eloy ela adonai Corpus Christi cogi sabaot nomina Crux the things
are profitable to the servant of God, N. hoc est enim corpus meum vt diligat
me, Amen.

I conjure you all weapons with the which all the saints have bin martyred. I
conjure you by the merits of all the saints, that you have no power to cut my
flesh, nor shed my blood, nor offend me the servant of God, N. nor hurt me in
any thing. The cross and passion of our Lord Jesus Christ, be in my mind and
defense. The peace and blessing of our Lord be always with me O darte stay
thy self by the virtue of the blessed virgin Mary, and by the head of S. John
Baptist, by the apostles, martyrs, confessors, virgins and widows: by the
angels and archangels: O dart stay thy self by the annunciation of our L.
Jesus Christ, O dart stay thy self by ye crown of thorns, which was set upon
the head of our Lord Jesus Christ, O dart stay thy self by the taking and
beating of our Lord Jesus Christ: O darte for the nails which pearsed the
hands and feet of our Lord Jesus Christ, O dart stay for the wounds of our
Lord Jesus Christ, by the resurrection of our Lord Jesus Christ in such sort
that thou have not the power to hurt me the servant of God, N. in the name of
the father, and of the son, and the holy Ghost, Amen.

A Prayer.
I Beseech thee by the holy cross, O Lord son of the living God, that thou
forgive me my sins keep my head by thy holy cross, keep my feet and all
my members by thy venerable cross, and give me remission and eternal life.
blessed God sanctify me, mighty God fortify me, immortal God have
compassion upon me thy servant N. because that my sins be in great number
before thee, and I am not worthy to be called thy servant by reason of mine
iniquities which are innumerable. Wherefore I beseech thee that thou will send
into my heart celestial love, who live and raignest a God from age to age,
Amen.

Another Prayer.
ABba father, have pity on me O son O holy ghost be with me, withdraw me
from all mine adversaries. I conjure thee O blade by the holy priest of the
old Testament, who brought Mary and our Lord Jesus Christ into the temple
saying: the sword shall go through thy soul with grief, so that it shall not
hurt the servant of God N. O stones I conjure you by the blessed Steven the
first martyr the which the Jews stonied, who ordained that we should pray for
our persecutors, saying N. impute not that sin unto them, for they know not
what they do, so that they cannot offend me the servant of God, N., in the name
of the father, and of the son, and of the holy Ghost, Amen.

FINIS.

