A Brief Discourse of the Hypostasis, or substance of the water of Spaw;
Containing in small quantity many pots of that Mineral Water.

Very profitable for such Patients, as cannot repair in person to those
Fountains, as by perusing this Discourse, it will plainly appear.

Translated out of French into English, by G. T.

This abouesaide Hypostasis, or substance of the water of Spaw, is to be sold
by Doctor Hieronimus Seminus, Italian, dwelling in S. Paul's Alley, in
Red-crosse-street.

A brief Discourse of the Hypostasis, or substance of the water of Spaw,
containing in small quantity many pots of that Mineral water.
WHereas the singular effects that are yearly experimented, by drinking the
water of Spaw, do cause the concourse of sundry persons of diverse Countries
and Nations to those Fountains: whereunto many more patients would willingly
repair, were they not let, either by extraordinary defect of health, or
ordinary want of wealth, or such other impeachments, as daily occur in the
course of this transitory life.

In consideration whereof, it has seemed very expedient to some, who have
disposed their studies and labors, to the good of others; and whose residences
are not far from those Fountains, nor themselves estranged from the ensearch
of natural things, to devise the means, that such as are absent, may be made
partakers of those Mineral waters; and consequently, of those healthful
effects, that by the drinking of them are produced.

The accustomed course hitherto taken, has been to fill numbers of Bottles
with the water of the upper or the lower Fountain, and to conueigh those
Bottles (being closely stopped) unto their designed places; as to France,
England, Italy, Germany, Polonia, Moscouia, and other far distant places. But
this way is found by experience, no less troublesome, then chargeable in the
carriage; considering, that a huge quantity of water, contains but a very
little of the Mineral substance, wherein the virtue of the water consists;
and the said substance being so thinly divided into a great quantity of water,
loses much of the force and virtue, before it can be brought into so far
distant places; the which has been the cause, why the persons before
insinuated, have employed their study and Travail, to reduce the pure
Hypostasis or substance of the said Minerals, into so little a quantity, as
that one pot may supply for far more then an hundred pots; and withal, that
no part of the force or virtue of the said Minerals should be impaired.

And to the end the Reader may receive some kind of satisfaction, who
perchance is curious to look into the practice hereof; or at lest, into the
speculation of this Maistry, three points he is then to observe.

First that the extraction of the said Mineral essence be made in Summer; in
which season, those Waters are of more efficacy: And if the extracter be
himself present at the Fountains, it is so much the better.

Secondly, that he find out the secret how to part the Mineral substance from
the Water, without distillation, (for that would not quite the cost) but by
precipitation, whereby the Mineral powder falls down, and setleth it self
in the bottom of the glass, depriving the Water of all Mineral taste and
operation; which secret, is soon performed by a skillful Artist.

Thirdly, when he has a sufficient quantity of that precipitated powder, he
must not dissolve it with any corasiue, but with a competent measure of such
Liquors as are agreeable unto the health of man: and in these three
observations the whole practice consists.

It follows now, to declare in what quantity this Hypostasis or extraction
dissolved thus into a liquor, is to be taken; which must be as follows.

Take a dram weight of this Liquor, which is the eight part of an Ounce; and
contains as much in quantity, as will fill a great Thimble; pour this into a
glass or stone Bottle, and pour thereunto fifty Ounces of the best and
clearest water that is to be had; whether it be Fountain water, River water,
or Well water: This water is to be put unto the dram weight of the other
liquor, at the time that the Patient is ready to drink it, and not before; not
that any inconvenience may ensue thereof, but because the fresher the water is,
the more grateful it is unto the taste, and the Mineral substance in length of
time, will descend unto the bottom of the glass: and albeit it may be newly
stirred and mingled with the water, and so taken; yet will it notwithstanding,
be more to the liking of the Patient, as before is noted, to have his water
brought fresh from the Spring, etc.

This quantity of fifty Ounces of Water to a dram of the Mineral substance,
is the ordinary and best proportion, which hitherto by practice has been
tried, being also less distasteful unto the drink; yet, in some diseases, as
in retention of Urine, or in quenching the heats of Agues, it will stand the
Patient in better steed to follow this proportion, then to take it in lesser
quantity of water. And this is spoken upon proof and experience: how be it,
if the learned Physician shall think it expedient, Vt in morbis in quibus
humiditas perualet.
that in some diseases the quantity of the water be diminished, the matter is
referred unto his grave judgment, consenting with the Philosopher, that
Frustra fit per plura, quod potest fieri per punciora.

The water being in the former proportion prepared* the patient may drink
thereof according to the quality of his disease; Till the water is past by the
belly, or by the Urine Meatus: and that the stomach is empty
as for example.

For the stone and gravel, or heat of the raynes, he may take every morning
fasting fifty Ounces at several times, and he must abstain from meat two
hours after, and if within that space he be in plight to walk, or to use some
other moderate exercise, it will work the better.

Here is also to be noted, that albeit such as drink the Spaw water, to take
100. 200. or more ounces in a morning. Yet this notwithstanding,
these-fiftie-ounces will be of as great efficacy, because there is more pure
substance contained in those fifty ounces, then in a far greater quantity of
Spaw water.

Thus much taken in a morning, will be sufficient the first week for the whole
day. The week following, so much more may be drunken in the afternoon, about
three or four of the clock, if it shall seem good to the learned and expert
Physician, to whose discretion and direction are referred, these and sundry
other particular circumstances that may happen (which in schools are termed
Hic and nunc) in sundry diseases, and in the diverse dispositions of different
patients: in which occurrences all purgations and other preparations that mny
be prescribed, are to go before the taking of this water, as in like sort the
prescription of dyets, and the like heedfull and healthful observations, as
when or how often the patient may drink the water alone, or mingled with wine,
at meats or at other times. These and other circumstances must in all reason
be referred to the discretion of the learned Physician.

In the retention of urine it will be needful to take those fifty ounces every
morning, and as much more in the afternoon, unless the party find
amendment, and in that disease to walk, and use some exercise, will be of
great importance.

The same quantity may be prescribed in the dropsy, morning and evening,
especially after the first week, and if the disease have not taken very deep
root, the patient will find sencible amendment, and his strength day by day
very much to increase.

In Tertian and Quartaine Agues, the Patient must drink every morning 50.
Ounces on his good days; but on the days of his fit, he may take before the
access 20. Ounces, and in the heat of the fit, thirty Ounces.

The like observations may be used in Quotidian Agues, to wit; that 20. ounces
be taken before the fit, and ^o. in the heat thereof, if it shall seem good
to the Physician, whose judgment is also to be used concerning the time and
quantity, when and how much of this water may be used in continual Agues.

In pestilentiall Agues, there has not (as yet) any assured trial been made.

In all Obstructions, as the Green sickness, and the like, For the pains of
the Spleen, hardness and swellings thereof.
the Physician may prescribe it in place of the powder of steel, it being
undoubtedly far more secure, and of more effectual operation.

In the weakness of the stomach and heat of the Liver, it is a singular
water, being daily taken in the aforesaid quantity of 50. ounces.

In the Flux, and in the abundance of VVoment Courses it may also be taken;
and being mingled now and then with red wine, it will be the better. In
women's infirmities (as aforesaid) if this water be mingled with distilled
Plantine water, it will work the better. For other diseases, the Reader may
see what is added in the end of this discourse, which is taken out of the
Treatise of the virtues of the waters of the Forest of Arden, and principally
of those of Spaw, written some years since in the French tongue, by the
learned M. Gilbert Lembourgh, Doctor of Physic, and dedicated unto the Prince
of Liege. Observing nevertheless by the way, that as the said Fountains of
Spaw do not benefit every one in particular; so is it not promised, that this
Hypostasis thereof shall work infallible cures in all kind of diseases, and
upon all persons, as though one saddle should fit every horse; for diverse
persons have diverse constitutions of body; and the same Medicine which is
available to one, is not always profitable to another, as reason and
experience daily shows. Wherefore to conclude, the ordinary proportion as
before has bin said, is to mingle fifty ounces of pure water to a dram of this
Mineral Hypostasis or substance of the Spaw water; not that there is any danger
if one should drink one dram only with an ounce of common water, but for the
more efficatious working: this ordinary quantity is found to be more
convenient, having therein some resemblance with the copious abundance of the
Spaw water.

Here also the patient may observe, that it shall not he needful for him
always to weigh the water; for having weighed it once, and put it into a
glass of convenient greatness, he may see to what fullness of the glass his
fifty Ounces of water do reach, and so use that measure for the said weight.
The Patient may moreover mingle the water with wine, in all such Diseases as
are not hot.

They do use at the Spaw to make Brewesse or sops of that water, boiling it
with Butter, which they find both toothsome and wholesome; in all which
particularities it will always be good (as before is said) to follow the
advice of a learned expert and unpassionate Physician.

Of sundry diseases, which principally are cured by the use of drinking the
water of Spaw, taken out of the treatise of the virtues thereof, written by M.
Gilbert Lembourgh, Doctor of Physic, and consequently of the Hypostasis of
the said water being mingled with pure common water, as in the precedent
discourse is declared. The drinking of this water does mightily quench thirst,
and it brings the hot Liver unto a good temper, as also the Kidneyes.

It strengthens the stomach, and gives it appetite thorough the astrictiue
virtue that it has, but for an extreme cold stomach it is not so good.

It is greatly profitable against all obstructions, and debility of the Milt,
for it does dissolve and cure the cause thereof.

It delivers the Kidneyes and bladder from Gravel, and is aidefull against
all defluctions of those parts.

It corrects Rheumes and Cararrhes, in what part of the body soever they
descend; as in the breast, the stomach, the Kidneyes, Sinews, on Muscles.

It cures Dropsies, how be it such as in whom this disease is confirmed by
length of time, and that the forces of the Patients are thereby much weakened,
are very hardly cured. And so are also such Dropsies as proceed of a
hardness of the Liuar, which Galen says, are incureable.

Experience also shows, that such dropsies as come of dryness of the
stomach, and of long resolution and humidity of the intestine parts are not
easily cured.

But among such as the beginning of this Disease comes of the illness of the
Milt, the other parts not naturally well, many persons have bin perfectly cured.

It helps greatly the parts that are softened and resolved by defluctions, as
the Sinews, Muscles, etc.

It strengthens the Matrix that i^ subject to too much humidity, and
disposes it in such sort that it retains the conceived fruit, and so
expelle^h barrenness.

It aydeth against strangulations and suffocations of the Matrix.

As touching such as are very Leapers; if it do not wholly cure them, yet does
the continual use thereof, impeach and hinder their disease from any more
increasing.

As for the curing of Agues, the Reader may note what has bin said in the
precedent Discourse.

The Reader is lastly to be advertised; That whereas the most usual taking of
the Water of Spaw is in Summer, it is chiefly because of the abundance of
Rain and Snow that falls into those Fountains in winter, which weakneth the
force of them; and so is the force also weakened in Summer in rainy weather; as
contrary-wise in winter, in frosty and dry weather, the water has his perfect
force. In which respect, this Hypostasis thereof being mingled with pure
Water, in such quantity of the one and the other, as before is mentioned, may
as well be used in winter, as in Summer.

FINIS.

