coat of arms of King Philip II of Spain, also used by Philip III, Philip IV
and Charles II

A PROCLAMATION FOR REFORMATION, Published and Commanded (to be observed as
Law) by the Hie and Mighty Philip the fourth, King of Spain, for the
Government of his Kingdoms.

Containing 23. several Chapters, wherein his Majesty with the advice of his
Councels has Ordered, and Reformed many Notorious Abuses in the Commonwealth.

Faithfully translated out of the Original Spanish Copy Printed by his
Majesty's Command.

LONDON, Printed for Nathaniell Butter, Nicholas Bourne, and Thomas Archer.

A TABLE OF THE several Chapters.
Chap. 1. For reducing Offices in Towns to a third Number. Chap. 2. That
Suitors may not reside in the Court, in any one year above thirty days. Chap.
3. That Commissioners nor Executors of commissions may be seut. Chap. 4. That
fiats of examination of Clearkes of these Kingdoms, be not allowed for the
space of twenty years. Chap. 5. A prescription or reformation in the excess
of Servants, Household-stuffe, and forniture of houses, and in the apparel of
men and women. Chap. 6. That nothing made of Wood or any Metal be garnished
or gilt with Silver or Gold, and that there may not be taken for the making or
fashion, but the fifteenth part of that which it shall weigh being of gold, and
the sixth being of silver. Chap. 7. That no kind of thing may be imbrodered.
Chap. 8. That there be made no Hangings for the Summer of strange stuff, and
eight years are allowed for the wearing out of those that are made. Chap. 9.
That neither Gold nor Silver be worn in stuff of silk, or trimming. Chap.
10. That Trimming be not worn upon garments. Chap. 11. That Cloakes of Silk
be not worn. Chap. 12. That Cloth, or stuff of Wool, or Silk, made within
or without the Dominions may not be sold without it have a mark. Chap. 13.
That nothing made out of the Kingdom may be brought in. Chap. 14. That they
shall wear no bands, but of the twelft part of an ell, and the cuffes but of
the eight breadth, both without garnishing. Chap. 15. What Titles each Rank
shall have is renewed. Chap. 16. Of the moderation of the Dowry Iuels and
apparel. Chap. 17. That to the Ladies of the Court there shall be given but a
Million of Marauedis in Dowry, and a Petticoat. Chap. 18. That his Majesty will
not glue any Office, nor place of Justice, nor of his house in Marriage. Chap.
19. Privileges which are granted to the state of Matrimony. Chap. 20. The
means whereby the Nobility is to be appeased. Chap. 21. Means for increase of
People. Chap. 22. That there may not be Grammar Schools, but in Cities and
Towns where there shall be a Justice or Deputy. Chap. 23. For the Abollishing of
public stews.
License and Taxation.
LAzaro de Rios Angulo, Secretary to the Kings Most Excellent Majesty,
executing by his commandment, the office of Secretary of the Council Chamber,
do testify upon my fidelity, that the Chapters of Reformation which his
Majesty is pleased to command to be observed for the government of the
Kingdom, were taxed by the Lords thereof, every one at the price of twelve
pence, which contains twelve sheets, and they command that they may be sold
for this price, and not above: and likewise they command that no Printer of
these Kingdoms may print the said Chapters: and Acts, but he that shall have
license and appointment from Hernando de Valleio, Secretary of his Majesty's
Chamber: and that there may be no doubt, of the commandment of the said Lords
of the Council, nor supplication of the said Hernando de Valeio, I gave these
Presents in the Town of Madrid the 14. of February, 1623.

Lazaro de Rios.

coat of arms of King Philip II of Spain, also used by Philip III, Philip IV
and Charles II
PHILIP, By the Grace of GOD, King of Castile, Leon, Arragon, of both the
Sicilies, Jerusalem, Portugal, Navarra, Granada, Toledo, Valencia, Galicia,
the Malorcas, Sivill, Sardinia, Cordova, Corcyca, Murcia, Iaen, the Algarves,
Algecira, Gibraltar, the Canarie Jlands, the East and West Indies, and of the
Islands, and firm Land of the Ocean Sea: Archduke of Austria, Duke of
Burgundy, Brabant, and Milan, Earl of Auspurgh, Flanders, Tiroll, and
Barcelona, Lord of Biscaye, and Molina, etc.
To the Infantes Our dear and welbeloved Brethren, and to the Prelates, Dukes,
Marquises, Earls, Priors of Orders, Lieutenants, and Deputie-Lieutenants,
Governors of Castles, Forts, and Chases, and to those of Our Council,
Presidents, and Masters of Our Requests, Justices, Marshalles of Our house,
Court, and Chancery; and to all Judges, Justices, Assistants, Governors,
High-Sherifes, and Vnder-Sherifes, Bayliffes, Provosts, and to Councels,
Universities, Mayors, Aldermen, Recorders, Town-clarkes, Knights, Squires,
Constables, Officers, and other good men, and Subjects whatsoever, of what
estate, pre-eminence, or dignity, soever they are, or may be, within all the
Cities, Villages, Towns, and Provinces, of these Our Kingdoms, and
Dominions, as well, to those that are, as to them that shall be, and to all and
every one of you, to whom this Our Edict, or any thing therein contained, shall
or may appertain, in any manner whatsoever, Greeting.
KNow ye, that Our Royal will and pleasure is, that in these Our Dominions,
(having acknowledged it a most important and sufficient means, for the
welfare and conservation of them,) there be instituted, appointed, and
established, certain Banks and Treasuries, where may be brought in, and
received, the Subsidies, and aid moneys, which seem to accord, and are
agreeing, with the Laws, Ordinances, Statutes, and Privileges, and that there
be ordained, certain Squadrons of Sea-Forces, for the defense of the Sea, and
too the intent that by their execution, the ends may be secured, which are
pretended for the universal benefit of Our Crown, restoring of Commerce, and
profit, and ease of persons, of every condition and quality; it has seemed
necessary to restore, and reduce to a convenient estate, some things of the
government, wherein by the change of time, and other accidents, many
inconveniences have been found: and it may be feared, that (if they are not
prevented,) may increase, for that the one helping the other, the effects which
they procure, may be greater, and more certain. And having by Our special
Commandment diligently discussed, and upon the whole with great care and
consideration consulted, and deliberated, it was concluded, that We should
command, and by this Our Edict We do command, which We will have observed as
a Law, and Act of Parliament, (as if it had been made and enacted in Court of
Parliament,) that from hence forward, these things following be observed and
kept.

Chap. I. Reducing of Offices to a third part.
FIrst, We ordain, and command, that the Offices of Majors, and Aldermen
Sheriffs, Constables, Bayliffes, Clerks, Proctors of the Cities, Villages,
and Towns, where (through the excessive number of them) they are found
inconvenient, and prejudicial to the government, causing many grievances,
which have been and are daily suffered, diverting the ends whereunto they were
ordained; be reduced to a third part, in the form, by the means, and with the
qualities, which are contained in the Commission, which for their execution,
We have caused to be sealed by Our Royal hand the day of the date hereof.

Chap. II. That Suitors may not reside in the Court in any one year, above
thirty days.
LIkewise, Because by the long and continual residence, and great concourse of
Suitors in this Court, there arises prejudice to their houses, and families, by
the forsaking and necessity wherein they leave them; and to their own
professions, seeing they cannot exercise them, nor employ the time, with that
decency, and profit, as beseems; and to the Offices, Commissions, and other
occupations, when they obtain them, because they have less ability and
disposition, then is requisite; for the better exercise, and more secure
administration of Justice, and for other considerations of equal importance,
other grivances have been acknowledged. We ordain and command, that what
person soever, that pretends Ecclesiastical office, or Secular Commission,
Temporal charge, or place, may come and prosecute his Suit in this Our Court,
and present the reasons and titles thereof, for the space of thirty days in
every year, and no more, and shall be bound to record the time of their
entrance, and departure, before the Secretary of the Council, where the Suit
shall depend. And likewise the Suitors, which have now Suits depending in this
Our Court, ought to be Registered within fifteen days, and to depart within
thirty following, according to the form prescribed: and not bringing a
Certificate from the Register of his entrance, may not have audience, not be
heard by any officer, nor have counsel, or advise.

Chap. III. That Commissioners, nor executors of Commission may be sent.
ANd because that by the sending of Commissioners, and executors of
Commissions, grievous inconveniences have been observed, not only in the
government and administration of Justice, but in the quietness, comfort, and
estate of our Subjects, (seeing that where they ought to have proceeded with
equity, and Justice, that the effects which from thence are wont to arise, to
the service of God, and Us, and the good of this Commonwealth might follow,)
they have in that manner transcended their duties, that using the same hand of
Justice to their own commodities, and private respects, they convert it to
their particular profit, to the irrepacable prejudice of government, with such
vexations, troubles, and costs of the parties, who come to be grieved and
oppressed, by those which should succor and relieve them, and to be without
necessary remedy, seeing that through the remoteness of places of Justice,
which should administer the releife, they cannot come to demand it, and other
dare not, and so they remain with the grievance which they have suffered, and
the Commissioners and executors of Commissions, without punishment, whereby
there has been, and is perceived a decay of Justice in the body of the
kingdom, and in the Subjects irreparable losses, which daily increase; and
therefore it is most expedient to provide for the remedy, which the
importancie of the matter requires, and having considered, the causes of this
mischief, and that by springing from covetousness, and through the
difficulty to understand the particular cases, whereby to afflict the
punishment upon the offenders, how much soever we are truly informed of the
certainty in general, it will be difficult to apply the remedy, and
therefore convenient and necessary, to come unto the root: We ordain and
command, that no Council, place of Judgment, Chancery, Audience, Corporation,
University, nor particular person, of any state, condition, or quality
whatsoever, for any title, cause, or reason, do or may send into any part of
these Our Dominions, any Commissioner, or executor of Commission, nor any other
person whatsoever, with Jurisdiction, commission, or instruction, neither in
other form, at the cost of the parties, or otherwise, under penalty, that the
persons offending, shall be severely punished; and those that shall admit the
said Commissioners, shall be perpetually deprived of their offices, which they
bear, and make a double restitution of the Fees received: and that all the
businesses and causes, wherein it may be necessary, to grant a Commission to a
particular person, as well of proofs, testimonies, recoveries, executions,
notifications, citations, as of other necessities, whatsoever, wherein hitherto
they have been sent, may be henceforward remitted to the ordinary Justices of
the City, Village, or Town, where they ought to be done. And if by any
reason or cause, any exception may be admitted, that they be remitted to the
next royal Judge belonging to Our Court; and We do only permit, that in Our
Council, there be Judges, diligently to enquire, and look into the cases, and
to allow them, if warrantable by the law, but not any other, of what quality
soever, and We command them, to procure to excuse these cases, as much as they
may.

AND likewise we command, that whatsoever is contained in this Act, be
inviolably kept and observed in Our Council of Our Revenues, and Our
Eschequer, unless it shall be in some excusable case, wherein a receipt cannot
be entered by the ordinary Justices of Our Royal Revenues, as are the Imposts,
or any other member of Our Revenue, the administration whereof, consists in
different places, without any settled being or condition; for in those cases a
Commission shall be granted, having first of all, consulted with the said
Council of Our Revenues, and Eschequer; and the person which shall be sent,
shall be such as the President shall appoint, and not in any other case,
because the administrations of Imposts, and other Rents, are to be committed to
the said Justices. And likewise, We do command, that when in Our said
Council of Our Revenues, there shall be made any determination, contract, or
letting to Farm, there may not be allowed any particular Judge, or
Commissioner, for the execution or accomplishment thereof, or to capitulate
with the parties, but that the one and the other be done, by the ordinary
Justices, and their officers.

ANd because as well in Our Council, as in the rest of Our Tribunalles, Courts
of Judgments, and in the Chanceries, and other Audiences, there are some
Counselors, and Officers, which have particular Commissions, whereby they name
Judges, Commissioners, executors of Commissions, and others, within and Without
the Court, for the dispatches of businesses which are presented; and likewise
subdelegate their Commissions, to other particular Judges, that out of them,
they may make others, and thereby the subdelegated may name Officers, and
servants. We ordain, and command, that from henceforth, all persons of what
estate, or condition soever they be, as well of Our Council, as of other
Tribunalles, or any other particular person, which shall have Commission,
Administration, or Superintendencie, although it be annexed to his office, may
not name, or send Judges Commissioners, executors of Commissions, or any other
person, to dispatch any business, nor subdelegate any particular person out of
this court, but to commit them to the ordinary Justices of the Kingdom, and to
use their officers, in the cases and business, which shall be offered
concerning the said Commission, using likewise Our next Royal Judge, when the
ordinary Justice shall allow of any lawful exception, which being conformable
to right, may make it suspicious, who may not take other officers for the
execution of the Commission, but those of the ordinary Justice of that part,
where the business ought to be done, without greater wages then their ordinary
Fees.

ANd also We do command, that the Commission of the Kingdom, and the
receiver thereof, and the receiver general of the Fines, and Amercement of the
Star chamber, and the rest of the Tribunalles, Chanceries, Audiences,
Cities, Towns, and Villages of the Kingdom; Treasurers, Collectors, or the
particular places by the divisions, which have or shall be made, may not
henceforward send, Judges, or executors of Commissions, for the recovery of any
thing, but that the said recoveries be remitted to the ordinary Justice.

ANd because there have been found the same injuries, both in the universal
and particular of this Kingdom, by the Judges, and executors of Commissions,
which are sent by virtue of contracts made between parties, for the execution
of them. We ordain, and command, that from henceforth the said Judges and
Executors, may not be sent. But it is Our will and pleasure, that all those who
by particular contract made before the publication of this Statute, have
cautelated the recoverie of their debts, by destinating, submitting, and
agreeing to send a Commissioner at the charge of the debtor, may do it by
virtue of the said contracts, and writings, because they may not be defrauded
of the security, and condition, in confidence whereof, they delivered their
goods, and without the which peradventure they had not delivered them; and
because in some contracts and writings, the parties have not been contented to
capitulate, that they may send a Commissioner, but also another person with
him, and both at the charge of the debtor, (the which in substance, is not
necessary for the Recoverie, and only causes expenses, and oftentimes an
impossibility in the Debtor to discharge the principal,) whereby is
occasioned his undoing. We ordain, that the Creditour, in whose favor the
said contracts, with the said qualities are made, may only send a Commissioner
or Recoverer, so that one only be sent, and that he have only one Fee.

ANd because for the justification of the titles of some Offices, and of the
Fees, and preheminences, which by virtue thereof appertain to the owners and
proprieters, there are certain Judges, called Judges of preservation of
Titles: We command that from henceforth, the said Judges be not so called, or
styled, and We do disanull and pronounce, such appellations to be void, and
of none effect, and estimation; And We do command, that those that have them,
forbear to use them, under the penalty of two hundred Ducats, to be disposed
in three parts, whereof the first to Our Exchequer; the next to the Judge; and
the third to the Informer, and that the parties repair to the ordinary
Justice, for the maintenance of the Title of the said Office, and the
preheminences, and rights, that by reason thereof belong unto them.

ANd because jointly by providing the remedy of the mischiefs mentioned, we
must cautelate and nicely look unto the matters; and that by committing them
to the ordinary Justices, they may not fail to have the security, and effects
which are fitting, as well in the substance, as in the time and manner how
great soever the presumption be in favor of the Justices, as well in respect of
the equality of their persons, as of their office and place, and therefore
seeing they are credited being of public government, and so important in the
Commonwealth, any other diligence or employment may be committed to their
trust, with assurance that they will more carefully discharge them, then other
Commissioners, notwithstanding, that herein no occasion of danger may remain;
We ordain, and command, that if the said ordinary Justices, shall not wholly
perform the businesses and causes which shall be committed unto them, with the
punctualitie and care as shall be appointed, and set down, by the writings and
contracts which they shall have to execute, then a Commissary to be sent at the
charge of the party, which may do and execute it, in the time, and with the
Fees, as the quality of the matter shall require, and as shall be appointed by
the Council, Tribunal, or person, to whom they shall remit the said cause.

But it is not Our will or desire to make alterations in the proofs of
Gentry, nor in the persons or Officers which are sent to the qualifying of
Nobility or Dignity, by the Council of the Orders; because herein We will
that the ancient Laws and Ordinances be observed, and the style and use
where-withall it is practiced.

Chap. IIII. That Fiats of Examination of Clearkes of these Kingdoms be not
allowed for the space of twenty years.
IN like manner by reason of the inconveniences which have redounded to the
commonwealth, by the facility of admitting and allowing the Titles of Clerks
of these Kingdoms, and the excessive number, whereunto have amounted the
Offices, with little conveniencie of government, and with prejudice to the
administration of Justice, and ease of Our Subjects, We did ordain, and
command, at the request of the Kingdom in the last Parliament, that for the
space of six years, a Fiat of Clearke might not be allowed to any person, of
any condition whatsoever, or for any title or cause, as more at large is
contained in the Act, which We commanded to be published, whereunto We refer
Us, because the excessive number of Clearkes, and the preiudices which thence
arise, is daily more and more discovered, and that by the suspension for the
said time of six years, the sufficient remedy cannot be provided. We do
command, that the said term of six years, wherein as aforesaid, a Fiat of a
Clearke of these Kingdoms ought not to be granted, nor any person examined
for the title of it, be and be understood to be the term of twenty years in
the whole, that within the said time, none may be allowed, and the contents of
the said Law observed.

ANd for to prevent the frauds and deceipts, which are committed in
Declarations by the Clearkes of the writing offices of the Number and
Realities. We command the acts in this case provided by Our Council be
observed. In like manner because it greatly imports to the good government
and administration of Justice, and prevention of the excesses, which are found
so prejudicial to Our Subjects, We ordain, and command, that the Clearks of
Criminal Pleas, Common Pleas, of Assizes, and Number of the Provinces and
Realities, in taking of Fees, and setting them down, for the actions and
writts, which they shall make, observe and keep, that which is ordained by the
Statutes, and Laws in this case provided, and that neither by themselves, nor
by any other person interposed, they receive any more, or any other thing,
under the punishments therein contained, and the loss of their office, and if
they be not the proprietors thereof, then of four years banishment, and that
for testimony and witness herein, three single testimonies may be sufficient,
as in case of bribery, and they may be the same persons, and if they will be
Informers, they may be admitted, and have the third part of the Fine.

ANd to the intent that with greater punctualitie and Justice they may take the
Fees, which are due unto them, and no more, We ordain, and command, that in
this Our Court, and in the Cities of Valladolid, Granada, Sivill, and Cornna,
none may be received or taken, unless they be first taxed, and assisted, by
the general Assister, and that the manner of proof, and the penalties be the
same. And that the Justices of Our House and Court, Chanceries, and Audiences,
and ordinary Justices of the said Cities, do not decree, nor determine any
Suit, wherein this has not been accomplished. And because the mischief may
be greater toward those that are prisoners, for that they little esteem who
defend them, and are careless of their liberties, We strictly command, that
in their causes it be executed with greater care and preciseness, and because
in what kind soever of their Suits they may be freed, it is understood they
are molested with excessive Fees, which they exact of them, We ordain, and
command, that the Assistor with one Justice, (doing it by weeks) may assese
every morning the Fees due by the Prisoners, which they have commanded to be
freed, and which shall be due, and delivering them to the Assistor, the parties
which ought to have them, may receive them at his hands; and receiving them in
any other manner; We declare them to incur the like penalty.

THat in this Our Kingdom the said Clearkes, and those which reside in the
Offices of Provinces and Number, do, nor may take of either of the parties,
any Fees in the Suits that are to be executed, neither for the Books, which
shall be drawn, nor the proofs which shall be made, during the ten days of
the proceedings, nor for following the Suit, until the cause be adjudged; and
then the Assistor having assisted them, the sum whereunto they shall amount
be put into a Bill or Writ of payment, which shall be allowed, that the
principal, and the tenth part be recovered together, under the penalty, of
being deprived of their offices, and disabled to execute any others.

ANd because many mischiefs do arise, in that the Clearkes deliver the Writts
of execution to the Bailiffes, that they shall make choice of, not only by
being interressed in the success, whereby it is to be feared, that in the
Records, and other Diligences, they may help the execution, but likewise,
because thereby many Bayliffes apply not themselves to the matter of criminal
causes, and delicts, but stand waiting in the houses of the said Clearkes, that
the said writs of execution may fall unto them, We ordain, and command, that
in this Our Court, and in the said Cities of Valladolid, Granada, Sivill, and
Cornna, every day may be brought in the writs of execution, which shall happen,
by the authority of the person that We shall depute thereunto, and those be by
him divided amongst the the Bayliffes by course, that hereby every one with
equity may participate of the fruit of their Offices, and the inconveniences
mentioned, as much as possibly, prevented.

ANd that no Bayliffe may enter in this course, unless he shall first bring a
testimony from the Clearkes of the Peace, and the Iaylor of the imprisonments,
and criminal causes, which he shall have done for thirty days past.

IN like manner, that no Clearke in this Our Court, do, or may take money, or
any other thing, for making reports of the Suits, which shall be heard before
them, and the Judges, in the first commencing of the Suit, or in appealing to
Our Council, Chanceries, and Audiences, and other Tribunalls whatsoever, but
only those, which by the Statute shall be due unto them, for the entry of the
Suits, under the penalty of the loss of the office, if it be their own, and
if not, the banishment for four years, and that the party which shall give
it, do loose the right of his Suit, and that for the whole, the testimony of
three single witnesses be allowed sufficient in the form aforesaid.

ANd because We have understood, that the public Scriveners, and Clearkes of
this Our Court, and other places of Our Kingdom, do apply themselves to seek
moneys, that the Councels, Universities, and particular persons may take them
to interrest, receiving of them between three or four in the hundred, by the
title and name of Broakage, We ordain, and command, that from hence forward
they may not receive money, nor any other thing, neither this title or other,
by themselves or other persons, nor more then the Fees, which by the Statute
shall be due unto them, for the writings that they shall make. And because
there follows an inconvenience by the excessive number of Clearkes, which are
in the Offices, We ordain, and command, that in the Offices of the criminal
Pleas of Our Chamber, and in those of the Province or Comitie of Madrid, there
may not be above the number of six principal Clearks, which may reside in
every Office for the executing of business, and those the owners and
proprietors of the Office to name at their peril, that if they be Fined, and
shall not have goods to discharge the Fine, it may be recovered of them: and
that those of the said Chamber be approved by the Chamber of our Judges, and
those of the Province of Madrid, by the Judges, before whom the Clearkes which
are proprietors of the Office, make the dispatches of their business, and
those of the Assizes, or any one of them, and the proprietour which shall have
more then the said six Clearkes, We condemn in the loss of his Office.

And because many Constables by diverse ways and representing causes and
impediments less certain, have taken out some reseruations in some things
concerning their offices, as are watches and wards and going out of this Court
to make imprisonments, and other things; which being so; that they might be of
more profit in the general, by having more knowledge and experience in those
businesses, and that this privilege and inequality is prejudicial to the
rest, We command that those that have the said privilege of reseruall do
deliver them to the President of our Council within four days, and may not
use them, but that they ought and do in the whole and every part conform
themselves, as they are bound by their offices, without any exception, under
the penalty of the loss of their said offices, and banishment for four
years.

That besides the ordinary Visitor of the offices, which is named every year
by Our Council, there may be named another, from three years to three years,
by the President thereof, that they may visit all the said Clarks and Officers,
and certify the abuses which shall be executed in the execution of their
offices, commissions, and other employments which they shall have, especially
contradicting the contents of this Act, allowing him thereunto a necessary
commission, which he shall use before a sufficient Scriuener, removing it (if
he will) out of the Court.

Again, We ordain and command, that the Clarks of our Councell-chamber, of
the Chanceries, and Audiences, may not take nor recover the fees which shall be
due unto them for the Scedule, according to the laws, unless they be first
assest by the Assessor general, and setting down upon their fidelity, or of
their principal officers, that which they recoues and take in every suit, and
the like is to be understood of the Relators in all the suits and Residencies,
and that in making the hill, they exact not upon the parties, nor receive any
thing, under the penalty of the loss of their offices, and for testimony and
proof, singly witnesses shall be sufficient.

Chap. 5. Which prescribes a reformation in the excess ofserua^ts,
household stuff, and furniture of houses, and in the apparel of men and women.
ALso because from the abuse and excess in attendance, household stuff, and
furniture of houses, and in the apparel of men and women, there have proceeded
many inconveniences, as well in the government and good disposition, wherein it
ought to be, as in the customs and estates, seeing that being voluntary
expenses once brought in, they are become so precise, that it is one of the
greatest burdens, wherewith the Subjects are oppressed, and likewise prejudicial
to commerce and trade, albeit that certain Laws were instituted, which seemed
convenient for the present estate, when they were ordained: but it is manifest
by time and occasions, that they have not proceeded so sufficient, as was
expected, and that wickedness by contrauention, has found out many devices
with increase of the mischiefs, desiring to provide a sufficient remedy, and
having commanded, to see what in this kind has been enacted, and to add what
shall be thought convenient. We do ordain, and command, that no person of any
estate, condition, or quality soever, may keep or entertain, of Gentlemen,
Pages, and Laqueyes, above the number of eight or ten persons, and who shall
execute the principal offices of the house, as Steward, Gentleman of the
Horse, and others; neither may keep them employed in their service, to the end
to accompany them or their wives, by the title of Followers or Household
servants, or other; seeing it only serves for ostentation, and certain
inconveniences, which are therein considered; and there is likewise imbursed,
the cost and expenses which they cause in the houses, and it is more expedient,
that they employ themselves insome other course of life, which may be more
profitable to the Commonwealth.

And because the effects of a matter so important may be secured, for the which
the example of the King, and his Officers will be convenient, seeing by
themselves alone and by their offices, they have sufficient authority, without
that the great or small number of attendance can increase or diminish it: let
them know, that We shall be very well pleased, that they continue as hitherto,
a moderation in their retinue, procuring, that, if it may be possible, it be
greater from hence-forward, so that the Counselors and Officers, may not have
nor entertain in all kind of attendance above eight persons, that by Our
example and reformation of the number of offices and servants, which We have
commanded to be done in our Royal House, and by that which they shall do,
reducing themselves to the said form, there may be a reformation in all the
rest, and may proportion themselves to their estate and necessity, wherein
they are, seeing the luster and authority of their houses and persons shall be
better preserved and kept, living out of necessity, and plentifully
accommodated, than by consuming in an expense so superfluous. And because the
servants of the said quality, which now they have in greater number than the
said eight or ten, may have departure and employment, and not vnaccommodated
and idle; We command that whatsoever is ordained concerning this Act, may be
observed after the expiration of a whole year after the promulgation.

Chap. 6. That nothing made of wood or any metal, begarnished or gilt with
Silver or Gold; and that there may not be taken for the making or fashion, but
the fifteenth part of that which it shall weigh, being of gold, and the sixth,
being of silver.
ANd because by garnishing things of wood or other things, and by gilding the^,
there follows loss, both in the expense and making, being a thing
unprofitable and superfluous; We ordain, and command, to observe with all
rigor, the contents in the fifth Act with those following, from the twenty
fourth title of the compilation, adding, that not any other metal may be
gilded, although it be plain and smooth plate, under the penalty of the loss
of the piece which shall be so gilded. But We do permit that it shall be
lawful to gilde all that shall be for Divine use, and the Arms, and furniture
for horses, so that they be not for the use of the Coach. And likewise We
command, that no fashion of Gold or Silver which shall be wrought, shall
exceed, being of Gold, the fifteenth part of the value of what it shall weigh,
and being of Silver, the sixth part; under penalty of the loss.

Chap. 7. That no kind of thing may be imbrodered.
IN like manner as concerning Hangings, let that be inuiolably observed, which
was published by the proclamation in the year of our Lord, 1611, adding
thereunto, that it shall not be lawful to make any kind of Imbrodery of gold,
silver, silk, or thread, neither in hangings, beds, chaires, stools,
canopies, pillowes, carpets, caskanets, nor any other thing, upon cloth of gold
or silver, cloth, leather, canuas, nor any other kind of stuff whatsoever.

Also that no Imbroderer may imbroder any kind of the aforesaid things, nor
any other, unless it shall be for divine use, and horse furniture, except
foot-cloathes, for We will not that they be imbrodered, as neither liueries for
the sport of the Cane, running at Tilt, both on horseback and foot, running at
the Quintaine, Ring, or other festival sports, that the disposition of this
law may facilitate the use of riding, and the exercise of these solemnities,
and for the rejoicing and delight of the people, and may take away the obstacle
and difficulty, which is often found by the not having of the pomp and
excessive expense, wherewith they are now celebrated. We command that the
contents of this branch or chapter be observed from the first day of March of
this present year.

Chap. 8. That there may not be made Hangings for the Summer of strange stuffs,
and eight years are allowed for the wearing out of those that are made.
LIkewise also We forbid, that no manner of person, of what estate, condition,
or quality soever, may have or use any hangings for the summer, of any sort or
kind, though they be plain, being wrought out of these kingdoms; but We
permit that they may have Damasks, shorn Veluets, counterfeit cloth of gold or
silver, and taffeties, so that that be wrought within our Dominions. And for
the wearing out and disposing of the Hangings which they have imbrodered, and
of stuffs made out of this Kingdom, and of other things imbrodered, the use
whereof is prohibited in this Statute, We do give and allow thereunto the
space of eight years, which being expired, We condemn all those that shall
use them, and disobey the contents hereof, in the forfeiture and confiscation
of them, and in fifty thousand Maravedis to be divided in three parts, viz.
our Chamber, the Judge, and the Informer.

Chap. 9. That gold nor silver be worn in stuff of silk or trimming.
IN like manner concerning fashions and apparel, We prohibit, and altogether
forbid to men and women without any distinction, the use of gold and silver, in
stuff and trimming, within and without the house, in all and all kinds of
garments or apparel, though they be doublets, gowns, night-gownes, cassocks,
short coats and others, though they be for travel, excepting (as before) for
religious use, furniture for the war and horse, in the form as they are
permitted in the Statute enacted in the year of our Lord, one thousand six
hundred and eleven.

Chap. 10. That trimmings be not worn upon garments.
ANd also We do altogether prohibit all kind of dressing and trimming, be it
single or double, though it be of one lace alone, in all kind of garments,
either of men or women, that they may not be worn neither in doublet,
short-coat, gown, night-gowne, cassocke, hose, or other whatsoever; neither
upon daggers or garters, for We permit them only to be worn plain, of
whatsoever the garment shall be.

In like manner We command, that it shall not be lawful to work, neither for
any Merchant or other person to buy (for to sell again) any kind of
garnishing, or lace, trimming of gold, silver or silk, from the day of the
proclaiming of this statute henceforward, under the penalty both to the maker
and buyer, of the loss of such trimming and lace, and of three hundred
thousand Maravedis to be applied in three parts, viz. Our Chamber, the Judge,
and Informer: and because through the toleration hitherto, We consider that
the Merchants have bought certain garnishings and trimmings of gold, silver and
silk; and likewise the women have bought many garments, made with them: We do
allow the space of three years to the said Merchants for to sell and dispose
of them; and to the women the space of four years, to wear out their
garments, and to use the said trimmings upon those which they have already
made. And as concerning men, that they may wear out those that they shall have
made with trimming: We allow them the space of two years, but that it shall
not be lawful for them within the said term, to make or cause to be made,
any new garment with trimming, because herein We will that from this present
this Statute be observed. And for the more certain execution thereof, and to
prevent all deceit, We will that the trimmings and garnishings, which the
Merchants now have in their hands, shall be produced, manifested and registered,
that having the view of them, those only which they now have may be sold:
seeing for this intention, and that they may be sold, it is permitted to the
women to use them for the said time, but not to buy others for to sell.

Chap. 11. That cloakes of Silk may not be worn.
LIkewise We do prohibit, that the men may not wear short cloaks, long
cloaks, short coats nor mantles of silk, but only of cloth or Rash: But We
permit that they may wear certain stuffes, as Telilias, Sergies, Mingled
stuff, and other the like stuffes, so that they be not mingled with silk,
and that they be wrought within Our Dominions; and We permit that in winter
they may line them outwardly with Silk, so that they be wrought within Our
Dominions.

Chap. 12. That cloth nor stuff of wool or silk made within or without the
Dominions, may not be sold without it have a mark.
IN like manner, because in the making of cloth and stuff, as well of wool as
of silk, or mixtures of both, has been and is daily found much deceit,
because, having no restraint, they are fraudulently and deceitfully made, and
thereby are of little service and durance, to the great prejudice of those that
wear them: We ordain and command, that from hence forward it shall not be
lawful to sell or buy in those kingdoms; neither for apparel, nor for any
other thing, any kind of cloth, or silk, or wool, or of both, made or
wrought within or without them, which shall not be made and wrought conformable
to the laws and ordinances of the Dominions, which appertain and concern the
makers and workers thereof; neither shall be lawful to make any other manner
whatsoever, under penalty of the loss of the said cloth or stuff, and of a
hundred thousand Maravedis to be applied in three parts, viz. Our Chamber, the
Judge, and the Informer. And We do declare, that the Merchants shall incur
the penalty of this Law, if they shall have in their shops the said clothes
and stuffes, without the qualities that are contained therein, and for to sell,
and dispose of them, which they have at this present without these qualities,
We allow them the space of three years, registring them in the form
aforesaid. But because in some part of these Kingdoms, there are made and
wrought some kinds of cloth and stuff, of wool, and silk, which if they be
well wrought, will be profitable, and expedient not to hinder it; We command
that those of our Council cause them to be acknowledged for persons skillful
in their faculty, and finding them to be profitable, to set down and appoint
an order, form, and direction, whereby hence forward they be made, and no
otherwise.

Chap. 13. That nothing made out of the Kingdom may be brought in.
IN like manner, because by the bringing in of many commodities made out of
these Kingdoms, as hangings, beds, chaires, stools, pillowes, bed-tikes,
carpets, and others, and likewise apparel for men and women, and others of
cotton, linen, leather, alchymie, tin, lead, stone, hair, and other kinds,
which (being furniture for the house, and of unprofitable usage) do consume
the estate and wealth, and hinder the labor and making of those, which shall
be profitably wrought, there arises great inconvenience to the Commonwealth;
seeing that hereby is taken away from the Tradesmen, the occupation and
disposition of gaining their living, and sustaining themselves, an infinite
number remaining idle, and vnimployed, and in the dangers whereunto the force
of the necessity obliges them: We ordain and command, that from the day of
the promulgation hereof forward, it shall not he lawful to set or put to make
out of the Kingdom, any thing made of wool, or silk, or of both, (so that it
be not Tapestrie of Flaunders) neither of cotton, linen, leather, alchymie,
lead, stone, shell, Iuorie, horn, hair, but that the materials and the
simples may only be brought in unwrought, being of the things permitted, to the
end that they may be wrought in Our said kingdoms, under penalty of the
loss of the thing which shall be so brought in, sold, or bought, being made
out of the Kingdom, and of thirty thousand Maravedis to him that shall cause
them to be made, sold, or bought, to be applied in three parts, viz. our
Chamber, the Judge, and Informer: and to the intent that he may sell and
dispose the things of this quality, which he shall have at the time of the
promulgation of this Edict, we do allow them the space of two years, which
being expired they ought not to sell them.

Chap. 14. That they shall wear no hands but of the twelfth part of an ell and
the curld but eight breadth, both without garnisning.
ITEM, We command, that all and every person of what estate, quality, or
condition they be, ought and shall wear plain falling bands, and without any
invention, bone-lace, cut-worke, shagge fringe, or any other kind of setting
forth, or starched with gum, powdered blew, or any other color, or set with a
steele-sticke, howbeit We permit that they have starch; and in case some man
may wear a ruff, We command that it be only of the breadth of the twelfth part
of an ell; and that the curled lettuce ruff be but of eight bredthes, and that
without any kind of dressing, of setting, garnishing of starch, powders, or
any other thing, and that it be all in one single length, not opened with a
mould, or any other instrument, and the cuffes to the same shall be but of
three bredths, and half a twelfth part aforesaid, and with the like qualities.
Also the lettuce ruffes and cuffes of women may be used as heretofore, but so
that they have no bone-lace or other garnishing more than one shagg fringe, nor
may they have any of these things in their falling bands, calls, falls, or
any other habit or ornament, nor may they be done with powdered blew, upon
pain of losing that which they wear contrary to this law, and of fifty
thousand Maravedis to be divided into three parts: viz. to the Chamber, the
Judge, and the Informer: which We command to be observed and executed in this
Court from the first of March of this year; and in all other parts and places
of this Kingdom within two months after the publication of this Law: And We
forbid, that any man or woman open any ruff either of man or woman, upon pain
of public shame and banishment from this Court, or the place where they shall
go against this Law.

Chap. 15. What Titles each rank shall have is renewed.
ITEM, Whereas on the second of January in the year, One thousand, six
hundred, and eleven, We commanded to publish and then was published concerning
the use of entertainment of courtesies, a Law of this tenor following: Don
Philip etc. Know ye, that We having been informed, that there has been and
is much disorder, exccesse, and inequality in the entertainments, titles, and
courtesies, as well in writing as in speech, which are used among the Grandes,
Gentlemen, and other persons of these Our kingdoms, whereupon many
inconveniences have followed, We commanded those of Our Council that they
should look into it, and treat of some form which might be kept, that so
these might be excused and having diverse times thus done, and consulted with
Us, We have now agreed to provide and order as follows.

And though it were not necessary in that which concerns my Self, and other
Royal Personages to innouate in any thing which has been heretofore
accustomed, notwithstanding that others with greater obligation and care may
keep and accomplish that which is to be said concerning this, We will and
command, that in writing to Us no other title be set in the top of the letter
or paper, than Sir; nor any thing said in the conclusion, more than, God
preserve the person of your Catholic Majesty, and without addition of any
other courtesy or complement, the person who shall write any such letter or
paper, shall firm it: and in the superscription no more may be put, but only,
To our Lord the King.

The same order also is to be held and kept with the Princes the heirs and
successors of these our Kingdoms, only changing that of, Your Majesty, into,
your Highness, and that of, King into Prince; and in the conclusion and end of
the letter shall be put, God keep your Highness.

That the same order and style be kept and held with the Queens of these Our
Kingdoms, which is to be given to the Queens, and so to the Princesses as to
the Princes.

That the Kings children male and female, be only styled, Their Highness: in
the top of the letter, Sir, or Lady; and in the end, God keep your Highness,
without any other complement; and in the superscription only, To my Lord N. the
Kings son, To my Lady N. the Kings daughter; and when it shall be said or
written absolutely, His Highness, this shall not be attributed but only to the
Prince the heir and successor of these our Kingdoms.

That the same complement be done to the Sons and Brothers in law of the
Kings of these our Kingdoms, as to their wines, and to the daughters and
sisters in law of the said Kings as to their husbands. As for that which is to
be done by the said Royal Personages to others, it is not Our will to innouate
any thing of that which has hitherto been and is accustomed.

In like manner We will and command, that the same style which is used and
observed in the petitions which are given in Our Council, and in other
Councels, Chanceries and Tribunals, and that which is accustomed in speech when
they are in Council, be observed as hitherto in all things which shall not be
contrary to this Our letter and provision, excepting only, that in the top may
be put, Powerful Lord, and no more.

That in the references of all Our letters, scedules, and provisions where Our
Secretaries were wont to put, By his Majesty, they put, By the King our Lord,
as now it is done; and that the same be done also in the references of the
Notaries of Our Chamber.

And that in all other seats of Judgment as well belonging to the King, as any
other whatsoever, whether the speech be in particular or in public, the
petitions, demands, and complaints shall begin in the line, and with the same
business which is to be treated of without placing any title, word, or sign
of any complement either at the top or any other part, only at the end it may
be said, Wherefore I implore the office of your Lordship or Worship; according
as the Persons or Judges are to whom a man speaks; and the Notaries may only
say, By the command of N. Judge, setting down his name and surname only, and
the name of the office of such a person or Judge, and the dignity or degree of
learning which he has, and no other title.

We forbid and defend, that no person either in word or writing, give to any
other of what estate or condition soever, what degree or office soever he
has, great and preheminent though it be, the style of Most Illustrious
Lordship, except it be to Cardinals; for it is not Our will that they be
comprehended in this our Law. Also by reason of the authority and greatness
of the dignity of the Archbishop of Toledo, We command, he being Primate of
Spain, that all men be bound to style him Most Illustrious Lordship, although
he be no Cardinal. And We command, for Archbishops, Bishops, and Grandes, and
such as We command to be covered, that all men be obliged to give them the
Lordship, as well in writing, as in speech: And also for the president of our
Council, We permit that he may be called, his Most Illustrious Lordship.

We command also, that such Ambassadors as have place in our Chapel, are
precisely to be called and written, Lordship. And We permit that the rest of
the Ambassadors which come from without these Kingdom, may be style Lordship;
but not them which go from them to other parts.

We permit that Marqueses, Earls, the great Commendadors of the Orders of
Santiago, Calatraua, and Alcantara, the great Commendador of Montessa, the
Keepers of the Keys of the said Orders of Calatraua and Alcantara, may be
called and written Your Lordships: and the Daughters of Grades, Your Ladyships;
the Presidents of our Councels and Chanceries, the Priors and Baylies of the
Order of Saint John, the Priors of the Covents of Veles and Leon of the Order
of Saint Iago during the time of their Offices, and the Vice-Royes, and
Generals of Our Armies, Gallyes, and Armada of the Ocean, and he which is or
shall be Master General of the Camp of Spain, and those which are chief
Cities of Kingdoms, and those other which have Voice in Courts, and the
Chapels of Metropolitan Churches, where it has been accustomed, shall be so
styled. And We will, and it is Our favor and intent, that such persons as
shall give the style of Ladyship to the Daughters in law of such Lords of
Title, which shall be married to the Heirs and Successors in their Houses, and
to the eldest Daughters, who of force are to succeed, for not being able now to
have a Brother which should be preferred before them in the succession of the
said Houses, shall not incur the penalties of this Edict hereafter mentioned,
nor any other. Forbidding, as We do forbid that no other person of whatsoever
quality, state or condition he be, have the style of Lordship, neither in
writing or speech, or that of Excellency, except he be Grande. And We declare
that the treaty which is to be had with the wives of Grandes, of Knights, and
of other persons, to whom (as it has been said) it is due, and who may be
called either Lord or Sir, and among themselves by writing or speech, it shall
be the same which is to be performed to their husbands.

Moreover, We command, in that which concerns one man's writing to another,
that generally without any exception this form be held and kept, viz. the
letter or paper which shall be written, shall prestently begin with the reason
or business in hand, without setting either under the cross at the top, or in
the beginning of the line, any title, cipher, or letter, and the conclusion of
the letter shall be, saying, God keep your Lordship, or your Worship, or God
keep you, and presently the date of the place and time, and under that the
firm, without any complement either before or after, only he which has a
title, may put it in the firm with the place from whence he has that title.
And for superscriptions, to a Prelate shall be put the Ecclesiastical dignity
which he has; to a Duke, Marquess, or Earl, that of his estate; to Knights,
Gentlemen, and other men, their name, surname, the dignity, or office, charge,
or degree of learning which they have.

Nor shall any exception be taken or made against this order and form of
writing by any person, neither by the subject writing to his Lord, nor by the
servant writing to his Master, only Parents writing to their children, or
children to their Parents may before the proper name add that which is
natural; also between the husband and the wife may be expressed the estate of
Matrimony, if they will, and between brothers, cozen germans, Uncles and
Nephews, that of their kindred.

And We will, and it is Our pleasure, that that which is thus ordered and
commanded in this Our letter and provision be observed of all men, not only
within these Our Kingdoms, but also in writing to such as are absent abroad.

And for the better keeping, accomplishing, and executing of all that has
been formerly related, We ordain and command, that such as shall come or go
against that which is here set down and contained in these Our letters and
provision, or any portion or part thereof, that every one of them shall for the
first offense pay two hundred Ducats, for the second, four hundred, for the
third, a thousand Ducats, and a years banishment five leagues from this Court,
and from the Cities, Villages, and places of these Our Kingdoms and
jurisdiction where the said law and edict shall be broken, the which pecuniarie
penalties aforesaid shall be distributed in this manner, viz. one third part to
the Informer, another third part to the Judge which gives sentence, and the
other third part to pious uses. In like manner shall fall into the same
foresaid penalties such persons who from hence forward shall underhand
dissemble or give consent that their children, servants, subjects, or any other
persons, do go beyond either in word or writing to them the courtesy and
order contained in this said Proclamation, and the transgressor or
transgressors, which have not wherewith to pay the said pecuniarie penalty, it
is Our will that for the first offense they be imprisoned twenty days, and if
it be in Our Court, that they be banished and depart from it five leagues for a
whole year, and if it be in any other place of these Our kingdoms, the
banishment shall be from that place and out of that country and jurisdiction:
for the second offense the foresaid punishment shall be doubled; and for the
third offense, they shall be banished for five years in the form aforesaid,
reserving unto Our Selves, according to Our pleasure, besides the foresaid
punishments, the making of some greater demonstration toward the said
transgressors.

For which cause, the observation and execution of all the aforesaid, being so
profitable and important, We command you all and every one of you, according as
has been said, that you take notice of this Our letter and provision, and
that which is contained in it, the which We will have to hold the force of a
Law, Edict, and Sanction, made and published in Court; and that you observe,
accomplish and execute the same, as such in and throughout every part of it,
according and as is contained therein; and that you at no time, nor in any
manner ways go or pass against the tenor and form hereof, upon pain of the
said punishments, and those other whereinto they fall who pass against and
break the commandments of their Kings and natural Lords, whatsoever laws or
edicts to the contrary notwithstanding; All which We by these presents do
abrogate, and take away, and give for none at all, and of no value or effect:
And so in like manner We command all Judges and Justices whatsoever in these
our Kingdoms, and all persons to whom the execution and performance of the
foresaid does or any manner of way may belong, that inuiolably with all rigor
they keep, accomplish, and execute it upon the transgressors, and that, not
having an Informer, they proceed against them Ex officio, and having an
Informer, that the Judge or Judges either not prosecuting the causes or giving
over to prosecute them, shall incur and fall into the same punishments
wherein the said transgressors should have been condemned and executed, and
into two years suspension from their offices: And whatsoever shall be contrary
to this Our law, disposed by any other whosoever in these Our kingdoms, We
abrogate and nullify all, and command that this only which is contained
herein, be kept, fulfilled, and executed.

And because it is thus ordained and commanded, and that it may come to the
notice of all, and no man pretend ignorance, We command that this Our Letter
and Provision be publicly proclaimed in this Our Court, and that that which is
therein contained be observed and accomplished, and executed precisely and
inuiolably in this Our Court from the time of the publication, and in other
parts and places of these Our Kingdoms, within thirty days after the
publication; and that you both the one and the other, by no manner of means
do otherwise hereafter, upon pain of the said punishments. Dated in Madrid,
etc.

And after, on the fourth of April of the same year, wherein there are two
Chapters to this purpose.

That to Princes, Dukes, Marqueses and Earls, which be strangers, may be given
the style of Lordship.

Also We permit, that our Ambassadors which do and shall reside in Our
Embassies about the Persons of other Princes, may have the style of Lordship.

Chap. 16. Of the moderation of the Dowry, Jewels, and Apparel.
ANd because the excess and head, whereunto the charges are come which are
made in marriages, and the obligations which therein are introduced, it is
considered to be a charge and burden to the subjects, because they consume
their commodities, and morgage their houses, which does increase the
depopulation of this Realm, seeing that the same are so great, precisely the
dowries must be so, whereby they are hindered. For men neither dare not nor
cannot enter (by reason of so great charges) into the state of Matrimony,
considering that they are not able to sustain them with the goods they have,
nor women have not sufficient dowries to supply them, and from thence there
arise other inconveniences in the customs, and against the tranquillity of
the Commonwealth; We do ordain and command, that for so much as concerns
the dowries, there be held, accomplished, and executed that which is ordained
by the first law of the second title of the fifth book of the Recollection, and
that according to the same, every person of what estate, quality, dignity, or
pre-eminence soever he be, that shall have two hundred thousand Maravedis, and
so upwards to five hundred thousand Maravedis of Rents, may give in dowry to
every one of his daughters lawfully begotten, a million of Maravedis, and no
more; and he that shall have less rents than the said two hundred thousand
Maravedis, may not give, nor shall give in dowry above six hundred thousand
Maravedis, and no more; and he that shall surpass the foresaid five hundred
thousand Maravedis, until a Million, and one having four hundred thousand
Maravedis in rents, may give a million and a half of Maravedis in dowry: and
he that has a million and a half of rents, and so upwards, may give in
dowry to every one of his lawful daughters, one years rent, and no more,
wherewith he may not exceed twelve Millions of Maravedis, notwithstanding his
said yearly rent be more than twelve Millions. And likewise concerning the
excess in Jewels, apparel, and other things, which are given and made at the
time of espousement: Let there be kept the said first law of the second title,
of the fifth book of the Recollection, and in conformity thereof, that no
person whatsoever, of what estate, quality, or condition soever he be, may
give, nor is to give to his spouse and wife in Jewels and apparel, nor in any
other thing whatsoever, more than the eighth part of her dowry shall amount
unto which he is to have with her, which is to be in the quantity and form
aforesaid. And from henceforth we make void and of no value and effect, the
contracts, agreements, or promises which shall be made in any other manner, and
for lost the quantities or thing wherein they shall exceed in any of the
aforesaid Cases, and We do apply them for the same fact to Our Chamber.

And because there may with more punctuality be accomplished that which is
ordained, that the Ioyntures may not exceed the tenth part of that which the
free goods shall amount unto; We do ordain and command, that in Our Council
chamber there be not given any power for the dispensation thereof, and from
henceforth We make void, and of no value and effect, whatsoever power shall be
given to the contrary: and for the more certainty of the execution of the
premises, the Notary before whom they shall acknowledge the writings, shall be
obliged to give an account of such Contracts to the Justice of the Country or
place where the same shall be made; and the Notary of the assembly of every
place, shall keep a book wherein he shall take the reason of the said
Contracts, and the quantity, dowry, and Iointures: and the Justice shall certify
whether the said dowry and Iointures, Jewels and apparel which they have
given, do exceed the quantity which by this Act is commanded; and he shall
execute the penalty and application made for Our chamber: And that hence
forwards this shall be put for an Article of residence, and this law may not be
renounced, but truly observed.

Chap. XVII. That to the Ladies of the Court there shall be given but a million
of marauedis in dowry, and a petticoat.
ITem, To the end that (in Our Royal house things may be set in good order)
and Our example to be the surest law, and an execution on to others; We do
ordain and command, that to no Lady of the Court there may be given for her
dowry and marriage, or to settle her for any other way, more then the sum of
one million of Marauedis, and a petticoat, without any other preeminence or
honorable title, nor office, nor other kind of dignity, which is the very same
that was given in the time of King Philip the second, my Lord and Grandfather:
and with the Portugal Ladies let there be done that which was done in the time
of the Kings of Portugal, before that Kingdom was incorporated with this
Crown, and that unto those of the Chamber, there be given no more but five
thousand marauedis, which have been accustomed.

Chap. XVIII. That his Majesty will not give any office, nor place of justice,
nor of his house, in marriage.
ITem, It is Our will, and We have resolved, that there shall not be given, nor
We will give to any person whatsoever, neither for dowry, nor preferment, nor
other particular title, any place nor office of Justice, nor public
authority, nor any of our Royal house and We command that no person
whatsoever be so bold as to require it, neither by writing nor word of mouth,
under penalty of Our displeasure and punishment as shall be found fitting.

Chap. XIX. Privileges which are given to the state of Matrimony.
ITem, To the end that for all there may be a help for increase, being a
thing so important, and for the felicity and frequency of the state of
Matrimony, which thereof follows; We do ordain and command, that four
years after the day of any bodies marriage, he shall be free of all charges and
public offices, recoueries, hosts, soldiers and others; and the two first
years of these four, of all royal taxations and offices, and of the foreign
money, if it happen to fall upon them: and if any marry before the age of
eighteen years, he may administer and enter in the eighteenth on his goods;
and those of his wife, although she be younger, without asking any leave of
Authority. And to those which are full five and twenty years, and are not
married, may be put to the said charges and public offices, and are bound to
serve them, although they are in the power and house of their fathers.

ITem, That he which shall have six male children alive, shall be free for all
his life time from the said charges, and public offices. And although there be
any of the children wanting, the privilege continues.

And because besides the reasons aforesaid of the excess in the dowries and
charges, poverty and want is, that many women are without means to be
married, willing to give them some succor; We do ordain and command, that
from henceforth the goods which shall be (mostrencos) in every place, shall
serve and be applied for the marriage of poor women and orphans; and from
henceforth We give the same to be applied for the same effect, notwithstanding
any laws and orders made to the contrary; and that the same come into the
power of the person which the Council, Justice and government shall nominate,
to the end that from thence it may be employed in the cases which shall happen
by the interuention of the said Council, having a regard to the age, quality,
and poverty, and other considerations, for to qualify poverty, or for the
preferment of them, if in case there be more then one.

ITem, That amongst the rest of the forced Legacies of the Testaments, there
shall hereafter be put a legacy for the marying of poor women and orphans, and
they shall be bound to leave some quantity or sum for that effect. And We
do charge the Prelates to gather the same, and to put the same in good
keeping, and employ the said legacies, and also the execution, as if Our most
holy Father had been pleased to grant it (as we have desired him,) and for
themselves in that which they can, examining the pious works which shall be in
their Bishoprics, applying them which shall be found least profitable, for
the marying of orphans and poor ones, seeing it is so meritorious a work; and
also the pious works which have no particular application, in such manner to
put it to this, and that of the small alms which they give, they may apply
that part which they can to this work, seeing in the regular there is none,
which can be so much for the service of GOD, and good of this Kingdom, and
for the succor and help of the poor.

Moreover, We require and charge all Prelates, of Churches, Cathedrals, and
Monasteries capable of goods in common, as well of Friars as of Nuns, that
they will jointly procure, and every one by himself, to remedy and help
poor women and orphans in the places where they shall be, seeing that amongst
the obligations and alms whereunto the Ecclesiastical goods and rents are
bound, in the estate which this day this kingdom has, this is one of the most
precious and meritorious.

ITem, Because it is very needful, that the effects, which may be expected of
that, disposed in this Law, may not be badly put forth for want of disposing
and exucution, We ordain and command those of our Council, that with
particular care and consideration they attend that all that which is aforesaid
be kept, accomplished, and executed, always procuring to understand if it be
so done, and in effect to provide all that which shall be needful.

Chap. XX. The mean whereby the Nobility is to be appeased
AND because hatred, malice, and other respects, and particular accidents have
taken so much place, in the mean of the appeasing of the nobility and
pureness, in the Acts which are required, with so little credit and
consolation to the Nation, with so much unquietness and discord in the
Commonwealth, with so great cost of goods and lives, and peril in the
consciences, which is judged in the government to be the worthiest thing to be
repaired, as well for the remedying of so great inconveniences, and by reason
whereof there arises generally so much damage in the Kingdom and particular
houses, because there should be maintained in their primitive quality and
institution, the holy Statures, and the profitable and laudable ends of the
common benefit, whereunto the same tended; and which by their good use, men
have been experimented, and in substance being so needful, and not to
prejudice the same by the accidents in any manner, We ordain and command,
that from henceforth no person, of what state and condition soever he be, may
not give, nor let him give, nor also to admit, nor let him admit memorials
without subscription, and that if the same shall be admitted in any Council,
Tribunal, Church, College, or other communalty, where there is necessary the
qualification of the nobility and pureness, let no credit be given thereunto,
nor take place, if the same be general, and render no particular reason of the
things the same contain, although they cite and choose witnesses, and although
they allege public fame, and may only be in order admitted for to enquire,
and for no other effect, when they shall elect and choose Sanbenito or
penitence, and the year wherein it was given, with expression of the person
whom it concerns of the Church, or the party where he is, of the parentage
which he has with the plaintiff, or with other individuos so particular,
which truly induce the mind that it is no malice; And also they may admit the
same, when they shall manifest writings with equal qualities to the sayings;
or in case of citing of witnesses, the same shall be given before the Informer
or Deputy, for in such case they may examine the witnesses, which therein are
cited, as the Informer might examine them by himself: and so shall give no
credit, as being cited in the memorial, but for so much as shall be said being
examined.

Besides, the words which have been spoken in difference, or extrajudicially
in corrillos, or in conuersations, do not withstand, nor shall not be an
hinderance to the acts of Nobility and pureness, wheresoever the same are
divulged and dispersed, and being come to the notice of many, that the
witnesses shall depose thereupon, as not having more notice of the quality of
the plaintiff, then to have heard the same, nor if he had not cause nor
reason to speak the same, shall not be an hinderance to the pretention of
Nobleness and pureness, as if it had not proceeded, nor shall not be grounded
in another beginning, but if there be verification made thereof by the
Informers, they shall find that there was a ground to declare it, because the
person was noted, or by other reasons of writings, Sanbenito, penitences, It is
Our will, that they work as the Law shall permit, because in such a case the
words shall not work by themselves, but the cause and ground which there is
against the Plaintisse, although the same are not declared.

ITem, Because all matters have their limits and terms to make them certain,
to the end the same may hereafter be held for such as being passed in an
adjudged matter, it is considered, that those of this quality should not hold
the same, but rather a perpetual disposition: and that after many positive
acts of Nobleness and pureness obtained and justly by the ordinary and
iuridicall means, the same shall not be executed, because the descendents by
right line, require Law, but remain subject that the effects of hatred and
malice which do daily experiment, are more powerful then the authority of the
adjudged matter, and that the vehement presumption does overcome the truth
against the which the Law can hardly find entrance. We do ordain and
command, that in the quarter or quarters in the which there shall be thee
positive Acts of clearnes and Nobleness (every one in the Act wherein he
shall require) shall hold for being passed in an adjudged matter and shall be
executed, and by virtue thereof to require a Royal due for the descendents by
a right line, for to remain qualified by Nobles and pureness, for all the
Acts which shall be offered by the said party, and sufficiently to prove the
descendence of the persons which obtained the said three Acts, as it is treated
in the Hidalguias.

And it is to be understood, that although the said three Acts have been
gained in sundry Courts, Tribunals, Communalties, or Colleges, or in one
only, and in respect of a quarter, or of two, or of all, as the Acts shall
comprehend them. But if the three shall not be accomplished, and shall have
only one or two, We declare, That the same shall not be given as passed in
an adjudged matter, nor the descendents shall not require any right, and are to
make new proofs of that quality in the ordinary form, and coming to three,
it shall cause the said Royal due, and comprehend it.

AND because the three Acts do work presumption of truth, it shall thereby
be executed for the descendents, it is just that they be of grave Tribunals,
and whole ones, where with due knowledge of the cause the matter shall be
treated and determined of; We do ordain and command, that the said three Acts
for to work the effect here before mentioned, are to be of the Inquisition,
wherein there shall be familiatures, and of the Council of the orders, and of
the Religion of St. John, or of the holy Church of Toledo, or of the four
great Colleges of Salamanca, and of the two greatest of Alcala and Valladolid,
and of no other Tribunal, Church, College, or any Communalty.

ANd because according to law, sometimes they return upon an adjudged matter,
or by new instruments, or because it has appeared that those which have been
presented were false, and for other causes enacted by Law always in this
matter; We do ordain and command, that the three Acts in form aforesaid, in
such manner shall make an adjudged matter, and occasion right to the
descendents, that although after the same there shall be discovered any thing
or reason which might be hinderfull, if the same had been known before by any
of them, the authority and effect of the adjudged matter shall be conserved and
remain in his force and vigor, for it is more credit for the said nobleness
and cleanness to sustain three califications wherewith it is approved, then
to discover (although it is by accident to whose knowledge it came) who gave
it; and persons have enjoyed the same, to whom it appertained not.

Moreover, because many persons with malice and natural curiosity, more then
for conueniency or other good effect, do keep in their power, books which they
call Verdes, or of leather, and Registers, and Catalogues of descendents
fabricated without more authority nor cause, then that which his own
indignation has offered; whereby there has and do arise vnreparable and iniust
damages, as well of the nobleness, as of the government and public
quietness, because there was only seen written in these books and Registers
certain Families, they qualify them for noted; and the deposition of one
witness who has seen the same, or has heard say that the same were, it is
not enough for defense, being ordinarily the most surest, that they have no
substance, nor know not the cause and ground of their beginning.

We do ordain and command, that no person of what estate, quality, and
condition soever he be, shall not, nor may not keep any book in his power,
Register, nor Catalogue, nor other paper, wherein it is treated of the
clearness of Families, or descendences and that he burn those which he has,
upon penalty of five hundred Duccats, to be applied in three parts, for the
Chamber, Judge and Denunciator, and two years banishment from the place where
he is an Inhabitant, and from this Court five leagues.

ITem, because in some Councels and Tribunals, particularly in that of the
Inquisition in the first institution, it is understood, that some persons which
were called before them, examined be themselves, and of their quality,
confessed some things which were not true, nor had cause nor reason for it, and
such like Confessions have prejudiced their Descendents, being so, that
according to Law, if it should be proved the contrary of that which they
contain, they cannot prejudice, because the truth does not move for the only
will: We ordain and command, that if the said Confessions be not helped with
some other reason whereby it may be induced, that the matter is not in sole
terms of confession, it is not sufficient to hinder the nobility and
pureness, but proceed to qualify it, as if the same had not been, and
according to that which shall arise let the determination be, ruling this
according to law.

ITem, Because some of the Tribunals and Communalties which require Acts of
nobility and cleanness, do draw nearer or faster more then other qualities of
the proof and qualification, and particularly the Colleges, not contenting
themselves with the affirmative how that they are clean, but also require,
that the contrary has not bin heard nor doubted, which quality and
verification has given occasion that many families remain noted unjustly by
the malice and hatred wherewith many go forwards in this matter, and if now it
go in the same form besides the foresaid inconveniences, it would prejudice
the rest of the Communalties and Tribunals, in the which they require nobility
and pureness; We do ordain and command, that all that which is disposed and
contained in this Act, be kept, accomplished, and executed uniformly and
equally in all Tribunals, Communalties and Colleges, without any exception or
difference.

Chap. XXI. Means for increase of people.
LIkewise because the increase and multitude of people, is the only and
principal foundation of Commonwealths; for the increase and conservation
whereof, greater diligence and care is to be applied, though that many things
contained in this Act, do in some sort provide, and are thereunto directed;
desiring to hinder and stay the Diminution herein, which daily increases, and
to prevent the causes from whence it has proceeded, and to dispose the matters
of Government, and quiet of the Subjects, in such sort that there may be hoped
great multiplication and increase; and considering the great importance that
there is, to procure by all ways and means, that this our Intention may have
his desired effect, having considered the greatest means which may be
auayleable hereunto: We do ordain and Command, that no person of what
estate, condition, or quality soever, may depart out of these our Kingdoms
with his House and Family, without our License, under penalty of the loss and
forfeyture of the goods that they shall leave therein, and that the Justices,
and Officers of the Ports, and any other person whatsoever, may stay and
detain the said persons and goods, that they shall carry with them, and shall
be very careful to understand the departure of any, and diligent for the
execution; and whosoever shall not observe the Contents of this Act, shall be
deprived of his Office.

Likewise because by the great concourse of people in this our Court, and the
great multitudes which reside in the Cities of Civil, and Granada, there
arise many inconveniences, as well by the number which live Idely, and the
danger wherein they live, in such a confusion, and the means whereby they
procure their maintenance, as in the other Cities, Towns and Villages of the
Kingdom, for the great importance, that there be an increase in all parts,
that the Land may be preserved, and Justice better administered, We do
Command, that as touching the Government of this our Court, that therein there
may not be more persons then needful, and so great a concourse be diminished,
and every one may be known, who he is, what Occupation, or cause of residence
he pretends, and how long he has resided, that the confusion hitherto may
be remedied; being precisely observed and kept, that which is ordained
concerning the Registers and Divisions, and shall be ordained by those of our
Counsel; and for many reasons of universal benefit which have been
considered. We do likewise Command, that those six Divisions, whereinto the
Court is divided, and in every one of which, one of the Justices of our House,
and Court, with his Officers is commanded to live and reside, be divided into
sixteen Divisions, the most proportionable that may be, and that in every one
of them, do reside some one of our Counsel, in the Houses which We command
to be allowed for them, who we Command and Charge carefully to know and
understand, the quality of the people that live therein, and the Professions
and employments they have, what occasions there are of scandales and offenses
toward God, and whatsoever else shall be executed and done in the said
Division, that by the Authority of his person and Office, he may procure it to
rest in a convenient and settled estate, and that for the accomplishing and
executing of the diligences and occasions which shall be offered, there be
appointed to every one a Purseuant of the Court, which shall live in the same
Division, and that the Justice of the principal Division, ought to repair to
those of our Counsel, who shall live within it, and give an account to them of
what shall happen, and that they may appoint him what shall seem convenient,
that by this care and correspondency there may be a consideration and account
of the whole.

And we Command, that henceforward, no person of what estate, condition, or
quality soever, may come to live and reside with his House and Family in this
our Court, or in the said Cities of Civil, and Granada, nor may be admitted
or suffered in them, under punishment of a Thousand Ducats of the person
offending, and from the Justice and Government, who shall admit and permit them
to live there, from each particularly Two hundred Ducats, and let it be set
down for an Act to remain.

And because by the non-residence of the Nobility and Gentry at their houses
and habitations, there have been found most grievous inconveniences, as well
in the public government of the Kingdom, and whereby the neigh bourhood and
Villages are decreased and depopulated; for that it is most absolute, that the
servants and vassals which were sustained by them, do follow them, and in the
part where they go, do live idly and vnaccommodated, and for that those
that remain behind, and are not well governed, nor maintained in peace and
Justice, as they ought: neither are the Justices careful to remedy it, rather
in many cases and occasions proceed absolutely, seeing themselves superiors,
from whence resulteth the morgaging and decay of their houses and estates:
seeing besides the loss of the commodity, and small charge, wherewith every
one lives upon his own, and the Obligations in the Court, and other great
places, being greater; the expenses must needs be greater, and therefore they
increasing, and the Tenants and Rents decreasing, (because all suffer
declination, and decay by their absence) it is of absolute necessity, that they
must consume and decay: and although their own conueniencie, being so well
known, might be sufficient to oblige them to procure the remedy, that there
might be no defect of our part, that it may be obtained. We ordain, and
command, that all the Lords, Knights, and other persons whatsoever, who shall
have their estates, rents, and goods, charged with Fines and amercements,
belonging unto us, with condition to redeem them within a certain time, may
enjoy the said time, within the which they ought to make the said redemption;
with condition that this be, and is understood to be, being resident in some
place of his estate, or where they shall be near, and so we revoke that which
is contained in the ninth Act, the third title of the fourth Book of the
compilation, by the which our Officers may make their demand in this our
Court, and we command to make them in those parts, where conformable to right
they ought, that by occasion of suits, they may not leave their estates, nor
continue their residence in this Court.

Likewise, we permit that the Strangers of these Kingdoms (so that they be
Catholics, and friends of our Crown) who will come to exercise their
professions and labors, may have free liberty: and we command, that actually
exercising any Trade or labor, and living twenty leagues within the land from
the Ports, they be for ever free from the tribute money, and for the space of
six years from Subsidies, and ordinary and extraordinary services, and
likewise from the common and public charge, in the place where they shall
live, and that they be admitted, as the rest of the neighbors, to all
commodities; and we do charge the Justices, to accommodate them with houses
and lands, if they shall have need. And other Strangers, although they be not
Craftesmen nor Laborers, having lived in this Kingdom the space of ten years,
with a family, and being married to a woman of our Dominions the space of six
years, be admitted to the Offices of the Commonwealth, so that they be not
high Sheriffs, Governors, chief Justices, Majors, Sheriffs, keepers of
pledges, Receivers, Clerks of Assizes, Receivers of pawnes, nor others of
government: for as concerning this and ecclesiastical Benefices, we refer
them to our Laws: and we command the Justices to accommodate them in all
that may be, with houses and lands for their labor, for the benefit, which is
considered by their abode, with these conditions.

Cha. XXII. That there may not be Schools of Grammar but in Cities and
Towns, where there shall be a Justice or Deputy.
IN like manner, because there are considered many inconveniences, by having
Schools of Grammar in so many parts of this Kingdom, seeing that in so many
places, neither can be had commodity for to teach it, nor those which do
learn it, do gain the necessary fundaments for other faculties, are rather
so ill taught, and instructed, that they fail altogether of the necessary
principles and rudiments, and without ability or disposition to profit in them;
and so, many proceed unto greater studies, and loose the time which they have
employed in learning the Latin, which being employed in other Mysteries and
Occupations, had been more profitable to them, and to the Commonwealth. We
command, that in these our Kingdoms, there be no Schools of Grammar, but in
Cities and Towns, where there be Justices, wherein likewise may enter
Lieutenants, Governors, and the chief Justices of places of the Orders, and
only one in every City and Town; and that in all the foundations of Schools
or Colleges which are; with charge to read Grammar, the Rent whereof does not
amount to three hundred Ducats, it may not be lawful to read: And we do
forbid the power to erect or find any particular School of Grammar, with a
greater or less Rent then three hundred Ducats, unless it shall be (as
above said) in a City or Town, where there shall be a Iusticeship or
Tenencie; and if it be erected, it may not be taught unless therein there be
no other: for in such a case we do permit, that it may be founded and
erected, the Rent amounting to three hundred Ducats and no less. And likewise
we command that there be no Schools of Grammar in the Hospitals, where
exposed and forsaken children are brought up and educated, and that the
Governors and Superintendants have care to apply them to other Arts, and
particularly to the exercise of the Sea, wherein they shall be very profitable,
by reason of the want there is in the Kingdoms of Pilots. But we will that
the Schools and Seminaries be preserved, which ought to be according to the
Council of Trent.

Cha. XXIII. That the public Stews be abolished.
IN like manner, because wickedness and corruption, to the height whereon
Nature is ascended, has changed the nature and effects of excusing greater
mischiefs, whereupon is founded the tolleration and permission of the public
Stews, in such sort, that it manifestly appears, that they rather administer
occasion, means, and disposition, that the same effects are committed, which
would be prevented, and that they serve only as a profession of
Abominations, scandales, troubles, and the corruption of many people; and
because it is unlawful to permit this in so Christian a Commonwealth, and
that We are Religiously bound to prevent, and cut off all offenses, and
occasions of offenses toward God, and especially of this quality, seeing that
by the contrary some great punishment may justly be feared, having thereby so
highly provoked and displeased his Divine Majesty; and particularly a greater
pronenesse and disposition, then that is fitting being Discovered, in all
places and in all kind of people; And therefore the said public Stews have
remained in few parts, where they are less hurtful and offensive, by reason
of the number of Women, that there abound; and the diverse ways that
wickedness has invented for the execution of this offense; And having
considered, that holy Kings, and well governed Commonwealthes have prevented
this michiefe, without any inconveniences that insued, rather many conueniences
thence proceeded in the service of GOD, and the Government.

We do Ordain and Command, that from hence forward, in no City, Town, or
Village of these our Kingdoms, it may be lawful to permit public Stews,
or Common houses, where Women may make a profit and sale of the use of their
Bodies; and We do prohibit and forbid them, and Command them to be
abolished, and strictly Charge those of our Counsel that they have particular
care for the execution hereof, as of a matter of great importance; and that the
Justices every one in his precinct and Division do execute the Contents
hereof, under Penalty, that if in any part they shall consent, suffer and
permit them, for the same offense, shall be deprived of his Office, and
condemned in Fifty thousand Marauedis, to be applied in three parts, to wit,
our Chamber, the Judge, and Informer, and this Act to remain for ever.

All which we Command to be observed, executed, and kept; any Law,
Ordinance, or Statute made to the contrary notwithstanding: because in so much
as they are contrary hereunto, We do revoke them, and we Command, that so
ye cause them to be executed and kept; in all things according as in our
Edict is contained and declared, and that against the tenor and form in no
manner, now, or at any time hereafter ye proceed, or consent to proceed. And
because it may be manifest and notorious, and none may pretend Ignorance, we
Command that this our Edict be publicly Proclaimed in our Court, and that
neither one, or other do any thing to the contrary, under Penalty of Our
displeasure, and of Thirty thousand Marauedis to be confiscated to our Chamber.

Given at our Court of Madrid, the Tenth day of February. 1623. By the King.
Approved by Don Francisco de Contreras. Iuan de Frias. Gilimon de la Moua.
Melchor de Molina. Don Alfonsa de Calriera. Don Fernando Remires Iaruias.
J Pedro de Contreras Secretary of the Kings most excellent Majesty, caused
it to be written by his commandment.

IN MADRID: By Tomas Iunti, Printer to the Kings most excellent Majesty. Anno
Domini 1623.

Publication.
IN the Town of Madrid the eleventh day of February 1623. before the Palace
and Court of his Majesty, and at the gate of Guadalaiara, where is held the
commerce and Traffic of the Merchants and Tradesmen, in the presence of the
Licentiats Don Miguel de Cardenas, Don Luis de Paredes, and Don Diego, Francos
de Garnica, Justices of his Majesty's house and Court, was published the Act
and ordinance contained in this other part, with Trumpets and Drums, by
public Criers, with high and intelligible voices: whereunto were present,
Jnsepe de Vrraca, Francisco de Mesa, and Francisco Sanches de Acosta,
Constables of the Kings Majesty's house and Court, and many others. Which was
done before me

Fernando de Valeto.

FINIS.

