VIRGINIA richly valued, By the description of the maine land of Florida, her
next neighbor:

Out of the four years continual travel and discovery, for above one
thousand miles East and West, of Don Ferdinando de Soto, and six hundred able
men in his company.

Wherein are truly observed the riches and fertility of those parts, abounding
with things necessary, pleasant, and profitable for the life of man: with the
natures and dispositions of the Inhabitants.

Written by a Portugal gentleman of Eluas, employed in all the action, and
translated out of Portugese by RICHARD HAKLVYT.

AT LONDON Printed by FELIX KYNGSTON for Matthew Lownes, and are to be sold at
the sign of the Bishops head in Paul's Churchyard. 1609.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, THE Right Worshipful Counselors, and others the
cheerful aduenturors for the advancement of that Christian and noble
plantation in VIRGINIA.
THis work, right Honorable, right Worshipful, and the rest, though small in
show, yet great in substance, does yield much light to our enterprise now on
foot: whether you desire to know the present and future commodities of our
country; or the qualities and conditions of the Inhabitants, or what course is
best to be taken with them.

Touching the commodities, besides the general report of Cabeca de Vaca to
Charles the Emperor (who first traveled through a great part of the Inland of
Florida, next adjoining upon our Virginia) That Florida was the richest
country of the world; and, that after he had found clothes made of cotton
wool, Chap. 35.
he saw gold and silver, and stones of great value: I refer you first to the
rich mines of gold reported to be in the province of Yupaha, and described in
the twelfth Chapter of this Treatise to come within our limits: And again, to
the copper hatchets found in Cutifachiqui, standing upon the River of Santa
Helena, which were said to have a mixture of gold. It seems also that the
last Chronicler of the West Indies, Antonio de Herrera, speaking of the
foresaid River of Santa Helena, which stands in 32. degrees and an half,
alludeth to the province of Yupaha, Decad. 3 lib. 8. cap. 8.
in these words: Y el oro, y plata, que hallaron, no era de aquella tierra,
sino de 60. leguas, adentro al norte, de los pueblos dichos Otapales y
Olagatanos, adonde se intiende, que ay minas de oro, plata, y cobre. That is to
say, That the gold and silver which they found, was not of that country (of
Santa Helena) but 60. leagues distant toward the North, of the towns called
Otapales and Olagatanos, where we understand that there are mines of gold,
silver, and copper. By which reckoning these rich mines are in the latitude of
35. degrees and an half. I desire you likewise to take knowledge of the famous
golden province of Chisca, stretching further to the North, whereof the Cacique
of Cost gave notice to Ferdinando de Soto in the town of Chiaha, Chap. 15.
affirming, that there were mines of copper, and of another metal of the same
color, save that it was finer, and of a far more perfect luster, and far
better in sight, and that they used it not so much, because it was softer. And
the selfsame thing was before told the Governor in Cutifachiqui: who sent two
Christians from Chiaha with certain Indians which knew the country of Chisca,
and the language thereof, to view it, and to make report of that which they
should find. Chap. 23.
We likewise read not long after, that the Governor set forward to seek a
province called Pacaha, which he was informed to be near unto Chisca, where
the Indians told him, that there was gold. And in another place he says;
Chap. 24.
That from Pacaha he sent thirty horsemen and fifty footmen to the province
of Caluca, to see if from thence he might travel to Chisca, where the Indians
said, there was a work of gold and copper. So that here is four times
mention, and that in sundry places, of the rich and famous golden mines of
Chisca, and that they lie beyond the mountains toward the North, over which
they were not able to travel for the roughnes thereof. But what need I to
stand upon foreign testimonies, since Master Thomas Heriot, a man of much
judgment in these causes, signified unto you all, at your late solemn meeting
at the house of the right honorable the Earl of Exeter, how to the Southwest
of our old fort in Virginia, the Indians often informed him, that there was a
great melting of red metal, reporting the manner in working of the same.
Besides, our own Indians have lately revealed either this or another rich mine
of copper or gold in a town called Ritanoe, near certain mountains lying
West of Roanoac.

Another very gainful commodity is, the huge quantity of excellent perles,
and little babies and birds made of them, that were found in Cutifachiqui. The
abundance whereof is reported to be such, Chap. 14.
that if they would have searched diverse graves in towns thereabout, they
might have laded many of their horses. Neither are the Turkey stones and cotton
wool found at Guasco to be forgotten, nor passed over in silence.

But that, which I make no small account of, is, the multitude of Oxen, which,
from the beginning of the 16. to the end of the 26. Chapter, are nine several
times made mention of, and that along from Chiaha, Cost, Pacaha, Coligoa, and
Tulla, still toward the North, to wit, toward us, there was such store of them,
that they could keep no corn for them: and that the Indians lived upon their
flesh. The hair of these Oxen is likewise said to be like a soft wool,
between the course and fine wool of sheep: and that they use them for
couerlets, because they are very soft and woolled like sheep: and not so only,
but they make boots, shoes, targets, and other things necessary of the same.
Besides the former benefits, their young ones may be framed to the yoke, for
carting and tillage of our ground. And I am in good hope, that ere it be long
we shall have notice of their being nearer us, by that which I read in the
Italian relation of Cabeca de Vaca, the first finder of them; which writes,
That they spread themselves within the country above four hundred leagues.
M^reouer, Vasques de Coronado, and long after him, Antonio de Espejo (whose
voiages are at large in my third volume) traveled many leagues among these
herds of Oxen, and found them from 33. degrees ranging very far to the North
and Northeast.

A fourth chief commodity we may account to be the great number of Mulberrie
trees, apt to feed Silke-wormes to make silk: whereof there was such plenty
in many places, that, though they found some hemp in the country, the
Spaniards made ropes of the barks of them for their brigandines, when they were
to put to sea for Noua Hispania.

A fifth is the excellent and perfect colors, as black, white, green, yellow,
and red, and the materials to dye withal, so often spoken of in this
discourse: among which I have some hope to bring you to the knowledge of the
rich grain of Cochonillio, so much esteemed, and of so great price. I speak
nothing of the several sorts of passing good grapes for Wine and Raisons.

Chap. 31. and 32
Neither is it the least benefit, that they found salt made by the Indians at
Cayas, and in two places of the province of Aguacay: the manner also how the
Inhabitants make it, is very well worth the observation.

One of the chiefest of all the rest may be the notice of the S uth Sea, Chap.
31. and 32
leading us to Iapan and China, which I find here twice to be spoken of.
Whereof long since I have written a discourse, which I think not fit to be
made over common.

For closing up this point, The distances of places, the qualities of the
soiles, the situations of the regions, the diversities and goodness of the
fruits, the several sorts of beasts, the variety of fowls, the difference
between the Inhabitants of the mountains and the plains, and the riches of
the Inland in comparison of the Seacoast, are iudicially set down in the
conclusion of this book, whereunto for mine own ease I refer you.

To come to the second general head, which in the beginning I proposed,
concerning the manners and dispositions of the Inhabitants: among other things,
I find them here noted to be very eloquent and well spoken, as the short
Orations, interpreted by John Ortiz, which lived twelve years among them, make
sufficient proof. And the author, which was a gentleman of Eluas in Portugal,
employed in all the action, whose name is not set down, speaking of the
Cacique of Tulla, says, that as well this Cacique, as the others, and all those
which came to the Governor on their behalf, delivered their message or speech
in so good order, that no Orator could utter the same more eloquently. But for
all their fair and cunning speeches, they are not overmuch to be trusted: for
they be the greatest traitors of the world, as their manifold most crafty
contrived and bloody treasons, here set down at large, do evidently prove.
They be also as unconstant as the wethercock, and most ready to take all
occasions of advantages to do mischief. They are great liars and dissemblers;
for which faults often times they had their deserved paiments. And many times
they gave good testimony of their great valor and resolution. To handle them
gently, while gentle courses may be found to serve, it will be without
comparison the best: but if gentle polishing will not serve, then we shall not
want hammerours and rough masons enough, I mean our old soldiers trained up in
the Netherlands, to square and prepare them to our Preachers hands. To
conclude, I trust by your Honors and Worships wise instructions to the noble
Governor, the worthy experimented Lieutenant and Admiral, and other chief
managers of the business, all things shall be so prudently carried, that the
painful Preachers shall be reverenced and cherished, the valiant and forward
soldiour respected, the diligent rewarded, the coward emboldened, the weak and
sick relieved, the mutinous suppressed, the reputation of the Christians among
the Saluages preserved, our most holy faith exalted, all Paganism and
Idolatry by little and little utterly extinguished. And here reposing and
resting my self upon this sweet hope, I cease, beseeching the Almighty to
bless this good work in your hands to the honor and glory of his most holy
name, to the enlargement of the dominions of his sacred Majesty, and to the
general good of all the worthy Adventurers and undertakers.

From my lodging in the College of Westminster this 15. of April, 1609. By
one publicly and anciently devoted to Gods service, and all yours in this so
good action, Richard Hakluyt.

A RELATION OF SVCH THINGS, AS DON FERDINANDO DE SOTO, the Adelantado of
Florida passed in seeking to conquer the said Country: wherein is declared who
he was, and what some of them were that went with him: and some particulars and
diversities of the Country, and whatsoever they saw and happened unto them in
the same.
CHAP. I.
Which declares who Don Ferdinando de Soto was, and how he got the government
of Florida.

Captain Soto was the son of a Squire of Xerez of Badaioz. He went into the
Spanish Indies, when Peter Arias of Auila was Governor of the West Indies: And
there he was without any thing else of his own, save his sword and target: and
for his good qualities and valor, Peter Arias made him Captain of a troop of
horsemen, and by his commandment he went with Fernando Pizarro to the
conquest of Peru: where (as many persons of credit reported, which were there
present) as well at the taking of Atabalipa, Lord of Peru, as at the assault of
the city of Cusco, and in all other places where they found resistance,
wheresoever he was present, he passed all other Captains and principal
persons. For which cause, besides his part of the treasure of Atabalipa, he had
a good share: whereby in time he gathered an hundred and fourscore thousand
Ducats together, with that which fell to his part: which he brought into
Spain: whereof the Emperor borrowed a certain part, which he repaied again
with 60000 Rials of plate in the rent of the silks of Granada, and all the
rest was delivered him in the Contractation house of Siuil. He took servants,
to wit, a Steward, a Gentleman Usher, Pages, a Gentleman of the Horse, a
Chamberlain, Lakies, and al other officers that the house of a Noble man
requires. From Siuil he went to the Court, and in the Court, there
accompanied him John Danusco of Siuil, and Lewis Moscoso D'aluarado, Nunno de
Touar, and John Rodriguez Lobillo. Except John Danusco, all the rest came with
him from Peru: and every one of them brought fourteen or fifteen thousand
Ducats: all of them went well and costly apparrelled. And although Soto of his
own nature was not liberal, yet because that was the first time that he was
to show himself in the Court, he spent frankely, and went accompanied with
those which I have named, and with his servants, and many other which resorted
unto him. He married with Donna Isabella de Bouadilla, daughter of Peter Arias
of Auila, Earl of Punno en Rostro. The Emperor made him the Governor of the
Isle of Cuba, and Adelantado or President of Florida; with a title of Marquis
of certain part of the lands, that he should conquer.

CHAP. II.
How Cabeca de Vaca came to the Court, and gave relation of the Country of
Florida: And of the Company that was assembled in Siuil to go with Don
Ferdinando de Soto.

WHen Don Ferdinando had obtained the government, there came a Gentleman from
the Indies to the Court, named Cabeca de Vaca, which had been with the Governor
Pamphilo de Naruaez which died in Florida, who reported that Naruaez was cast
away at sea with all the company yt went with him. And how he with four more
escaped and arrived in Nueua Espanna: Also he brought a relation in writing of
that which he had seen in Florida; which said in some places: In such a place
I have seen this; and the rest which here I saw, I leave to confer of
between his Majesty and my self. Generally he reported the misery of the
Country, and the troubles which he passed: and he told some of his
kinsfolk, which were desirous to go into the Indies, and urged him very much
to tell them whether he had seen any rich country in Florida, that he might
not tell them, because he and another, whose name was Orantes, (who remained
in Nueua Espanna with purpose to return into Florida: for which intent he
came into Spain to beg the government thereof of the Emperor) had sworn not
to discover some of those things which they had seen, because no man should
prevent them in begging the same: And he informed them, Florida is the richest
Country of the world.
That it was the richest Country of the world. Don Ferdinando de Soto was very
desirous to have him with him, and made him a favorable offer: and after they
were agreed, because Soto gave him not a sum of money which he demanded to
buy a ship, they broke off again. Baltasar de Gallegos, and Christopher de
Spindola, the kinsemen of Cabeca de Vaca, told him, that for that which he had
imparted to them, they were resolved to pass with Soto into Florida, and
th^^efore they prayed him to advise them what they were best to do. Cabeca de
Vaca told them, that the cause why he went not with Soto was, because he hoped
to beg another government, and that he was loath to go under the command of
another: and that he came to beg the conquest of Florida: but seeing Don
Ferdinando de Soto had gotten it already, for his oaths sake he might tell
them nothing of that which they would know: but he counseled them to sell
their goods and go with him, and that in so doing they should do well.
As Soon as he had opportunity he spoke with the Emperor, and related unto
him whatsoever he had passed and seen, and come to understand. Of this
relation made by word of mouth to the Emperor, the Marquis of Astorga had
notice, and forthwith determined to send with Don Ferdinando de Soto his
brother Don Antonio Osorio: and with him two kinsmen of his prepared
themselves, to wit, Francis Osorio, and Garcia Osorio. Don Antonio dispossessed
himself of 60000 Rials of rent which he held by the Church: and Francis
Osorio of a town of Vassals, which he had in the Country de Campos. And they
made their Rendezuous with the Adelantado in Siuil. The like did Nunnez de
Touar, and Lewis de Moscoso, and John Rodriguez Lobillo, each of who^ had
brought from Peru fourteen or fifteen thousand Ducats. Lewis de Moscoso
carried with him two brethren: there went also Don Carlos, which had married
the Governors Niece, and took her with him. From Badaioz there went Peter
Calderan, and three kinsemen of the Adelantado, to wit, Arias Tinoco, Alfonso
Romo, and Diego Tinoco. And as Lewis de Moscoso passed through Eluas is a City
in Portugal.
Eluas, Andrew de Vasconcelos spoke with him, and requested him to speak to
Don Ferdinando de Soto concerning him, and delivered him certain warrants
which he had received from the Marquis of Villa real, wherein he gave him the
Captaineship of Ceuta in Barbary, that he might show them unto him. And the
Adelantado saw them; and was informed who he was, and wrote unto him, that he
would favor him in all things, and by all means, and would give him a charge
of men in Florida. And from Eluas went Andrew de Vasconcelos, and Fernan
Pegado, Antonio Martinez Segurado, Men Roiz Pereira, John Cordero, Stephen
Pegado, Benedict Fernandez, and Aluaro Fernandez. And out of Salamanca, and
Iaen, and Valencia, and Albuquerque, and from other parts of Spain, many
people of Noble birth assembled at Siuil: insomuch that in Saint Lucar many men
of good account which had sold their goods remained behind for want of
shipping, whereas for other known and rich Countries, they are wont to want men:
and this fell out by occasion of that which Cabeca de Vaca told the Emperor,
and informed such persons as he had conference withal touching the State of
that Country. Soto made him great offers: and being agreed to go with him (as
I have said before) because he would not give him money to pay for a ship,
which he had bought, they brake off, and he went for Governor to the River of
Plate. Cabeca de Vaca was the Governor of the River of Plate.
His kinsemen Christoper de Spindola, and Baltasar de Gallegos went with Soto.
Baltasar de Gallegos sold houses and vineyards, and rent corn, and ninety
ranks of Olive trees in the Xarafe of Siuil: He had the office of Alcalde
Mayor, and took his wife with him: And there went also many other persons of
account with the President, and had the offices following by great friendship,
because they were offices desired of many: to wit, Antonie de Biedma was
Factor, John Danusco was Auditor, and John Gaytan nephew to the Cardinal of
Ciguenza had the office of Treasurer.

CHAP. III.
How the Portugales went to Siuil, and from thence to S. Lucar: he appointed
Captains over the ships, and distributed the people which were to go in them.

THe Portugales departed from Eluas the 15. of January, and came to Siuil the
19. of the same month, and went to the lodging of the Governor, and entered
into a court, over the which were certain galleries where he was, who came
down and received them at the stairs, whereby they went up into the
galleries: when he was come up, he commanded chaires to be given them to sit
on. And Andrew de Vasconcelos told him who he and the other Portugales were,
and how they all were come to accompany him, and serve him in his voyage. He
gave him thanks, and made show of great contentment for his coming and offer.
And the table being already laid he invited them to dinner. And being at
dinner he commanded his steward to seek a lodging for them near unto his
own, where they might be lodged. The Adelantado departed from Siuil to Saint
Lucar with all the people which were to go with him: And he commanded a muster
to be made, at the which the Portugales showed themselves armed in very bright
armor, and the Castellans very gallant with silk upon silk, with many
pinkings and cuts. The Governor, because these brauaries in such an action did
not like him, commanded that they should muster another day, and every one
should come forth with his armor: at the which the Portugales came as at the
first armed with very good armor. The Governor placed them in order near
unto the standard which the ensigne-bearer carried. The Castellanes for the
most part did wear very bad and rustie shirts of maile, and all of them
headpeeces and steel cappes, and very bad lances. And some of them sought to
come among the Portugales. So those passed and were counted and enroled, which
Soto liked and accepted of, and did accompany him into Florida; which were in
all six hundred men. Six hundred men went with Soto into Florida.
He had already bought seven ships, and had all necessary provision aboard
them: He appointed Captains, and delivered to every one his ship, and gave
them in a role what people every one should carry with them.

CHAP. IV.
How the Adelantado with his people departed from Spain, and came to the
Canaries, and afterward to the Antiles.

IN the year of our Lord 1538. in the month of April, the Adelantado
delivered his ships to the Captains which were to go in them: and took for
himself a new ship, and good of sail, and gave another to Andrew de
Vasconcelos, in which the Portugales went: he went over the bar of S. Lucar
on Sunday being S. Lazarus day, in the morning, of the month and year
aforesaid, with great joy, commanding his trumpets to be sounded, and many
shots of the ordinance to be discharged. He sailed four days with a
prosperous wind; and suddenly it calmed: the calmes continued eight days with
swelling seas, in such wise, that we made no way. The 15. day after his
departure from S. Lucar, he came to Gomera, one of the Canaries, on Easter day
in the morning. The Earl of that Island was apparrelled all in white, cloak,
ierkin, hose, shoes, and cappe, so that he seemed a Lord of the Gypses. He
received the Governor with much joy: he was well lodged, and all the rest had
their lodgings gratis, and gat great store of victuals for their money, as
bread, wine and flesh: and they took what was needful for their ships: and
the Sunday following, eight days after their arrival, they departed from the
Isle of Gomera. The Earl gave to Donna Isabella the Adelantados wife a bastard
daughter that he had to be her waiting maid. They arrived at the Antilles, in
the Isle of Cuba, at the port of the City of Sant Iago upon Whitsunday. As Soon
as they came thither, a Gentleman of the City sent to the sea side a very
fair roan horse and well furnished for the Governor, and a mule for Donna
Isabella: and all the horsemen and footmen that were in the town came to
receive him at the seaside. The Governor was well lodged, visited, and served
of all the inhabitants of that City, and all his company had their lodgings
freely: those which desired to go into the country, were divided by four and
four, and six and six in the farms or granges, according to the ability of
the owners of the farms, and were furnished by them with all things necessary.

CHAP. V.
Of the inhabitants which are in the City of S. Iago, and in the other towns
of the Island: and of the quality of the soil, and fruits that it yields.

THe City of S. Iago has fourscore houses which are great and well
contrived. The most part have their walls made of bords, and are covered with
thatch; it has some houses builded with lime and stone, and covered with
tiles. It has great Orchards and many trees in them, differing from those of
Spain: there be figgetrees which bear figs Great figs.
as big as ones fist, yellow within, and of small taste; and other trees which
bear a fruit which they call Ananes, Ananes.
in making and bigness like to a small Pineapple: it is a fruit very sweet in
taste: the shel being taken away, the kernel is like a piece of fresh cheese.
In the granges abroad in the country there are other great pineapples, Great
Pineapples.
which grow on low trees, and are like the Erua babosa.
Aloetree: they are of a very good smell and exceeding good taste. Other trees
do bear a fruit, Mameis, an excellent f^uit.
which they call Mameis of the bigness of Peaches. This the Islanders do hold
for the best fruit of the country. There is another fruit which they call
Guayabas Guayabas.
like Filberds, as big as figs. There are other trees as high as a
iaueline, having one only stock without any bough, and the leaves as long as a
casting dart: and the fruit is of the bigness and fashion of a Cucumber, one
bunch bears 20. or 30. and as they ripen, the tree bends downward with
them: they are called in this country Plantanos; Plantanos.
and are of a good taste, and ripen after they be gathered; but those are the
better which ripen upon the tree it self; they bear fruit but once: and the
tree being cut down, there spring up others out of the but, which bear fruit
the next year. There is another fruit; whereby many people are sustained, and
chiefly the slaves, which are called Batatas. Batatas, or Potatos.
These grow now in the Isle of Tercera, belonging to the Kingdom of Portugal,
and they grow within the earth, and are like a fruit called Iname, they have
almost ye taste of a chestnut. The bread of this country is also made of
roots which are like the Batatas. The Cassaui ^oote.
And the stock whereon those roots do grow is like an Elder tree: they make
their ground in little hillocks, and in each of them they thrust 4. or 5.
stakes; and they gather the roots a year and an half after they set them. If
any one, thinking it is a Batata or Potato root, chance to eat of it never so
little, he is in great danger of death: which was seen by experience in a
soldier, which as soon as he had eaten a very little of one of those roots,
he died quickly. They pare these roots and stamp them, and squese them in a
thing like a press: the juice that comes from them is of an evil smell. The
bread is of little taste and less substance. Of the fruits of Spain, there
are Figs and Oranges, and they bear fruit all the year, because the soil
is very rank and fruitful. In this country are many good horses, Store of
good horses.
and there is green grass all the year. There be many wild oxen and hogs,
whereby the people of the Island is well furnished with flesh: Without the
towns abroad in the Country are many fruits. And it happens sometimes that
a Christian goes out of the way and is lost 15. or 20. days, because of the
many paths in the thick groves that cross to and fro made by the oxen: and
being thus lost, they sustain themselves with fruits and palmitos: for there
be many great groves of Palm trees through all the Island: they yield no
other fruit that is of any profit. The length and breadth of Cuba.
The Isle of Cuba is 300. leagues long from the East to the West, and is in
some places 30. in others 40. leagues from North to South. It has 6. towns of
Christians: to wit, S. Iago, Baracoa, Bayamo, Puerto de Principes, S. Espirito,
and Hauana. Every one has between 30. and 40. households, except S. Iago and
Hauana, which have about 60. or 80. houses. They have Churches in each of them,
and a Chaplen which confesses them and says Mass. In S. Iago is a Monastery
of Franciscan Friars: it has but few Friars, and is well provided of alms,
because the country is rich: The Church of S. Iago has honest reuenew, and
there is a Curat and Prebends and many Priests, as the Church of that City,
which is the chief of all the Island. There is in this country much gold, and
few slaves to get it: For many have made away themselves, because of the
Christians evil usage of them in the mines. A steward of Vasques Porcallo, A
witty stratagem.
which was an inhabitour in that Island, understanding that his slaves would
make away themselves, stayed for them with a cudgill in his hand at the place
where they were to meet, and told them, that they could neither do nor think
any thing, that he did not know before; and that he came thither to kill
himself with them, to the end, that if he had used them badly in this world,
he might use them worse in the world to come: And this was a mean that they
changed their purpose, and turned home again to do that which he commanded
them.

CHAP. VI.
How the Governor sent Donna Isabella with the ships to Hauana, and he with
some of his people went thither by land.

THe Governor sent from S. Iago his Nephew Don Carlos with the ships in
company of Donna Isabella to tarry for him at Hauana, which is an haven in the
West part toward the head of the Island, 180. leagues from the City of Saint
Iago. The Governor and those which stayed with him bought horses and proceeded
on their journey. The first town they came unto was Bayamo: (...).
they were lodged four and four, and six and six, as they went in company,
and where they lodged, they took nothing for their diet, for nothing cost them
ought save the Maiz or corn for their horses, because the Governor went to
visit them from town to town, and seized them in the tribute and service of
the Indians. Bayamo is 25. leagues from the City of S. Iago. Near unto the
town passes a great River, which is called Tanto; it is greater then
Guadiana, and in it be very great Crocodiles, which sometimes hurt the Indians,
or the cattle which passes the River. In all the country are neither Wolf,
Fox, Bear, Lion, nor Tiger. There are wild dogs which go from the houses
into the woods and feed upon swine. There be certain Snakes as big as a man's
thigh or bigger, they are very slow, they do no kind of hurt. From Bayamo to
Puerto dellos principes Puerto dellos Principes.
are 50. leagues. In all the Island from town to town, the way is made by
stubbing up, the underwood: and if it be left but one year undone, the wood
grows so much, that the way cannot be seen, and the paths of the oxen are so
many, that none can travel without an Indian of the Country for a guide: for
all the rest is very hie and thick woods. From Puerto dellos principes the
Governor went to the house of Vasques Porcallo by sea in a boat, (for it was
near the sea) to know there some news of Donna Isabella, which at that
instant (as afterward was known) was in great distress, in so much that the
ships lost one another: and two of them fell on the coast of Florida, and all
of them endured great want of water and victuals. When the storm was over,
they met together, without knowing where they were: in the end they descried
the Cape of S. Anton, The Cape of S. Antonio.
a country not inhabited of the Island of Cuba: there they watered; and at the
end of 40. days, which were passed since their departure from the City of S.
Iago, they arrived at Hauana. The Governor was presently informed thereof, and
went to Donna Isabella. And those which went by land, which were one hundred
and fifty horsemen, being divided into two parts, because they would not
oppress the inhabitants, traveled by S. Espirito, which is 60. leagues from
Puerto dellos principes. The food which they carried with them was Cacabe
bread, which is that whereof I made mention before: and it is of such a
quality, that if it be wet, it breaks presently, whereby it happened to some
to eat flesh without bread for many days. They carried dogs with them, and
a man of the Country, which did hunt; and by the way, or where they were to
lodge that night, they killed as many hogs as they needed. In this journey
they were well provided of beef and porke: And they were greatly troubled with
Muskitos, especially in a lake, which is called the mere of Pia, which they had
much ado to pass from noone till night, the water might be some half league
over, and to be swome about a crossebow shot, the rest came to the waste, and
they waded up to the knees in the mire, and in the bottom were cockle shells,
which cut their feet very sore; in such sort, that there was neither boot nor
shoe sole that was hole at half way. Their clothes and saddels were passed in
baskets of Palm trees. Passing this lake, stripped out of their clothes, there
came many muskitos, upon whose biting there arose a wheale that smarted very
much: they struck them with their hands, and with the blow which they gave
they killed so many, that the blood did run down the arms and bodies of the
men. That night they rested very little for them, and other nights also in the
like places and times. They came to Santo Espirito, Santo Espirito.
which is a town of thirty houses; there passes by it a little River: it is
very pleasant and fruitful, having great store of Oranges and citrons, and
fruits of the Country: One half of the company were lodged here, and the
rest passed forward 25. leagues to another town called la Trinidad La Trinidad.
of 15. or 20. households. Here is an hospital for the poor, and there is
none other in all the Island. And they say, that this town was the greatest in
all the Country, and that before the Christians came into this land, as a ship
passed along the coast, there came in it a very sick man, which desired the
Captain to set him on shore: and the Captain did so, and the ship went her
way: The sick man remained set on shore in that country, which until then
had not been haunted by Christians; whereupon the Indians found him, carried
him home, and looked unto him till he was whole; and the Lord of that town
married him unto a daughter of his, and had war with all the inhabitants round
about, and by the industry and valor of the Christian, he subdued and brought
under his command all the people of that Island. A great while after, the
Governor Diego Velasques went to conquer it, and from thence discovered new
Spain: And this Christian which was with the Indians did pacify them, and
brought them to the obedience and subjection of the Governor. From this town
della Trinidad unto Hauana Hauana.
are 80. leagues 'without any habitation, which they traveled. They came to
Hauana in the end of March; where they found the Governor, and the rest of the
people which came with him from Spain. The Governor sent from Hauana John
Dannusco with a carauele and two brigantines with 50. men to discover the haven
of Florida; and from thence he brought two Indians, which he took upon the
coast, wherewith (as well because they might be necessary for guides and for
interpretours, as because they said by signs that there was much gold in
Florida) the Governor and all the company received much contentment, and
longed for the hour of their departure, thinking in himself that this was the
richest Country, that unto that day had been discovered.

CHAP. VII.
How we departed from Hauana, and arrived in Florida, and of such things as
happened unto us.

BEfore our departure, the Governor deprived Nunno de Touar of ye office of
Captain General, and gave it to Porcallo de Figueroa, an inhabitant of Cuba,
which was a mean that the ships were well furnished with victuals: for he
gave a great many loads of Casabe bread, and many hogs. The Governor took
away this office from Nonno de Touar, because he had fallen in love with the
daughter of ye Earl of Gomera, Donna Isabellas waighting maid, who, though his
office were taken from him, (to return again to the Governors favor) though
she were with child by him, yet took her to his wife, and went with Soto into
Florida. The Governor left Donna Isabella in Hauana; and with her remained the
wife of Don Carlos, and the wives of Baltasar de Gallegos, and of Nonno de
Touar. And he left for his Lieutenant a Gentleman of Hauana, called John de
Roias, for the government of the Island.

May 18. 1539.
On Sunday the 18. of May, in the year of our Lord, 1539. the Adelantado or
president departed from Hauana in Cuba with his fleet, which were nine
vessels, five great ships, two carauels, and two brigantines: They sailed seven
days with a prosperous wind. The 25. day of May, the day de Pasca de Spirito
Santo, (which we call Whitson Sunday,) they saw the land of Florida; This place
was called Baya de Spirito Sancto, being on the West side of Florida, in 29.
degrees,
and because of the shoalds, they came to an anchor a league from the shore. On
Friday the 30. of May they landed in Florida, two leagues from a town of an
Indian Lord, called Vcita. They set on land two hundred and thirteen horses,
which they brought with them, to unburden the ships, that they might draw the
less water. He landed all his men, and only the sea men remained in the
ships, which in eight days, going up with the tide every day a little,
brought them up unto the town. As Soon as the people were come on shore, he
pitched his camp on the sea side, hard upon the Bay which went up unto the
town. And presently the Captain general Vasques Porcallo with other 7. The
ships came up to the town of Vcita.
horsemen foraged the Country half a league round about, and found six
Indians, which resisted him with their arrows, which are the weapons which
they use to fight withal: The horsemen killed two of them, and the other four
escaped; because the country is cumbersome with woods and bogs, where the
horses stacke fast, and fell with their riders, because they were weak with
traveling upon the sea. The same night following the Governor with an hundred
men in the brigantines lighted upon a town, which he found without people,
because, that as soon as the Christians had sight of land, they were descried,
and saw along the coast many smokes, which the Indians had made to give advice
the one to the other. The next day Luys de Moscoso, Master of the Camp set the
men in order, the horsemen in three squadrons, the Vantgard, the Batallion, and
the Rerewarde: and so they marched that day, and the day following, compassing
great Creekes which came out of the Bay: They came to the town of Vcita, The
town of Vcita. June
where the Governor was, on Sunday the first of June, being Trinity Sunday.
The town was of seven or eight houses. The Lords house stood near the shore
upon a very hie mount, made by hand for strength. At another end of the town
stood the Church, and on the top of it stood a foul made of wood with gilded
eyes. Here were found some pearls Some perles found.
of small value, spoiled with the fire, which the Indians do pierce and string
them like beads, and wear them about their necks and handwrists, and they
esteem them very much. The houses were made of timber, and covered with Palm
leaves. The Governor lodged himself in the Lords houses, and with him Vasques
Porcallo, and Luys de Moscoso: and in others that were in the midst of the
town, was the chief Alcalde or Justice, Baltasar de Gallegos lodged; and in
the same houses was set in a place by it self, all the provision that came in
the ships: the other houses and the Church were broken down, and every three or
four soldiers made a little cabin wherein they lodged. The Country round
about was very fennie, and encombred with great and hie trees. The Governor
commanded to fell the woods a crossebow shot round about the town, that the
horses might run, and the Christians might have the advantage of the Indians,
if by chance they should set upon them by night. In the ways and places
convenient, they had their Centinelles of footmen by two and two in every
stand, which did watch by turns, and the horsemen did visit them, and were
ready to assist them, if there were any alarm. The Governor made four
Captains of the horsemen, and two of the footmen. The Captains of the
horsemen were, one of them Andrew de Vasconcelos, and another Pedro Calderan de
Badaioz: and the other two were his kinsemen, to wit, Arias Tinoco, and Alfonso
Romo, borne likewise in Badaioz. The Captains of the footmen, the one was
Francisco Maldonado of Salamanca, and the other Iuan Rodriguez Lobillo. While
we were in this town of Vcita, the two Indians, which John Danusco had taken
on that coast, and the Governor carried along with him for guides and
interpretours, through carelessenes of two men, which had the charge of them,
escaped away one night. For which the Governor and all the rest were very
sorry, for they had already made some roades, and no Indians could be taken,
because the country was full of marish grounds, and in many places full of
very hie and thick woods.

CHAP. VIII.
Of some inrodes that were made into the Country: and how there was a
Christian found, which had bin long time in the power of an Indian Lord.

FRom the town of Vcita, the Governor sent the Alcalde Mayor, Baltasar de
Gallegos with 40. horsemen and 80. footmen into the Country to see if they
could take any Indians: and the Captain John Rodriguez Lobillo another way
with 50. footmen, the most of them were swordmen and targettours, and the rest
were shot and crossebowmen. They passed through a country full of bogges,
where horses could not travel. Half a league from the camp, they lighted
upon certain cabins of Indians near a River: Certain cabins of Indians.
The people that were in them leaped into the River; yet they took four
Indian women: And twenty Indians charged us, and so distressed us, that we
were forced to retire to our camp, being, as they are, exceeding ready with
their weapons. It is a people so warlike and so nimble, that they care not
awhit for any footmen. For if their enemies charge them, they run away, and
if they turn their backs, they are presently upon them. And the thing that
they most flee, is the shot of an arrow. They never stand still, but are
always running and traversing from one place to another: by reason whereof
neither crossebow nor a^cubuse can aim at them: and before one crossebowman
can make one shot, an Indian will discharge three or four arrows; and he
seldom misseth what he shoots at. An arrow, where it finds no armor,
pierces as deeply as a crossebow. Their bows are very long, and their
arrows are made of certain canes like reeds, very heavy, and so strong,
that a sharp cane passes through a target: Some they arm in the point with a
sharp bone of a fish like a chisel, and in others they fasten certain stones
like points of Diamants. For the most put when they light upon an armor, they
break in the place where they are bound together. Those of cane do split and
pierce a coat of maile, and are more hurtful then the other. John Rodriguez
Lobillo returned to the Camp with six men wounded, whereof one died; and
brought the four Indian women, which Baltasar Gallegos had taken in the cabins
or cotages. Two leagues from the town, coming into the plain field, he
espied ten or eleven Indians, among whom was a Christian, which was naked, and
scorched with the Sun, and had his arms razed after the manner of the
Indians, and differed nothing at all from them. And as soon as the horsemen saw
them they ran toward them. The Indians fled, and some of them hid themselves in
a wood, and they ouertooke two or three of them, which were wounded: and the
Christian, seeing an horseman run upon him with his lance, began to cry out,
Sirs, I am a Christian, slay me not, nor these Indians, for they have saved my
life. And straightway he called them, and put them out of fear, and they came
forth of the wood unto them. The horse men took both the Christian and the
Indians up behind them; and toward night came into the Camp with much joy:
which thing being known by the Governor, and them that remained in the Camp,
they were received with the like.

CHAP. IX.
How this Christian came to the land of Florida, and who he was: and what
conference he had with the Governor.

THis Christians name was John Ortiz, John Ortiz, lived 12. years, among the
Floridians of Vcita and Mococo
and he was borne in Siuil, of worshipful parentage. He was 12. years in the
hands of the Indians. He came into this Country with Pamphilo de Naruaez, and
returned in the ships to the Island of Cuba, where the wife of the Governor
Pamphilo de Naruaez was: and by his commandment with 20. or 30. other in a
brigandine returned back again to Florida: and coming to the port in the
sight of the town, on the shore they saw a cane sticking in the ground, and
riuen at the top, and a letter in it: and they believed that the Governor had
left it there to give advertisement of himself, when he resolved to go up
into the land: and they demanded it of four or five Indians, which walked
along the sea shore: and they bad them by signs to come on shore for it: which
against the will of the rest John Ortiz and another did. And as soon as they
were on land, from the houses of the town issued a great number of Indians,
which compassed them about, and took them in a place where they could not
flee: and the other which sought to defend himself, they presently killed
upon the place, and took John Ortiz alive, and carried him to Vcita their
Lord. And those of the brigandine sought not to land, but put themselves to
sea, and returned to the Island of Cuba. Vcita commanded to bind John Ortiz
hand and foot upon four stakes aloft upon a raft, and to make a fire under
him, that there he might be burned: But a daughter of his desired him that he
would not put him to death, alleging, that one only Christian could do him
neither hurt nor good, telling him, that it was more for his honor to keep
him as a captive. And Vcita granted her request, and commanded him to be cured
of his wounds: and as soon as he was whole, he gave him the charge of the
keeping of the Temple: because that by night the wolves did carry away the dead
corpses out of the same: who commended himself to God and took upon him the
charge of his temple. One night the wolves gate from him the corpse of a little
child, the son of a principal Indian; and going after them he threw a darte
at one of the wolves and struck him that carried away the corpse, who feeling
himself wounded, left it, and fell down dead near the place: and he not
woting what he had done, because it was night, went back again to the Temple:
the morning being come, and finding not the body of the child, he was very
sad. As Soon as Vcita knew thereof, he resolved to put him to death; and sent
by the tract, which he said the wolves went, and found the body of the child,
and the wolf dead a little beyond: whereat Vcita was much contented with the
Christian, and with the watch which he kept in the Temple, and from thence
forward esteemed him much. Three years after he fell into his hands, there
came another Lord, called Mococo, Mococo dw^lleth two days journey from Vcita.
who dwells two days iourny from the Port, and burned his town. Vcita fled
to another town that he had in another sea port. Thus John Ortiz lost his
office and favor that he had with him. These people being worshippers of the
devil, are wont to offer up unto him the lives and blood of their Indians, or
of any other people they can come by: and they report, that when he will have
them do that sacrifice unto him, he speaks with them, and tells them that
he is athirst, and wills them to sacrifice unto him. John Ortiz had notice by
the damsel that had delivered him from ye fire, how her father was determined
to sacrifice him ye day following, who willed him to flee to Mococo: for she
knew yt he would use him well: for she heard say, that he had asked for him, and
said he would be glad to see him: and because he knew not the way, she went
with him half a league out of the town by night, and set him in the way, and
returned, because she would not be discovered. John Ortiz travailed all that
night, and by ye morning came unto a River, A River.
which is in the territory of Mococo: and there he saw two Indians fishing;
and because they were in war with the people of Vcita, and their languages were
different, and he knew not the language of Mococo, he was afraid, because he
could not tell them who he was, nor how he came thither, nor was able to
answer any thing for himself, that they would kill him, taking him for one of
the Indians of Vcita, and before they espied him, he came to the place where
they had laid their weapons: and as soon as they saw him, they fled toward the
town, and although he willed the^ to stay, because he meant to do the^ no
hurt, yet they understood him not, and ran away as fast as ever they could. And
as soon as they came to the town with great outcries, many Indians came forth
against him, and began to compass him to shoot at him: John Ortiz seeing
himself in so great danger, sheilded himself with certain trees, and began
to shreeke out, and cry very loud, and to tell them that he was a Christian,
and that he was fled from Vcita, and was come to see and serve Mococo his Lord.
It pleased God that at that very instant there came thither an Indian that
could speak the language and understood him; and pacified the rest; who told
them what he said. Then ran from thence three or four Indians to bear the
news to their Lord: who came forth a quarter of a league from the town to
receive him; and was very glad of him. He caused him presently to swear
according to the custom of the Christians, that he would not run away from
him to any other Lord: and promised him to entreat him very well; and that if
at any time there came any Christians into that country, he would freely let
him go, and give him leave to go to them: and likewise took his oath to
perform the same according to the Indian custom. About three years after
certain Indians, which were fishing at sea two leagues from the town, brought
news to Mococo Mococo his town within 2. leagues of the sea.
that they had seen ships: and he called John Ortiz, and gave him leave to go
his way: who taking his leave of him, with all the haste he could came to the
sea, and finding no ships, he thought it to be some deceit, and that the
Cacique had done the same to learn his mind. So he dwelt with Mococo nine
years, with small hope of seeing any Christians. As Soon as our Governor
arrived in Florida, it was known to Mococo, and straightway he signified to
John Ortiz, that Christians were lodged in the town of Vcita: And he thought
he had iested with him, as he had done before, and told him, that by this time
he had forgotten the Christians, and thought of nothing else but to serve him.
But he assured him that it was so, and gave him license to go unto them:
saying unto him, that if he would not do it, and if the Christians should go
their way, he should not blame him, for he had fulfilled that which he had
promised him. The joy of John Ortiz was so great, that he could not believe
that it was true: notwithstanding he gave him thanks, and took his leave of
him: and Mococo gave him ten or eleven principal Indians to bear him
company: and as they went to the port where the Governor was, they met with
Baltasar de Gallegos, as I have declared before. As Soon as he was come to the
camp, the Governor commanded to give him a suit of apparel, and very good
armor, and a fair horse; and enquired of him, whether he had notice of any
country, where there was any gold or silver? He answered, No, because he never
went ten leagues compass from the place where he dwelt: But that 30. leagues
from thence dwelt an Indian Lord, which was called Parocossi, Paracossi 30.
leagues from Puert de Spirito Santo.
to whom Mococo and Vcita, with all the rest of that coast paid tribute, and
that he peradventure might have notice of some good country: and that his
land was better then that of the sea coast, and more fruitful and plentiful
of maiz. Whereof the Governor received great contentment: and said that he
desired no more then to find victuals, that he might go into the maine land,
for the land of Florida, was so large, that in one place or other there could
not choose but be some rich Country. The Cacique Mococo came to the Port to
visit the Governor, and made this speech following.

Right hie and mighty Lord, I being lesser in mine own conceit for to obey
you, then any of those which you have under your command; and greater in desire
to do you greater services, do appear before your Lordship with so much
confidence of receiving favor, as if in effect this my good will were
manifested unto you in works: not for the small service I did unto you
touching the Christian which I had in my power, in giving him freely his
liberty, (For I was bound to do it to preserve mine honor, and that which I
had promised him:) but because it is the part of great men to use great
magnificences: And I am persuaded, that as in bodily perfections, and
commanding of good people, you do exceed all men in the world, so likewise
you do in the parts of the mind, in which you may boast of the bounty of
nature. The favor which I hope for of your Lordship is, that you would hold
me for yours, and bethink your self to command me any thing, wherein I may
do you service.

The Governor answered him, That although in freeing and sending him the
Christian, he had preserved his honor and promise, yet he thanked him, and
held it in such esteem, as it had no comparison; and that he would always
hold him as his brother, and would favor him in all things to the utmost of
his power. Then he commanded a shirt to be given him, and other things,
wherewith the Cacique being very well contented, took his leave of him, and
departed to his own town.

CHAP. X.
How the Governor sent the ships to Cuba: and left an hundred men at the Haven
de Spirito Santo, and himself with the rest of his people went into the maine
land.

FRom the Port de Spirito Santo where the Governor lay, he sent the Alcalde
Mayor Baltasar de Gallegos with 50. horsemen, and 30. or 40. footmen to the
province of Paracossi, to view the disposition of the country, and inform
himself of the land farther inward, and to send him word of such things as he
found. Likewise he sent his ships back to the Island of Cuba, that they
might return within a certain time with victuals. Vasques Porcallo de
figueroa, which went with the Governor as Captain General, (whose principal
intent was to send slaves from Florida, to the Island of Cuba, where he had his
goods and mines,) having made some inrodes, and seeing no Indians were to be
got, because of the great bogs and thick woods yt were in the Country,
considering the disposition of the same, determined to return to Cuba. And
though there was some difference between him and the Governor, whereupon they
neither dealt nor conuersed together with good countenance, yet notwithstanding
with loving words he asked him leave and departed from him. Baltasar de
Gallegos came to the Paracossi: Paracossi.
There came to him 30. Indians from the Cacique, which was absent from his
town, and one of them made this speech:

Paracossi, the Lord of this province, whose vassals we are, s^ndeth us unto
your worship, to know what it is that you se^ke in this his Count^ie, and
wherein he may do you service.

Baltasar de Gallegos said unto him, that he thanked them very much for their
offer, willing them to warn their Lord to come to his town, and that there
they would talk and confirm their peace and friendship, which he much
desired. The Indians went their way, and returned the next day, and said, that
their Lord was ill at ease, and therefore could not come, but that they came on
his behalf to see what he demanded. He asked them if they knew or had notice
of any rich Country where there was gold or silver. They told them, they did:
and that toward the West, there was a Province which was called Cale; and that
others that inhabited other Countries had war with the people of that
Country, where the most part of the year was summer, and that there was much
gold: and that when those their enemies came to make war with them of Cale,
these inhabitants of Cale did wear hats of gold, in manner of head pieces.
Baltasar de Gallegos, seeing that the Cacique came not, thinking all that they
said was fained, with intent that in the mean time they might set themselves
in safety, fearing, that if he did let them go, they would return no more,
commanded the thi^ty Indians to be chained, and sent word to the Gouern^ur, by
eight horsemen, what had passed: whereof the Governor with all that were with
him, at the Port de Spirito Santo received great comfort, supposing, that that
which the Indians reported, might be true. He left Captain Calderan at the
Port, with thirty horsemen, and seventy footmen, with provision for two
years, and himself with all the rest marched into the maine land, and came to
the Paracossi, Paracossi.
at whose town Baltasar de Gallegos was: and from thence with all his men
took the way to Cale. He passed by a little town, called Acela, Acela.
Tocaste.
and came to another, called Tocaste: and from thence he went before with 30.
horsemen, and 50. footmen toward Cale. Another town.
And passing by a town, whence the people were fled, they saw Indians a little
from thence in a lake; A Lake.
to whom the Interpretour spoke. They came unto them and gave them an Indian
for a guide: A swift River.
and he came to a River with a great current, and upon a tree, which was in
the midst of it, was made a bridge, whereon the men passed: the horses swam
over by a hawser, that they were pulled by from the otherside: for one, which
they drove in at the first without it, was drowned. From thence the Governor
sent two horsemen to his people that were behind, to make haste after him;
because the way grew long, and their victuals short. He came to Cale, Cale.
and found the town without people. He took three Indians which were spies,
and tarried there for his people that came after, which were sore vexed with
hunger and evil ways, because the Country was very barren of Maiz, low, and
full of water, bogs, and thick woods; and the victuals, which they brought
with them from the Port de Spirito Santo, were spent. Wheresoever any town was
found, there were some beetes, and he that came first gathered them, and
sodden with water and salt, did eat them without any other thing: and such as
could not get them, gathered the stalks of Maiz and eat them, which because
they were young had no Maiz in them. when they came to the River which the
Governor had passed, they found palmitos upon low Palmetrees like those of
Andaluzia. There they met with the two horse men which the Governor sent unto
them, and they brought news that in Cale there was plenty of Maiz; at which
news they all rejoiced. As Soon as they came to Cale, the Governor commanded
them to gather all the Maiz that was ripe in the field, which was sufficient
for three months. At the gathering of it the Indians killed three Christians,
and one of them which were taken told the Governor, that within seven days
journey, there was a very great Province, and plentiful of Maiz, which was
called Apalache. And presently he departed from Cale with 50. horsemen, and
60. footmen. He left the master of the Camp Luys de Moscoso with all the rest
of the people there, with charge that he should not depart thence until he
had word from him. And because hitherto none had gotten any slaves, the bread
that every one was to eat, he was feign himself to beat in a mortar made in
a piece of timber with a pestle, and some of them did sift the flower through
their shirts of maile. They baked their bread upon certain tileshares which
they set over the fire, in such sort as heretofore I have said they use to do
in Cuba. It is so troublesome to grind their Maiz, that there were many that
would rather not eat it, then grind it: and did eat the Maiz parched and
sodden.

CHAP. XI.
How the Governor came to Caliquen, and carrying from thence the Cacique with
him went to Napetuca, where the Indians sought to have taken him from him, and
in an assault many of them were slain, and taken prisoners.

THe 11. day of August 1539. the Governor departed from Cale; he lodged in a
little town called Ytara, Ytara.
and the next day in another called Potano, Potano.
and the third day at Vtinama, Vtinama.
and came to another town, which they named the town of Evil peace; The town
of Evil peace.
because an Indian came in peace, saying, That he was the Cacique, and that he
with his people would serve the Gouer^^ur, and that if he would set free 28.
persons, men and women, which his men had taken the night before, he would
command provision to be brought him, and would give him a guide to instruct him
in his way: The Governor commanded them to be set at liberty, and to keep
him in safeguard. The next day in the morning there came many Indians, and set
themselves round about the town near to a wood. The Indian wished them to
carry him near them; and that they would speak unto them, and assure them,
and that they would do whatsoever he commanded them. And when he saw himself
near unto them he brake from them, and ran away so swiftly from the
Christians, that there was none that could overtake him, and all of them fled
into the woods. The Governor commanded to loose a grayhound, which was
already fleshed on them, which passing by many other Indians, caught the
counterfeit Cacique, which had escaped from the Christians, and held him till
they came to take him. From thence the Governor lodged at a town called
Cholupaha: C^o^up^ha.
and because it had store of Maiz in it, they named it Villa farta. Beyond the
same there was a River, A R^^er.
on which he made a bridge of timber, and traveled two days through a desert.
The 17. of August, he came to Caliquen, Ca^iquen.
where he was informed of the Province of Apalache: They told him that Pamphilo
de Naruaez had bin there; and that there he took shipping, because he could
find no way to go forward: That there was none other town at al; but that on
both sides was all water. The whole company were very sad for these news; and
counseled the Governor to go back to the Port de Spirito Santo, and to
abandon the Country of Florida, lest he should perish as Naruaez had done:
declaring, that if he went forward, he could not return back when he would,
and that the Indians would gather up that small quantity of Maiz which was
left. Whereunto the Governor answered, that he would not go back, till he had
seen with his eyes that which they reported: saying, that he could not believe
it, and that we should be put out of doubt before it were long. And he sent to
Luys de Moscoso to come presently from Cale, and that he tarried for him here.
Luys de Moscoso and many others thought, that from Apalache they should return
back; and in Cale they buried their iron tools, and diverse other things. They
came to Caliquen with great trouble; because the Country, which the G^uernor
had passed by, was spoiled and destitute of Maiz. After all the people were
come together, he commanded a bridge to be made over a River A River.
that passed near the town. He departed from Caliquen the 10. of September,
and carried the Cacique with him. After he had traveled three days, there
came Indians peaceably, to visit their Lord, and every day met us on the way
playing upon flutes: which is a token that they use, that men may know that
they come in peace. They said, that in our way before there was a Cacique,
whose name was Vzachil, a kinseman of the Cacique of Caliquen their Lord,
waiting for him with many presents, and they desired the Governor that he would
loose the Cacique. But he would not, fearing that they would rise, and would
not give him any guides, and sent them away from day to day with good words. He
traveled five days, he passed by some small towns, he came to a town called
Napetuca, Some small towns. Napetuca.
the 15. day of September. Thither came 14. or 15. Indians, and besought ye
Governor to let loose the Cacique of Caliquen their Lord. He answered them that
he held him not in prison, but that he would have him to accompany him to
Vzachil. The Governor had notice by John Ortiz, that an Indian told him how
they determined to gather themselves together, and come upon him, and give him
battle, and take away the Cacique from him. The day that it was agreed upon,
the Governor commanded his men to be in a readiness, and that the horsemen
should be ready armed and on horseback every one in his lodging, because the
Indians might not see them, and so more confidently come to the town. There
came four hundred Indians in sight of the camp with their bows and arrows,
and placed themselves in a wood, and sent two Indians to bid the Governor to
deliver them the Cacique. The Governor with six footmen leading the Cacique
by the hand, and talking with him, to secure the Indians, went toward the place
where they were: And seeing a fit time, commanded to sound a trumpet: and
presently those that were in the town in the houses, both horse and foot, set
upon the Indians, which were so suddenly assaulted, that the greatest care they
had was which way they should flee: They killed two horses; one was the
Governors, and he was presently horsed again upon another. There were 30. or
40. Indians slain. The rest fled to two very great lakes, Two very great lakes.
that were somewhat distant the one from the other: There they were swimming,
and the Christians round about them. The calieuermen and crossebowmen shot at
them from the bank; but the distance being great, and shooting afar off,
they did them no hurt. The Governor commanded that the same night they should
compass one of the lakes, because they were so great, that there were not me^
enough to compass them both: being beset, as soon as night shut in, the Indians,
with determination to run away, came swimming very softly to the bank; and
to hide themselves, they put a water lilly leaf on their heads. The horsemen
as soon as they perceived it to stir, ran into the water to the horses
breasts, and the Indians fled again into the lake. So this night passed
without any rest on both sides. John Ortiz persuaded them, that seeing they
could not escape, they should yield themselves to the Governor: which they
did, enforced thereunto by the coldness of the water; and one by one, he first
whom the cold did first overcome, cried to John Ortiz, d^siring that they would
not kill him, for he came to put himself into the hands of the Governor. By
the morning watch they made an end of yielding themselves: only 12. principal
men, being more honorable and valorous then the rest, resolved rather to die
then to come into his hands. And the Indians of Paracossi, which were now
loosed out of chains, went swimming to them, and pulled them out by the hair
of their heads, and they were all put in chains; and the next day were divided
among the Christians for their service. Being thus in captivity, A new
conspiracy.
they determined to rebel; and gave in charge to an Indian, which was
interpretour, and held to be valiant, that as soon as the Governor did come to
speak with him, he should cast his hands about his neck, and choke him: Who,
when he saw opportunity, laid hands on the Governor, and before he cast his
hands about his neck, he gave him such a blow on the nostrils, that he made
them gush out with blood, and presently all the rest did rise. He that could
get any weapons at hand, or the handle wherewith he did grind the Maiz, sought
to kill his master, or the first he met before him: and he that could get a
lance or sword at hand, bestirred himself in such sort with it, as though he
had used it all his life time. One Indian in the market place enclosed between
15. or 20. footmen, made a way like a bull with a sword in his hand, till
certain halbardiers of the Governor came, which killed him. Another gat up
with a lance to a loft made of canes, which they build to keep their Maiz in,
which they call a Barbacoa, and there he made such a noise, as though ten
men had been there defending the door: they slew him with a partisan. The
Indians were in all about two hundred men. They were all subdued. Two hundred
Indians taken.
And some of the youngest the Governor gave to them which had good chains,
and were careful to look to them that they gat not away. All the rest he
commanded to be put to death, being tied to a stake in the midst of the market
place: and the Indians of the Paracossi did shoot them to death.

CHAP. XII.
How the Governor came to Apalache, and was informed, that within the land,
there was much gold.

THe Governor departed from Napetuca the 23. of September: he lodged by a
River, A River.
where two Indians brought him a buck from the Cacique of Vzachil. The next day
he passed by a great town called Hapaluya; Hapaluya a great town.
and lodged at Vzachil, Vzachil.
and found no people in it, because they durst not tarry for the notice the
Indians had of the slaughter of Napetuca. He found in that town great store of
Maiz, french beans, and Aboboras.
pompions, which is their food, and that wherewith the Christians there
sustained themselves. The Maiz is like course millet, and the pompions are
better and more sauorie then those of Spain. From thence the Governor sent
two Captains each a sundry way to seek ^he Indians. They took an hundred men
and women: of which as well there as in other places where they made any inrodes,
the Captain chose one or two for the Governor, and divided the rest to
himself, and those that went with him. They led these Indians in chains with
iron collars about their necks; and they served to carry their stuff, and to
grind their Maiz, and for other services that such captives could do.
Sometimes it happened that going for wood or Maiz with them, they killed the
Christian that led them, and ran away with the chain: others filed their
chains by night with a piece of stone, wherewith they cut them, and use it in
stead of iron. Those that were perceived paid for themselves, and for the rest,
because they should not dare to do the like another time. The women and young
boys, when they were once an hundred leagues from their Country, and had
forgotten things, they let go loose, and so they served; and in a very short
space they understood the language of the Christians. From Vzachil the
Governor departed toward Apalache, and in two days journey, he came to a
town called Axille, Axille.
and from thence forward the Indians were careless, because they had as yet no
notice of the Christians. The next day in the morning, the first of October, he
departed from thence, and commanded a bridge to be made over a River A River.
which he was to pass. The deep of the River where the bridge was made, was
a stones cast, and forward a crossebow shot the water came to the waste; and
the wood, whereby the Indians came to see if they could defend the passage, and
disturb those which made the bridge, was very hie and thick. The crossebowmen
so bestirred themselves that they made them give back: and certain plancks were
cast into the River, whereon the men passed, which made good the passage: The
Governor passed upon Wednesday, which was S. Francis his day, and lodged at a
town which was called Vitachuco, Vitachuco.
subject to Apalache: he found it burning; for the Indians had set it on fire.
From thence forward the country was much inhabited, and had great store of
Maiz. He passed by many granges like hamlets. On Sunday the 25. of October,
October 25
he came to a town, which is called Vzela, Vzela.
and upon Tuesday to Anaica Apalache, Anaica Apalac^e.
where the Lord of all that Country and Province was resident: in which town
the Campemaster, whose office it is to quarter out, and lodge men, did lodge
all the company round about within a league, and half a league of it. There
were other towns, where was great store of Maiz, Pompions, French Beans, and
Plummes of the Country, which are better then those of Spain, and they grow
in the fields without planting. The victuals that were thought necessary to
pass the winter, were gathered from these towns to Anaica Apalache. Apalache
within 10. ^^a^ues of the sea.
The Governor was informed, that the sea was ten leagues from thence. He
presently sent a Captain thither with horsemen and footmen: And six leagues
on the way, he found a town, which was named Ochete, Ochete.
and so came to the sea; ^he ^^a.
and found a great tree felled, and cut into pieces, with stakes set up like
mangers, and saw the skulles of horses. He returned with this news. And that
was held for certain, which was reported of Pamphilo de Naruaez, that there
he had builded the barks wherewith he went out of the land of Florida, and
was cast away at Sea. Presently the Governor sent John Danusco with 30.
horsemen to the port de Spiritu Santo, where Calderan was, with order, that
they should abandon the port, and all of them come to Apalache. He departed on
Saturday the 17. of November. In Vzachil and other towns that stood in the way
he found great store of people already careless. He would take none of the
Indians, for not hindering himself, because it behooued ^im to give them no
leisure to gather themselves together. He passed through the towns by night,
and rested without the towns three or four hours. In ten days he came to
the Port de Spirito Santo. The Port de Spiritu Santo ten days journey from
Apalache.
He carried with him 20. Indian women, which he took in Ytara, and Potano,
near unto Cale, and sent them to Donna Isabella in the two carau^ls, which he
sent from the Port de Spirito Santo to Cuba. And he carried all the footmen in
the brigandines, and coasting along the shore, came to Apalache. And Calderan
with the horsemen, and some crossebowmen on foot went by land; and in some
places the Indians set upon him, and wounded some of his men. As Soon as he
came to Apalache; presently the Governor sent sawed plankes and spikes to the
seaside, wherewith was made a piragna or bark, wherein were embarked 30. men
well armed; which went out of the Bay to the Sea, looking for the brigandines.
Sometimes they fought with the Indians, which passed along the harbor in their
canoes. Upon Saturday the 29. of November, Nouem. 29.
there came an Indian through the Watch undiscovered, and set the town on
fire, and with the great wind that blew, two parts of it were consumed in a
short time. On Sunday the 28. of December December. 28.
came John Danusco with the brigandines. The Governor sent Francisco Maldonado
a Captain of footmen with 50. men to discover the coast Westward, and to
seek some Port, because he had determined to go by land, and discover yt part.
That day there went out eight horsemen by commandment of the Governor into the
field, two leagues about the town to seek Indians: for they were now so
emboldened, that within two crossebow shot of ye camp, they came and slew men.
They found two men and a woman gathering French Beans: the men, though they
might have fled, yet because they would not leave the woman, which was one of
their wives, they resolved to die fighting: and before they were slain, they
wounded three horses, whereof one died within a few days after. Calderan going
with his men by the Seacoast, from a wood that was near the place, the Indians
set upon him, and made him forsake his way, and many of them that went with him
forsook some necessary victuals, which they carried with them. Three or four
days after the limited time given by the Governor to Maldonado for his going
and coming, being already determined and resolved, if within eight days he
did not come, to tarry no longer for him, he came, and brought an Indian from
a Province, which was called Ochus, Ochus 60. leagues West of Apalache.
sixty leagues Westward from Apalache; where he had found a good Port of good
depth and defense against weather. And because the Governor hoped to find a
good country forward, he was very well contented. And he sent Maldonado for
victuals to Hauana, with order, that he should tarry for him at the Port of
Ochus, which he had discovered, for he would go seek it by land: and if he
should chance to stay, and not come thither that summer, that then he should
return to Hauana, and should come again the next summer after, and tarry for
him at that port: for he said he would do none other thing but go to seek
Ochus. Francisco Maldonado departed, and in his place for Captain of the
footmen remained John de Guzman. Chap 11.
Of those Indians which were taken in Napetuca, the treasurer John Gaytan had a
young man, which said, that he was not of that Country, but of another far
off toward the Sunrising, and that it was long since he had traveled to see
Countries; and that his Country was called Yupaha, and that a woman did
govern it: and that the town where she was resident was of a wonderful
bigness, and that many Lords round about were tributaries to her: and some
gave her clothes, and others gold in abundance: Abundance of gold.
and he told, how it was taken out of the mines, and was moulten and refined,
as if he had seen it done, or the devil had taught it him. So that all those
which knew any thing concerning the same, said that it was impossible to give
so good a relation, without having seen it: And all of them, as if they had
seen it, by the signs that he gave, believed all that he said to be true.

CHAP. XIII.
How the Governor departed from Apalache to seek Yupaha, and of that which
happened unto him.

ON Wedensday the third of March, March the 3. 1540.
of the year 1540. the Governor departed from Anaica Apalache to seek Yupaha.
He commanded his men to go provided with Maiz for sixty leagues of desert.
The horsemen carried their Maiz on their horses, and the footmen at their
sides: because the Indians that were for service, with their miserable life
that they lead that winter, being naked and in chains, died for the most part.
Within four days journey they came to a great River: A great River.
and they made a piragua or ferrie bote, and because of the great current, they
made a cable with chains, which they fastened on both sides of the River; and
the ferrie bote went along by it; and the horses swam over, being drawn with
capstans. Having passed the River, in a day and an half, they came to a town
called Capachiqui. Capachiqui.
Upon Friday, the 11. of March, they found Indians in arms. The next day five
Christians went to seek morters, which the Indians have to beat their Maiz,
and they went to certain houses on the backside of the Camp environed with a
wood: And within the wood were many Indians which came to spy us; of the which
came other five and set upon us. One of the Christians came running away,
giving an al^rme unto the Camp. Those which were most ready answered the
alarm. They found one Christian dead, and three sore wounded. The Indians fled
unto a lake adjoining near a very thick wood, where the horses could not
enter. The Governor departed from Capachiqui, and passed through a desert. On
Wednesday the 21. of the month he came to a town called Toalli: And from
thence forward there was a difference in the houses. For those which were
behind us were thatched with straw, and those of Toalli Toalli.
were covered with reeds, in manner of tiles. These houses are very cleanly.
Some of them had walls daubed with clay, which showed like a mudwall. In all
the cold Country the Indians have every one a house for the winter daubed with
clay within and without, and the door is very little: they shut it by night,
and make fire within; so that they are in it as warm as in a stoue: and so it
continues all night that they need not clothes: and besides these, they have
others for summer; and their kitchins near them, where they make fire and bake
their bread: and they have barbacoas wherein they keep their Maiz; which is an
house set up in the air upon four stakes, boorded about like a chamber, and
the floor of it is of cane hurdles. The difference which Lords or principal
men's houses have from the rest, besides they be greater, is, that they have
great galleries in their fronts, and under them seats made of canes in manner
of benches: and round about them they have many lofts, wherein they lay up that
which the Indians do give them for tribute, which is Maiz, Deeres skins, and
mantles of the Country, which are like blankets: they make them of the inner
rind of the barks of trees, and some of a kind of grass like unto nettles,
which being beaten, is like unto flax. A grass like flax.
The women cover themselves with these mantles; they put one about them from
the wast downward; and another over their shoulder, with their right arm out,
like unto the Egyptians. The men wear but one mantle upon their shoulders
after the same manner: and have their secrets hid with a Deeres skin, made like
a linen breech, which was wont to be used in Spain. The skins are well
corried, Excellent colors.
and they give them what color they list, so perfect, that if it be red, it
seems a very fine cloth in grain, and the black is most fine: and of the
same leather they make shoes; and they die their mantles in the same colors.
The Governor departed from Toalli the 24. of March: he came on Thursday at
evening to a small River, A small River.
where a bridge was made whereon the people passed, and Benit Fernandez a
Portugal fell off from it, and was drowned. As Soon as the Governor had
passed the River, a little distance thence he found a town called Achese.
Achese.
The Indians had no notice of the Christians: they leaped into a River: some
men and women were taken; among which was one that understood the youth which
guided the Governor to Yupaha: whereby that which he had reported was more
confirmed. For they had passed through Countries of diverse languages, and some
which he understood not. The Governor sent by one of the Indians that were
taken to call the Cacique, which was on the other side of the River. He came
and made this speech following:

Right high, right mighty, and excellent Lord, those things which seldom
happen do cause admiration. What then may the sight of your Lordship, and your
people do to me and mine, whom we never saw? especially being mounted on such
fierce beasts as your horses are, entering with such violence and fury into my
Country, without my knowledge of your coming. It was a thing so strange, and
caused such fear and terror in our minds, that it was not in our power to
stay and receive your Lordship with the solemnity due to so high and renowned
a Prince, as your Lordship is. And trusting in your greatness and singular
virtues, I do not only hope to be freed from blame, but also to receive
favors: and the first which I demand of your Lordship is, that you will use
me, my Country, and subjects as your own: and the second, that you will tell
me who you are, and whence you come, and whither you go, and what you seek,
that I the better may serve you therein.

The Governor answered him, that he thanked him as much for his offer and
good will, as if he had received it, and as if he had offered him a great
treasure: and told him that he was the son of the Sun, and came from those
parts where he dwelt, and traveled through that Country, and sought the
greatest Lord, and richest Province that was in it. The Cacique told him; that
farther forward dwelt a great Lord, and that his dominion was call Ocute. He
gave him a guide, and an interpretour for that Province. The Governor
commanded his Indians to be set free, and traveled through his Country up a
River very well inhabited. A (...) very (...).
He departed from his town the first of April; and left a very high cross of
Wood set up in the midst of the market place: and because the time gave no
more leisure, he declared to him only, that that cross was a memory of ye
same, whereon Christ, which was God and man, and created the heavens and the
earth, suffered for our salvation: therefore he exhorted them that they should
reverence it: and they made show as though they would do so. The fourth of
April the Governor passed by a town called Altamaca, Altamaca.
and the 10. of the month he came to Ocute. Ocute.
The Cacique sent him two thousand Indians with a present, to wit, many conies,
and partriges, Conies, Patriges, Hens, Dogs.
bread of Maiz, two hens, and many dogs: which among the Christians were
esteemed as if they had been fat wethers, because of the great want of flesh
meat and salt, and hereof in many places, and many times was great need; and
they were so scarce, that if a man fell sick, there was nothing to cherish him
withal: and with a sickness, that in another place easily might have been
remedied, he consumed away till nothing but skin and bones were left: and
they died of pure weakness, some of them saying, If I had a slice of meat, or a
few corns of salt, I should not die. The Indians want no fleshmeat: for they
kill with their arrows many dear, hens, conies, and other wild foul: for
they are very cunning at it: which skill the Christians had not: and though
they had it, they had no leisure to use it: for the most of the time they spent
in travel, and durst not presume to straggle aside. And because they were thus
scanted of flesh, when six hundred men that went with Soto, came to any town,
and found 30. or 40. dogs, he that could get one and kill it, thought himself
no small man: and he that killed it, and gave not his Captain one quarter, if
he knew it, he frowned on him, and made him feel it, in the watches, or in any
other matter of labor that was offered, wherein he might do him a
displeasure. On Monday the 12. of April, the Governor departed from Ocute:
The Cacique gave him two hundred Tamenes, to wit, Indians to carry burdens:
he passed through a town, the Lord whereof was named Cofaqui, Cofaqui.
and came to a province of an Indian Lord, called Patofa, Patofa.
who, because he was in peace with the Lord of Ocute, and with the other
bordering Lords, had many days before notice of the Governor, and desired to
see him: He came to visit him, and made this speech following.

Mighty Lord, now with good reason I will crave of fortune to requite this my
so great prosperity with some small adversity; and I will count my self
very rich, seeing I have obtained that, which in this world I most desired,
which is, to see, and be able to do your Lordship some service. And alth^ugh
the tongue be the image of that which is in the heart, and that the
contentment which I feel in my heart I cannot dissemble, yet is it not
sufficent wholly to manifest the same. Where did this your Country, which I
do govern, deserve to be visited of so sovereign, and so excellent a Prince,
whom all the rest of the world ought to obey and serve? And those which inhabit
it being so base, what shall be the issue of such happiness, if their memory
do not represent unto them some adversity that may betide them, according to
the order of fortune? If from this day forward we may be capable of this
benefit, that your Lordship will hold us for your own, we cannot fail to be
favored and maintained in true justice and reason, and to have the name of
men. For such as are void of reason and justice, may be compared to brute
beasts. For mine own part, from my very heart with reverence due to such a
Prince, I offer my self unto your Lordship, and beseech you; that in reward of
this my true good will, you will vouchsafe to make use of mine own person, my
Country, and subjects.

The Governor answered him, that his offers and good will declared by the
effect, did highly please him, whereof he would always be mindful to honor
and favor him as his brother. This Country, from the first peaceable Cacique,
unto the Province of Patofa, which were fifty leagues, is a fat Country,
beautiful, An excellent Country for 50. leagues.
and very fruitful, and very well watered, and full of good Rivers. And from
thence to the Port de Spirito Santo, where we first arrived in the land of
Florida, (which may be 350. leagues, little more or less) is a barren land,
and the most of it groves of wild Pinetrees, low and full of lakes, and in some
places very hie and thick groves, whither the Indians that were in arms fled,
so that no man could find them, neither could any horses enter into them. Which
was an inconvenience to the Christians, in regard of the victuals which they
found conveyed away; and of the trouble which they had in seeking of Indians to
be their guides.

CHAP. XIIII.
How the Governor departed from the Province of Patofa, and went through a
desert, where he and all his men fe l into great distress, and extreme misery.

IN the town of Patofa the youth, which the Governor carried with him for an
interpretour and a guide, began to some at the mouth, and tumble on the ground,
as one possessed with the devil: They said a Gospel over him; and the fit
left him. And he said, that four days journey from thence toward the Sun
rising, was the province that he spoke of. The Indians of Patofa said, that
toward that part they knew no habitation; but that toward the Northwest, they
knew a Province which was called Coca, a very plentiful country, which had
very great towns in it. The Cacique told the Governor, that if he would go
thither, he would give him guides and Indians for burdens; and if he would go
whither the youth spoke of, that he would likewise give him those that he
needed: and so with loving words and offers of courtesy, they took their
leaves the one of the other. He gave him seven hundred Indians to bear
burdens. He took Maiz for four days journey. He traveled six days by a
path which grew narrow more and more, till it was lost altogether: He went
where the youth did lead him, Two swift Rivers.
and passed two Rivers which were waded: each of them was two crossebow shot
over: the water came to the stirrops, and had so great a current, that it was
needful for the horsemen to stand one before another, that the footmen might
pass above them leaning unto them. Another greater River.
He came to another River of a greater current and largenes, which was passed
with more trouble, because the horses did swim at the coming out about a
lances length. Having passed this River, the Governor came to a grove of
pinetrees, and threatened the youth, and made as though he would have cast him
to the dogs, because he had told him a lie, saying, (...) days (...).
it was but four days journey, and they had traveled nine, and every day 7.
or 8. leagues, and the men by this time were grown weary and weak, and the
horses lean through the great scanting of the Maiz. The youth said, that he
knew not where he was. It saved him that he was not cast to the dogs, that
there was never another whom John Ortiz did understand. The Governor with them
two, and with some horsemen and footmen, leaving the Camp in a grove of
pinetrees, traveled that day 5. or. 6. leagues to seek a way, and returned at
night very comfortless, and without finding any sign of way or town. The
next day there were sundry opinions delivered, whether they should go back,
or what they should do: and because backward the Country whereby they had
passed was greatly spoiled and destitute of Maiz, and that which they brought
with them was spent, and the men were very weak, and the horses likewise, they
doubted much whether they might come to any place where they might help
themselves. And besides this, they were of opinion, that going in that sort out
of order, that any Indians would presume to set upon them, so that with hunger,
or with war, they could not escape. The Governor determined to send horsemen
from thence every way to seek habitation: and the next day he sent four
Captains, every one a sundry way with eight horsemen. At night they came
again, leading their horses, or driving them with a stick before; for they
were so weary, that they could not lead them; neither found they any way nor
sign of habitation. The next day, the Governor sent other four with as many
horsemen that could swim, to pass the Ose and Rivers which they should find,
and they had choice horses the best that were in the Camp. The Captains were
Baltasar de Gallegos, which went up the River; and John Danusco, down the
River: Alfonso Romo, and John Rodriguez Lobillo went into the inward parts of
the land. The Governor brought with him into Fl^rida thirteen sowes, The
great increa^e of ^^^ne.
and had by this time three hundred swine: He commanded every man should have
half a pound of hogs flesh every day: and this he did three or four days
after the Maiz was all spent. With this small quantity of flesh, and some
sodden herbs, with much trouble the people were sustained. The Governor
dismissed ye Indians of Patofa, because he had no food to give them; who
desiring to accompany and serve the Christians in their necessity, making
show that it grieved them very much to return, until they had left them in a
peopled Country, returned to their own home. John Danusco came on Sunday late
in the evening, and brought news that he had found a little town 12. or 13.
leagues from thence: he brought a woman and a boy that he took there. With his
coming and with those news, the Governor and all the rest were so glad, that
they seemed at that instant to have returned from death to life. Upon Monday,
the twenty six of April, the Governor departed to go to the town, which
was called Aymay; Aymay.
and the Christians named it the town of Relief. He left where the Camp had
lien at the foot of a Pinetree a letter buried, and letters carved in the
bark of the pine, the contents whereof was this: Dig here at the foot of this
pine, and you shall find a letter. And this he did, because when the Captains
came, which were sent to seek some habitation, they might see the letter, and
know what was become of the Governor, and which way he was gone. There was no
other way to the town, but the marks that John Danusco left made upon the
trees. The Governor with some of them that had the best horses came to it on
the Monday: And all the rest enforcing themselves the best they could, some of
them lodged within two leagues of the town, some within three and four, every
one as he was able to go, and his strength served him. There was found in the
town a storehouse full of the flower of parched Maiz; and some Maiz, which was
distributed by allowance. Here were four Indians taken, and none of them would
confess any other thing, but that they knew of none other habitation. An
Indian burned for his falsehood.
The Governor commanded one of them to be burned; and presently another
confessed, that two days journey from thence, there was a Province that was
called Cutifa-Chiqui. Upon Wednesday came the Captains Baltasar de Gallegos,
Alfonso Romo, and John Rodriguez Lobillo: for they had found the letter, and
followed the way which the Governor had taken toward the town. Two men of
John Rodriguez company were lost, because their horses tired: the Governor
checked him very sore for leaving them behind, and sent to seek them: and
as soon as they came, he departed toward Cutifa-Chiqui. Cutifa-Chiqui.
In the way three Indians were taken, which said, that the Lady of that
Country had notice already of the Christians, and stayed for them in a town
of hers. The Governor sent by one of them to offer her his friendship, and to
advertise her how he was coming thither. The Governor came unto the town:
and presently there came four canoes to him; in one of them came a sister of
the Lady, and approaching to the Governor she said these words:

Excellent Lord, my sister sends unto you by me to kiss your Lordships
hands, and to signify unto you, that the cause why she came not in person, is,
that she thinks to do you greater service staying behind, as she does, giving
order, that with all speed, al her canoes be ready, that your Lordship may
pass the River, and take your rest, which shall be presently performed.

The Governor gave her thanks, and she returned to the other side of the
River. Within a little while the Lady came out of the town in a Chair,
whereon certain of the principal Indians brought her to the River. She entered
into a barge, which had the stern tilted over, and on the floor her mat
ready laid with two cushions upon it one upon another, where she sat her
down; and with her came her principal Indians in other barges, which did wait
upon her. She went to the place where the Governor was, and at her coming she
made this speech following:

Excellent Lord, I wish this coming of your Lordship into these your
Countries, to be most happy: although my power be not answerable to my will,
and my services be not according to my desire, nor such as so high a Prince, as
your Lordship, deserves; yet since the good will is rather to be accepted,
then all the treasures of the world, that without it are offered, with most
vnfaileable and manifest affection, I offer you my person, lands, and subjects,
and this small service.

And therewithal she presented unto him great store of clothes of the Country,
which she brought in other canoes; to wit, mantles and skins; and took from
her own neck a great cordon of perles, A (...) perles.
and cast it about the neck of the Governor, entertaining him with very
gracious speeches of love and courtesy, and commanded canoes to be brought
thither, wherein the Governor and his people passed the River. They pass^ the
Riue^. Cut^fa-Chi^^i.
As Soon as he was lodged in the town, she sent him another present of many
hens. This Country was very pleasant, fat, and has goodly meadows by the
Rivers. Their woods are thin, and full of walnut trees and Mulberrie trees.
Walnut trees. Mulbery trees for silk. The sea two days journey ^ff.
They said the sea was two days journey from thence. Within a league, and
half a league about this town, were great towns dispeopled, and ouergrowne
with grass; which showed, that they had been long without inhabitants. The
Indians said, that two year before there was a plague in that Country, and
that they removed to other towns. There was in their storehouses great
quantity of clothes, Mantles of the barks of trees. Mantles of f^athers.
mantles of yarne made of the barks of trees, and others made of feathers,
white, green, red, and yellow, very fine after their use, and profitable for
winter. There were also many Deeres skins, with many compartiments traced in
them, and some of them made into hose, stockings, and shoes. And the Lady
perceiving, that the Christians esteemed the perles, advised the Governor to
send to search certain graves that were in that town, and that he should
find many: and that if he would send to the dispeopled towns, he might load
all his horses. They sought the graves of that town, and there found
fourteen rooues of perles, Three hundred ninety two pounds of pearls found.
and little babies and birds made of them. The people were brown, well made,
and well proportioned, and more civil then any others that were seen in all
the Country of Florida, and all of them went shod and clothed. The youth told
the Governor, that he began now to enter into the land which he spoke of: and
some credit was given him that it was so, because he understood the language
of the Indians: and he requested that he might be Christened, for he said he
desired to become a Christian: He was Christened, and named Peter; and the
Governor commanded him to be loosed from a chain, in which until that time
he had gone. This Country, as the Indians reported, had been much inhabited,
and had the same of a good Country. And, as it seems, the youth, which was
the Governors guide, had heard of it, and that which he knew by heresay, he
affirmed that he had seen, and augmented at his pleasure. In this town was
found a dagger, and beads, that had belonged to Christians. This town was but
two days journey from the haven of Santa Helena.
The Indians reported, that Christians had been in the haven, which was two
days journey from this town, many years ago. He that came thither was the
Governor, the Licenciate Lucas Vasquez de Ayllon, which went to conquer this
Country, and at his coming to the Port he died; In the year 1525.
and there was a division, quarrels and slaughters between some principal men
which went with him, for the principal government: And without knowing any
thing of the Country, they returned home to Hispaniola. All the Company
thought it good to inhabit that Country, It is in 32. degrees
because it was in a temperat climate: And that if it were inhabited, all the
ships of New Spain, of Peru, Santa Martha, and Tierr^ ^rme, in their return
for Spain, might well touch there: because it was in their way; and because it
was a good Country, and sited fit to raise commodity. The Governor, since
his intent was to seek another treasure, like that of Atabalipa Lord of Peru,
was not contented with a good Country, nor with pearls, though many of them
were worth their weight in gold. And if the Country had been divided among the
Christians, those which the Indians had fished for afterward, would have been
of more value: for those which they had, because they burned them in the fire,
did leese their color. The Governor answered them, that urged him to inhabit,
That in all the Country, there were not victuals to sustain his men one
month; and that it was needful to resort to the Port of Ocus, where Maldanado
was to stay for them: and that if no richer Country were found, they might
return again to that whenever they would: and in the mean time the Indians
would sow their fields, and it would be better furnished with Maiz. He inquired
of the Indians, whether they had notice of any great Lord farther into the
land. They told him, that 12. days journey from thence, Chiaha 12. days
journey from Santa Helena: and Cost 7. days journey from Chiaha: at which
town of Cost, they had an ox hide: Chap. 16.
there was a Province called Chiaha, subject to the Lord of Coca. Presently the
Governor determined to seek that land. And being a stern man, and of few
words, though he was glad to sift and know the opinion of all men, yet after
he had delivered his own, he would not be contraried, and always did what
liked himself, and so all men did condescend unto his will. And though it
seemed an error to leave that Country, (for others might have been sought
round about, where the people might have been sustained, until the harvest had
been ready there, and the Maiz gathered) yet there was none that would say any
thing against him, after they knew his resolution.

CHAP. XV.
How the Governor departed from Cutifa-Chiqui to seek the Province of Coca;
and what happened unto him in the way.

THe Governor departed from Cutifa Chiqui the third day of May. And because
the Indians had revolted, and the will of the Lady was perceived, that if she
could, she would depart without giving any guides or men for burdens, for the
wrongs which the Christians had done to the Indians: (for there never want some
among many of a base sort, that for a little gain do put themselves and
others in danger of undoing.) The Governor commanded her to be kept in
safeguard, and carried with him, not with so good usage as she deserved for ye
good will she showed, and good entertainment that she had made him. And he
verified that old proverb which says; For weldoing I receive evil. And so he
carried her on foot with his bondwomen to look unto her. In all the towns
where the Governor passed, the Lady commanded the Indians to come and carry
the burdens from one town to another. We passed through her Country an
hundred leagues, in which, as we saw, she was much obeyed. For the Indians did
all that she commanded them with great efficacy and diligence. Peter the youth
that was our guide, said, that she was not the Lady her self, but a niece of
hers, which came to that town to execute certain principal men by
commandment of the Lady, which had withheld her tribute: which words were not
believed, because of the lies which they had found in him before: but they bare
with all things, because of the need which they had of him, to declare what the
Indians said. In seven days space the Governor came to a Province called
Chalaque, Chalaque seven days journey from Cutifa Chiq^i.
the poorest Country of Maiz that was seen in Florida. The Indians fed upon
roots and herbs which they seek in the fields, and upon wild beasts, which
they kill with their bows and arrows: and it is a very gentle people. All of
them go naked, and are very lean. There was a Lord, which for a great
present, brought the Governor two Deeres skins: and there were in that
Country many wild hens. 700. Hens.
In one town they made him a present of 700. hens, and so in other towns
they sent him those which they had or could get. From this Province to another,
which is called Xualla, he spent five days: Xualla 5. days off.
here he found very little Maiz; and for this cause, though the people were
wearied, and the horses very weak, he stayed no more but two days. From Ocute
to Cutifa-chiqui, may be some hundred and thirty leagues, whereof 80. are
wilderness. From Cutifa-chiqui to Xualla, two hundred and fifty, and it is an
hilly Country. The Governor departed from Xualla toward Guaxule: he passed
very rough and hie hills. Rough and hie hills.
In that journey, the Lady of Cutifa-chiqui (whom the Governor carried with
him, as is before said, with purpose to carry her to Guaxule, because her
territory reached thither) going on a day with the bondwomen which lead her,
went out of the way, and entered into a wood, saying, she went to ease her
self, and so she deceived them, and hid her self in the wood; and though they
sought her they could not find her. She carried away with her a little chest
made of canes in manner of a coffer, which they call Petaca, full of vnbored
perles. Some which could judge of them, said, that they were of great value. An
Indian woman that waited on her did carry them. The Governor not to
discontent her altogether, left them with her, making account that in Guaxule
he would ask them of her, when he gave her leave to return: which coffer she
carried away, and went to Xualla with three slaves which fled from the Camp,
and one horseman which remained behind, who falling sick of an ague went out
of the way, and was lost. This man, whose name was Alimamos, dealt with the
slaves to change their evil purpose, and return with him to the Christians:
which two of them did; and Alimamos and they ouertooke the Governor 50.
leagues from thence in a Province called Chiaha; and reported how the Lady
remained in Xualla with a slave of Andrew de Vasconcellos, which would not come
back with them, and that of a certainty they lived as man and wife together,
and meant to go both to Cutifa-chiqui. Within five days the Governor came to
Guaxule. Guaxule five days ^^f.
The Indians there gave him a present of 300. dogs, because they saw the
Christians esteem them, and sought them to feed on them: for among them they
are not eaten. In Guaxule, and all that way, was very little Maiz. The
Governor sent from thence an Indian with a message to the Cacique of Chiaha,
to desire him to gather some Maiz thither, that he might rest a few days in
Chiaha. The Governor departed from Guaxule, Canasagua two days journey off.
Great store of Mulberrie t^ees to make ^^lke.
and in two days journey came to a town called Canasagua. There met him on
the way 20. Indians every one laden with a basket full of Mulberries: for there
be many, and those very good, from Cutifa-chiqui thither, and so forward in
other Provinces, and also nuts and plummes. And the trees grow in the fields
without planting or dressing them, and are as big and as rank, as though they
grew in gardens dug and watered. From the time that the Governor departed
from Canasagua, he iournied five days through a desert; and two leagues
before he came to Chiaha, there met him 15. Indians laden with Maiz, which
the Cacique had sent; and they told him on his behalf, that he waited his
coming with 20. barnes full of it; and farther, that himself, his Country,
and subjects, and al things else were at his service. On the 5. day of June, the
Governor entered into Chiaha: June 5. Chiaha five days journey off, and ^0.
leagues from Xualla.
The Cacique voided his own houses, in which he lodged, and received him with
much joy, saying these words following:

Mighty and excellent Lord, I hold my self for so happy a man, in that it
has pleased your Lordship to use me, that nothing could have happened unto me
of more contentment, nor that I would have esteemed so much. From Guaxule your
Lordship sent unto me, that I should prepare Maiz for you in this town for two
months: Here I have for you 20. barnes full of the choicest that in all the
Country could be found. If your Lordship be not entertained by me in such
sort, as is fit for so hie a Prince, respect my tender age, which excuses me
from blame, and receive my good will, which with much loyalty, truth, and
sincerity, I will always show in any thing, which shall concern your
Lordships service.

The Governor answered him, that he thanked him very much for his service and
offer, and that he would always account him as his brother. There was in this
town much butter in gourds melted like oil: they said it was the fat of
bears. The fat of bears.
There was found also great store of oil of walnuts, Oil of Walnuts.
which was clear as butter, and of a good taste, and a pot full of honey of
bees, Honey of Bees.
which neither before nor afterward was seen in all the Country. The town
was in an Island Chiaha seated in an Island.
between two arms of a River, and was seated nigh one of them. The River
divides it self into those two branches two crossebow shot above the town,
and meets again a league beneath the same. The plain between both the
branches is sometimes one crossebow shot, sometimes two crossebow shot over.
The branches are very broad, and both of them may be waded over. There were all
along them very good meadows, and many fields sown with Maiz. And because
the Indians stayed in their town, the Governor only lodged in the houses of
the Cacique, and his people in the fields; where there was ever a tree, every
one took one for himself. Thus the Camp lay separated one from another, and
out of order. The Governor winked at it, because the Indians were in peace,
and because it was very hot, and the people should have suffered great
extremity, if it had not bin so. The horses came thither so weak, that for
feebleness, they were not able to carry their masters: because that from
Cutifa-chiqui, they always traveled with very little prouender, and were
hunger-starued and tired ever since they came from the desert of Ocute. The
desert of Ocute, chap. 14.
And because the most of them were not in case to use in battle, though need
should require, they sent them to feed in the night a quarter of a league from
the Camp. The Christians were there in great danger, because that if at this
time the Indians had set upon them, they had been in evil case to have
defended themselves. The Governor rested there thirty days, 30. Days rest.
in which time, because the Country was very fruitful, the horses grew fat.
At the time of his departure, by the importunity of some, which would have
more then was reason, he demanded of the Cacique 30. women to make slaves of.
He answered that he would confer with his chief men. And before he
returned an answer, one night all of them with their wives and children
forsook the town, and fled away. The next day the Governor purposing to go
to seek them, the Cacique came unto him, and at his coming used these words
unto the Governor:

Mighty Lord, with shame and fear of your Lordship, because my subjects
against my will have done amiss in absenting themselves, I went my way without
your license; and knowing the error which I have committed, like a loyal
subject, I come to yield my self into your power, to dispose of me at your
own pleasure. For my subjects do not obey me, nor do any thing but what an
Uncle of mine commands, which governs this Country for me, until I be of
a perfect age. If your Lordship will pursue them, and execute on them that,
which for their disobedience they deserve, I will be your guide, since at this
present my fortune will not suffer me to perform any more.

Presently the Governor with 30. horsemen, and as many footmen, went to seek
the Indians, Certain towns.
and passing by some towns of the principal Indians which had absented
themselves, he cut and destroyed great fields of Maiz; and went up the River,
where the Indians were in an Island, where the horsemen could not come at them.
There he sent them word by an Indian to return to their town and fear
nothing, and that they should give him men to carry burdens, as al those
behind had done; for he would have no Indian women, seeing they were so loath to
part with them. The Indians accepted his request, and came to the Governor to
excuse themselves; and so all of them returned to their town. A Cacique of a
Province caleld Cost, came to this town to visit the Governor. After he had
offered himself, and passed with him some words of tendering his service and
courtesy; the Governor asking him whether he had notice of any rich Country?
he said, yea: to wit, that toward the North, there was a Province named Chisca:
and that there was a melting of copper, Mines of copper and gold in Chisca
toward the North.
and of another metal of the same color, save that it was finer, and of a
far more perfect color, and far better to the sight; and that they used it
not so much, because it was softer. And the self same thing was told the
Governor in Cutifa-chiqui; where we saw some little hatchets of copper, which
were said to have a mixture of gold. Ha^chets of coppe^ hold^ng gold.
But in that part the Country was not well peopled, Chisca is directly North
from Catifa-Chiqui, which ^s within two ^aies of Santa Helena.
and they said there were mountains, which the horses could not pass: and for
that cause, the Governor would not go from Cutifa-chiqui directly thither:
And he made account, that traveling through a peopled Country, when his men
and horses should be in better plight, and he were better certified of the
truth of the thing, he would return toward it, by mountains, and a better
inhabited Country, whereby he might have better passage. ^wo Christians s^nt
from Chiaha to ^eeke Chisca.
He sent two Christians from Chiaha with certain Indians which knew the
Country of Chisca, and the language thereof to view it, and to make report of
that which they should find; where he told them that he would tarry for them.

CHAP. XVI.
How the Governor departed from Chiaha, and at Cost was in danger to have been
slain by the hands of the Indians, and by a stratageme escaped the same: And
what more happened unto him in this journey, and how he came to Coca.

WHen the Governor was determined to depart from Chiaha to Cost, he sent for
the Cacique to come before him, and with gentle words took his leave of him,
and gave him certain things, wherewith he rested much contented: (...) even
(...) ^^om ^^^aha, chap. ^^.
In seven days he came to Cost. The second of Iulie he commanded his Camp
to be pitched two crossebow shot from the town: and with eight men of his guard
he went where he found the Cacique, which to his thinking received him with
great love. As he was talking with him, there went from the Camp certain
footmen to the town to seek some Maiz, and not contented with it, they
ransacked and searched the houses, and took what they found. With this despite
the Indians began to rise and to take their arms: and some of them with
cudgils in their hands, ran upon five or six Christians, which had done them
wrong, and beat them at their pleasure. The Governor seeing them al in an
uproar, and himself among them with so few Christians, to escape their hands
used a stratagem, A wise stratagem.
far against his own disposition, being, as he was, very francke and open:
and though it grieved him very much that any Indian should be so bold, as with
reason, or without reason to despise the Christians, he took up a cudgel, and
took their parts against his own men; which was a means to quiet them: And
presently he sent word by a man very secretly to the Camp, that some armed men
should come toward the place where he was; and he took the Cacique by the
hand, using very mild words unto him, and with some principal Indians that did
accompany him, he drew them out of the town into a plain way, and unto the
sight of the Camp, whither by little and little with good discretion the
Christians began to come and to gather about them. Thus the Governor led the
Cacique, and his chief men until he entered with them into the Camp: and
near unto his tent, he commanded them to be put in safe custody: and told
them, that they should not depart without giving him a guide and Indians for
burdens, and till certain sick Christians were come, which he had commanded
to come down the River in canoes from Chiaha; and those also which he had sent
to the Province of Chisca: (for they were not returned; and he feared that the
Indians had slain the one, and the other.) Within three days after, those
which were sent to Chisca returned, Those which were ^^t to seek Ch^sca
retu^ne. High mountains.
and made report, that the Indians had carried them through a Country so poor
of Maiz, and so rough, and over so high mountains, that it was impossible for
the army to travel that way; and that seeing the way grew very long, and that
they lingered much, they consulted to return from a little poor town, A
little poor town.
where they saw nothing that was of any profit, and brought an ox hide, An ox
hide with hairelike wool. cap. 26. and Gomara Histor. General. cap. 215. says
^o.
which the Indians gave them, as thin as a calves skin, and the hair like
a soft wool, between the course and fine wool of sheep. The Cacique gave a
guide, and men for burdens, and departed with the Governors leave. The
Governor departed from Cost the ninth of Iulie, and lodged at a town called
Tali: Tali, 1 day ^^om Cost.
The Cacique came forth to receive him on the way, and made this speech:

Excellent Lord and Prince, worthy to be served and obeyed of all the Princes
in the world; howsoever for the most part by the outward physiognomie, the
inward virtue may be judged, and that who you are, and of what strength, was
known unto me before now: I will not infer hereupon how mean I am in your
presence, to hope that my poor services will be grateful and acceptable:
since whereas strength fails, the will does not cease to be praised and
accepted. And for this cause I presume to request your Lordship, that you will
be pleased only to respect the same, and consider wherein you will command my
service in this your Country.

The Governor answered him, that his good will and offer was as acceptable
unto him, as if he had offered him all the treasures of the world, and that he
would always entreat, favor, and esteem him as if he were his own brother.
The Cacique commanded provision necessary for two days, while the Governor
was there, to be brought thither: and at the time of his departure, he gave him
four women and two men, which he had need of to bear burdens. The Governor
traveled six days through many towns subject to the Cacique of Coca: Many
towns of Coca.
and as he entered into his Country many Indians came unto him every day from
the Cacique, and met him on the way with messages, one going, and another
coming. He came to Coca upon Friday, the 26. of Iulie. Coca. Iulie 26.
The Cacique came forth to receive him two crossebow shot from the town in a
chair, which his principal men carried on their shoulders, sitting upon a
cushion, and covered with a garment of Marterns, Marterns.
of the fashion and bigness of a woman's huke: he had on his head a diadem of
feathers, and round about him many Indians playing upon flutes, and singing.
As Soon as he came unto the Governor, he did his obeisance, and uttered these
words following:

Excellent and mighty Lord, above all them of the earth; although I come but
now to receive you, yet I have received you many days ago in my heart, to
wit, from the day wherein I had first notice of your Lordship; with so great
desire to serve you, with so great pleasure and contentment, that this which I
make show of, is nothing in regard of that which is in my heart, neither can it
have any kind of comparison. This you may hold for certain, that to obtain
the dominion of the whole world, would not have rejoiced me so much, as your
sight, neither would I have held it for so great a felicity. Do not look for
me to offer you that which is your own: to wit, my person, my lands and
subjects: only I will busy my self in commanding my men with all diligence
and due reverence to welcome you from hence to the town with playing and
singing, where your Lordship shall be lodged and attended upon by my self and
them: and all that I possess, your Lordship shall use as it were your own.
For your Lordship shall do me a very great favor in so doing.

The Governor gave him thanks, and with great joy they both went conferring
together, till they came to the town: The town.
and he commanded his Indians to void their houses, wherein the Governor and
his men were lodged. There was in the barnes, and in the fields, great store of
Maiz and French Beans: The Country was greatly inhabited with many great
towns, Many great towns.
and many sown fields, which reached from the one to the other. It was
pleasant, fat, full of good meadows upon Rivers. There were in the fields, many
Plum trees, Many plum-trees of di^ers sorts. ^wo sorts of ^^apes
as well of such as grow in Spain, as of the Country: and wild tall vines,
that run up the trees; and besides these, there were other low vines with big
and sweet grapes; but for want of digging and dressing, they had great kirnels
in them. The Governor used to set a guard over the Caciques, because they
should not absent themselves, and carried them with him, till he came out of
their Countries: because that carrying them along with him, he looked to find
people in the towns, and they gave him guides, and men to carry burdens: and
before he went out of their Countries, he gave them license to return to
their houses, and to their porters likewise, as soon as he came to any other
Lordship, where they gave him others. The men of Coca seeing their Lord
detained, took it in evil part, and revolted, and hid themselves in the woods,
as well those of the town of the Cacique, as those of the other towns of ^is
principal subjects. The Governor sent out four Captains, every one his way
to seek them. They took many men and women, which were put into chains: They
seeing the hurt which they received, and how little they gained in absenting
themselves, came again, promising to do whatsoever they were commanded. Of
those which were taken prisoners, some principal men were set at liberty,
whom the Cacique demanded: and every one that had any, carried the rest in
chains like slaves, without letting them go to their Country: neither did
any return, but some few, whose fortune helped them with the good diligence
which they used to file off their chains by night, or such as in their
traveling could slip aside out of the way, seeing any negligence in them
that kept them: some escaped away with the chains, and with the burdens, and
clothes which they carried.

CHAP. XVII.
How the Governor went from Coca to Tascaluca.

THe Governor rested in Coca 25. days. He departed from thence the 20. of
August 20. of August.
to seek a Province called Tascaluca: he carried with him the Cacique of
Coca. He passed that day by a great town called Tallimuchase, Tallimuchase, a
great town.
the people were fled: he lodged half a league farther near a brook. The
next day he came to a town called Ytaua, Ytaua.
subject to Coca. He stayed there six days because of a River that passed by
it, which at that time was very hie; A great River.
and as soon as the River suffered him to pass, he set forward, and lodged at
a town named Vllibahali. Vllibahali.
There came to him on the way, on the Caciques behalf of that Province, ten or
twelve principal Indians to offer him his service; all of them had their
plumes of feathers, and bows and arrows. The Governor coming to the town
with twelve horsemen, and some footmen of his guard, leaving his people a
crossebow shot from the town, entered into it, he found all the Indians with
their weapons: and as far as he could guess, they seemed to have some evil
meaning. It was known afterward, that they were determined to take the Cacique
of Coca from the Governor, if he had requested it. The Governor commanded
all his people to enter the town, which was walled about, Vllibahali walled
about.
and near unto it passed a small River. The fashion of their walls.
The wall, as well of that, as of others, which afterward we saw, was of great
posts thrust deep into the ground and very rough, and many long railes as big
as ones arm laid acrosse between them, and the wall was about the height of a
lance, and it was daubed within and without with clay, and had loope holes. On
the otherside of the River was a town, A town.
where at that present the Cacique was. The Governor sent to call him, and he
came presently. After he had passed with the Governor some words of offering
his services, he gave him such men for his cariages as he needed, and thirty
women for slaves. In that place was a Christian lost, called Mancano, borne in
Salamanca, of noble parentage, which went astray to seek for grapes, whereof
there is great store, Great store of good grapes.
and those very good. The day that the Governor departed from thence, he
lodged at a town A town.
subject to the Lord of Vllibahali: and the next day he came to another town
called Toasi. Toasi.
The Indians gave the Governor thirty women, and such men for his cariages as
he needed. He traveled ordinarily 5. or 6. leagues a day He traveled
ordinarily five or six leagues a day.
when he traveled through peopled Countries: and going through deserts, he
marched as fast as he could, to eschew the want of Maiz. From Toasi, passing
through some towns subject to a Cacique, which was Lord of a province called
Tallise, he traveled five days: He came to Tallise the 18. of September:
Tallise, a great town. September 18.
The town was great, and situated near unto a maine River. A maine River.
On the other side of the River were other towns, and many fields sown with
Maiz. On both sides it was a very plentiful Country, and had store of Maiz:
they had voided the town. The Governor commanded to call the Cacique; who
came, and between them passed some words of love and offer of his services,
and he presented unto him 40. Indians. There came to the Governor in this
town a principal Indian in the behalf of the Cacique of Tascaluca, and made
this speech following:

Mighty, virtuous, and esteemed Lord, the great Cacique of Tascaluca my Lord,
sends by me to kiss your Lordships hands, and to let you understand, that he
has notice, how you justly ravish with your perfections and power, all men on
the earth; and that every one by whom your Lordship passes does serve and
obey you; which he acknowledges to be due unto you, and desires, as his life,
to see, and to serve your Lordship. For which cause by me he offers himself,
his lands and subjects, that when your Lordship pleases to go through his
Country, you may be received with all peace and love, served and obeyed; and
that in recompense of the desire he has to see you, you will do him the
favor to let him know when you will come: for how much the sooner, so much the
greater favor he shall receive.

The Governor received and dispatched him graciously, giving him beads, which
among them were not much esteemed, and some other things to carry to his Lord.
And he gave license to the Cacique of Coca to return home to his own
Countries. The Cacique of Tallise gave him such men for burdens as he needed.
And after he had rested there 20. days, he departed thence toward Tascaluca.
That day when he went from Tallise, he lodged at a great town called
Casiste. Ca^^^te a great town.
And the next day passed by another, and came to a small town of Tascaluca;
Ta^caluca.
and the next day he camped in a wood two leagues from the town where the
Cacique resided, and was at that time. And he sent the Master of the Camp, Luys
de Moscoso, with 15. horsemen, to let him know how he was coming. The Cacique
was in his lodgings under a Canopie: and without doors, right against his
lodgings, in an high place, they spread a mat for him, and two cushions one
upon another, where he sat him down, and his Indians placed themselves round
about him, somewhat distant from him, so that they made a place, and a void
room where he sat: and his chiefest men were nearest to him, and one with a
shadow of Deeres skin, which keept the Sun from him, being round, and of
the bigness of a target, quartered with black and white, having a rundell in the
midst: a far off it seemed to be of taffata, because ye colors were very
perfect. It was set on a small staff stretched wide out. This was the device
which he carried in his wars. He was a man of a very tall stature, of great
limbs, and spare, and well proportioned, and was much feared of his neighbors
and subjects. He was Lord of many territories and much people: In his
countenance he was very grave. After the Master of the Camp had spoken with
him, he and those that went with him coursed their horses, pransing them to and
fro, and now and then toward the place where the Cacique was, who with much
gravity and dissimulation now and then lifted up his eyes, and beheld them as
it were with disdain. At the Governors coming, he made no offer at all to
rise. The Governor took him by the hand, and both of them sat down together
on a seat which was under the cloth of estate. The Cacique said these words
unto him:

Mighty Lord, I bid your Lordship right heartily welcome. I receive as much
pleasure and contentment with your sight, as if you were my brother whom I
dearly loved: upon this point it is not needful to use many reasons; since it
is no discretion to speak that in many words, which in few may be uttered.
How much the greater the will is, so much more gives it name to the works,
and the works give testimony of the truth. Now touching my will, by it you
shall know, how certain and manifest it is, and how pure inclination I have to
serve you. Concerning the favor which you did me, in the thing which you sent
me, I make as much account of them as is reason to esteem them: and chiefly
because they were yours. Now see what service you will command me.

The Governor satisfied him with sweet words, and with great brevity. When he
departed from thence he determined to carry him along with him for some
causes, and at two days journey he came to a town called Piache, Piache.
by which there passed a great River. A great Riu^^.
The Governor demanded canoes of the Indians: they said, they had them not,
but that they would make rafts of canes and dry timber, on which he might
pass well enough: And they made them with all diligence and speed, and they
governed them; and because the water went very slow, the Governor and his
people passed very well.

From the Port de Spirito Santo to Apalache, which is about an hundred leagues,
the Governor went from East to West: And from Apalache to Cutifa-chiqui, which
are 430. leagues, from the Southwest to the Northeast: and from Cutifa-chiqui
to Xualla, which are about two hundred and fifty leagues, from the South to
the North: And from Xualla to Tascaluca, which are two hundred and fifty
leagues more, an hundred and ninety of them he traveled from East to West, to
wit, to the Province of Coca: and the other 60. from Coca to Tascaluca from the
North to the South.

Having passed the River of Piache, a Christian went from his company from
thence to seek a woman slave that was run away from him, and the Indians
either took him captive, or slew him. The Governor urged the Cacique that he
should give account of him, and threatened him, that if he were not found, he
would never let him loose. The Cacique sent an Indian from thence to Mauilla,
whither they were traveling, which was a town of a principal Indian and his
subject, saying, that he sent him to advise them to make ready victuals, and
men for carriages. But, (as afterward appeared) he sent him to assemble all
the men of war thither, that he had in his Country. The Governor traveled
three days; and the third day he passed all day through a peopled Country:
and he came to Mauilla Mauilla. 1^. O^ Octob^r.
upon Monday the 18. of October. He went before the Camp with 15. horsemen and
30. footmen. And from the town came a Christian, whom he had sent to the
principal man, three or four days before, because he should not absent
himself, and also to learn in what sort the Indians were: who told him that
he thought they were in an evil purpose: for while he was there, there came
many people into the town, and many weapons, and that they made great haste
to fortify the wall. Manilla walled.
Luys de Moscoso told the Governor, that it would be good to lodge in the
field, seeing the Indians were of such disposition: and he answered, that he
would lodge in the town, for he was weary of lodging in the field. When he
came near unto the town, the Cacique came forth to receive him with many
Indians playing upon flutes and singing: And after he had offered himself,
he presented him with three mantles of marterns. 3. Mantles of Marterns.
The Governor, with both the Caciques, and seven or eight men of his guard,
and three or four horsemen, which alighted to accompany him, entered into the
town, and sat him down under a cloth of estate. The Cacique of Tascaluca
requested him, that he would let him remain in that town, and trouble him no
more with traveling: And seeing he would not give him leave, in his talk he
changed his purpose, and dissemblinglie fained that he would speak with some
principal Indians, and rose up from the place where he sat with the
Governor, and entered into a house, where many Indians were with their bows
and arrows. The Governor when he saw he returned not, called him, and he
answered, that he would not come out from thence, neither would he go any
farther then that town, and that if he would go his way in peace, he should
presently depart, and should not seek to carry him perforce out of his
Country and territory.

CHAP. XVIII.
How the Indians rose against the Governor, and what ensued thereupon.

THe Governor seeing the determination, and furious answer of the Cacique,
went about to pacify him with fair words: to which he gave no answer, but
rather with much pride and disdain, withdrew himself where the Governor might
not see him, nor speak with him. As a principal Indian passed that way, the
Governor called him, to send him word, that he might remain at his pleasure
in his Country, and that it would please him to give him a guide, and men for
carriages, to see if he could pacify him with mild words. The Indians
answered with great pride, that he would not hearken unto him. Baltasar de
Gallegos, which stood by, took hold of a gown of marterns which he had on; A
^^wne of (...)
and he cast it over his head, and left it in his hands: and because all of
them immediately began to stir, Baltasar de Gallegos gave him such a wound
with his coutilas, that he opened him down the back, and presently all the
Indians with a great cry came out of the houses shooting their arrows. The
Governor consideing, that if he tarried ^here, he could not escape, and if
he commanded his men to come in, which were without the town, the Indians
within the houses might kill their horses, and do much hurt, ran out of the
town, and before he came out, he fell twice or thrice, and those that were
with him did help him up again; and he and those that were with him were sore
wounded: and in a moment there were five Christians slain in the town. The
Governor came running out of the town, crying out, that every man should
stand farther off, because from the wall they did them much hurt. The Indians
seeing that the Christians retired, and some of them, or the most part, more
then an ordinary pase, shot with great boldness at them, and struck down
such as they could overtake. The Indians which the Christians did lead with
them in chains, had laid down their burdens near unto the wall: and as soon
as the Governor and his men were retired, the men of Mauilla laid them on the
Indians backs again, and took them into the town, and loosed them presently
from their chains, and gave them bows and arrows to fight withal. All the
clothes and perles of the Christians were lost.
Thus they possessed themselves of all the clothes and perles, and all that the
Christians had, which their slaves carried. And because the Indians had been
always peaceable until we came to this place, some of our men had their
weapons in their fardels and remained unarmed. And from others that had entered
the town with the Governor they had taken swords and halebards, and fought
with them. When the Governor was gotten into the field, he called for an
horse, and with some that accompanied him, he returned and slew two or three
Indians: All the rest retired themselves to the town, and shot with their
bows from the wall. And those which presumed of their nimblenes, sallied
forth to fight a stones cast from the wall: And when the Christians charged
them, they retired themselves at their leisure into the town. At the time that
the broile began, there were in the town a Friar, and a Priest, and a servant
of the Governor, with a woman slave: and they had no time to come out of the
town: and they took an house, and so remained in the town. The Indians being
become Masters of the place, they shut the door with a field gate: and among
them was one sword which the Governors servant had, and with it he set
himself behind the door, thrusting at the Indians which sought to come into
them: and the Friar and the Priest stood on the other side, each of them with a
bar in their hands to beat him down that first came in. The Indians seeing
they could not get in by the door, began to uncover the house top. By this
time, all the horsemen and footmen which were behind, were come to Mauilla.
Here there were sundry opinions, whether they should charge the Indians to
enter the town, or whether they should leave it, because it was hard to enter:
and in the end it was resolved to set upon them.

CHAP. XIX.
How the Governor set his men in order, and entered the town of Mauilla.

As Soon as the battle and the rereward were come to Mauilla, the Governor
commanded all those that were best armed to alight, and made four squadrons of
footmen. The Indians, seeing how he was setting his men in order, concluded
with the Cacique, A consultation of the Indians to send away their Cacique.
that he should go his way, saying unto him, as after it was known by
certain women that were taken there, that he was but one man, and could fight
but for one man, and that they had there among them many principal Indians
very valiant and expert in feats of arms, that any one of them was able to
order the people there; and forasmuch as matters of war were subject to
casualtie, and it was uncertain which part should overcome, they wished him to
save himself, to the end, that if it fell out that they should end their days
there, as they determined, rather then to be overcome, there might remain one
to govern the Country. For all this he would not have gone away: but they
urged him so much, that with fifteen or twenty Indians of his own, he went
out of the town, and carried away a skarlat cloak, and other things of the
Christians goods; as much as he was able to carry, and seemed best unto him.
The Governor was informed how there went men out of the town, and he
commanded the horsemen to beset it, and sent in every squadron of footmen one
soldier with a firebrand to set fire on the houses, that the Indians might
have no defense: all his men being set in order, he commanded an harcubuz to
be shot off. The sign being given, the four squadrons, every one by it self
with great fury, gave the onset, and with great hurt on both sides they entered
the town. The Friar and the Priest, and those that were with them in the house
were saved, which cost the lives of two men of account, and valiant, which came
thither to succor them. The Indians fought with such courage, that many times
they drove our men out of the town. The fight lasted so long, that for
weariness and great thirst many of the Christians went to a poole that was
near the wall, to drink, which was all stained with the blood of the dead, and
then came again to fight. The Governor seeing this, entered among the footmen
into the town on horseback, with certain that accompanied him, and was a
mean that the Christians came to set fire on the houses, and brake and
overcame the Indians, who running out of the town from the footmen, the
horsemen without drove in at the gates again, where being without all hope of
life, they fought valiantly, and after the Christians came among the^ to handy
blows, seeing themselves in great distress without any succor, many of them
fled into the burning houses, where one upon another they were smothered and
burnt in the fire. The death of 2500. Indians.
The whole number of the Indians that died in this town, were two thousand and
five hundred, little more or less. Of the Christians there died eighteen; of
which one was Don Carlos, brother in law to the Governor, and a nephew of his,
and one John de Gamez, and Men Rodriguez Portugals, and John Vazquez de
Villanoua de Barca Rota, all men of honor, and of much valor: the rest were
footmen. Besides those that were slain, there were an hundred and fifty
wounded with 700. wounds of their arrows: and it pleased God that of very
dangerous wounds they were quickly healed. Moreover, there were twelve horses
slain, and seventy hurt. All the clothes which the Christians carried with
them to clothe themselves withal, and the ornaments to say Mass, and the
perles, were all burnt there: and the Christians did set them on fire
themselves; because they held for a greater inconvenience, the hurt which the
Indians might do them from those houses, where they had gathered all those
goods together, then the loss of them. Here the Governor understood, that
Francisco Maldonado waited for him at the Port of Ochuse, and that it was six
days journey from thence; The Port of Ochuse six days journey from Mauilla.
and he dealt with John Ortiz to keep it secret, because he had not
accomplished that which he determined to do; and because the perles were burnt
there, which he meant to have sent to Cuba for a show, that the people hearing
the news, might be desirous to come to that Country. He feared also, that if
they should have news of him without seeing from Florida neither gold nor
silver, nor any thing of value, it would get such a name, that no man would
seek to go thither, when he should have need of people. And so he determined
to send no news of himself, until he had found some rich Country.

CHAP. XX.
How the Governor departed from Mauilla toward Chicaca, and what happened unto
him.

FRom the time that the Governor entered into Florida, until his departure
from Mauilla, there died an hundred and two Christians, some of sickness, and
others which the Indians slew. He stayed in Mauilla, because of the wounded
men, eight and twenty days; all which time he lay in the field. It was a well
inhabited and a fat Country, there were some great and walled towns: Great
and walled towns
and many houses scattered all about the fields, to wit, a crossebow shot or
two, the one from the other. Upon Sunday, the eighteenth of November, 18. Of
November.
when the hurt men were known to be healed, the Governor departed from
Mauilla. Every one furnished himself with Maiz for two days, and they
traveled five days through a desert: they came to a Province called
Pafallaya, unto a town, named Taliepataua: Taliepataua.
and from thence they went to another, called Cabusto: Cabusto.
near unto it ran a great River. A great River.
The Indians on the other side cried out, threatening the Christians to kill
them, if they sought to pass it. The Governor commanded his men to make a
barge within the town, because the Indians should not perceive it: it was
finished in four days, and being ended, he commanded it to be carried one
night upon sleds half a league up the River. In the morning there entered into
it thirty men well armed. The Indians perceived what was attempted, and those
which were nearest, came to defend the passage. They resisted what they could,
till the Christians came near them; and seeing that the barge came to the
shore, Canauarales.
they fled away into the groves of canes. The Christians mounted on horseback,
and went up the River to make good the passage, whereby the Governor and his
company passed the River. There were along the River some towns well stored
with Maiz and French Beans. Some towns.
From thence to Chicaca the Governor traveled five days through a desert.
He came to a River, A River.
where on the otherside were Indians to defend the passage. He made another
barge in two days; and when it was finished, the Governor sent an Indian to
request the Cacique to accept of his friendship, and peaceably to expect his
coming: whom the Indians that were on the other side the River slew before his
face, and presently making a great shout went their way. Having passed the
River, the next day, being the 17. of December, December 17.
the Governor came to Chicaca, a small town of twenty houses. And after they
were come to Chicaca, Chicaca.
they were much troubled with cold, Snow and much cold.
because it was now winter and it snowed, while most of them were lodged in the
field, before they had time to make themselves houses. This Country was very
well peopled, and the houses scattered like those of Mauilla, fat and
plentiful of Maiz, and the most part of it was fielding: they gathered as much
as sufficed to pass the winter. Some Indians were taken, among which was one
whom the Cacique esteemed greatly. The Governor sent an Indian to signify to
the Cacique, that he desired to see him and to have his friendship. The Cacique
came unto him, to offer him his person, Country and subjects, and told him,
that he would cause two other Caciques to come to him in peace; who within few
days after came with him, and with their Indians: The one was called Alimamu,
the other Nicalasa. They gave a present unto the Governor of an hundred and
fifty conies, Conies.
and of the Country garments, to wit, of mantles and skins. The Cacique of
Chicaca came to visit him many times; and sometimes the Governor sent to call
him, and sent him an horse to go and come. He complained unto him, that a
subject of his was risen against him and deprived him of his tribute,
requesting his aid against him, for he meant to seek him in his Country,
and to punish him according to his desert. An Indian stratageme.
Which was nothing else but a fained plot. For they determined, as soon as the
Governor was gone with him, and the Camp was divided into two parts, the one
part of them to set upon the Governor, and the other upon them that remained
in Chicaca. He went to the town where he used to keep his residence, and
brought with him two hundred Indians with their bows and arrows. The
Governor took thirty horsemen, and eighty footmen, and they went to
Saquechuma Saquechuma.
(for so was the Province called of that chief man, A walled ^^wne.
which he said had rebelled.) They found a walled town, without any men: and
those which went with the Cacique set fire on the houses, to dissemble their
treason. But by reason of the great care and heedfulness^, that was as well in
the Governors people which he carried with him, as of those which remained in
Chicaca, they durst not assault them at that time. The Governor invited the
Cacique, and certain principal Indians, and gave them hogs flesh to eat.
And though they did not commonly use it, yet they were so greedy of it, that
every night there came Indians to certain houses a crossebow shot from the
Camp, where the hogs lay, and killed, and carried away as many as they could.
And three Indians were taken in the manner. Two of them the Governor commanded
to be shot to death with arrows; and to cut off the hands of the other, and he
sent him so handled to the Cacique. Who made as though it grieved him yt they
had offended the Governor, and that he was glad that he had executed that
punishment on them. He lay in a plain Country half a league from the place,
where the Christians lodged. Four horsemen went a straggling thither, to wit,
Francisco Osorio, and a servant of the Marquis of Astorga, called Reynoso, and
two servants of the Governor, the one his page called Ribera, and the other
Fuentes his Chamberlain: and these had taken from the Indians some skins,
and some mantles, wherewith they were offended, and forsook their houses. The
Governor knew of it, and commanded them to be apprehended; and condemned to
death Franscisco Osorio, and the Chamberlain as principals, and al of them to
loss of goods. The Friars and Priests and other principal persons were
earnest with him to pardon Francisco Osorio his life, and to moderate his
sentence, which he would not grant for any of them. While he was ready to
command them to be drawn to the market place to cut off their heads, there
came certain Indians from the Cacique to complain of them. John Ortiz, at the
request of Baltasar de Gallegos and other persons, changed their words, and
told the Governor, that the Cacique said, he had notice how his Lordship held
those Christians in prison for his sake, and that they were in no fault,
neither had they done him any wrong, and that if he would do him any favor, he
should set them free. And he told the Indians; That the Governor said, he had
them in prison, and that he would punish them in such sort, that they should
be an example to others. Hereupon the Governor commanded the prisoners to be
loosed. As Soon as March was come, he determined to depart from Chicaca, and
demanded of the Cacique two hundred men for cariages. He sent him answer, that
he would speak with his principal men. Upon Twesday the eight of March,
March, 1541.
the Governor went to the town where he was, to ask him for the men: He
told him, he would send them the next day. As Soon as the Governor was come to
Chicaca, he told Luys de Moscoso the Camp-master, that he misliked the
Indians, and that he should keep a strong watch that night, which he
remembered but a little. The Indians came at the second watch in four
squadrons, every one by it self, and as soon as they were descried, they
sounded a drum, and gave the assault with a great cry, and with so great
celeritie, that presently they entered with the scoutes, that were somewhat
distant from the Camp. Chicaca set on fire by the Indians.
And when they were perceived of them which were in the town, half the houses
were on fire, which they had kindled. That night three horsemen chanced to be
skouts, two of them were of base calling, and the worst men in all the Camp,
and the other, which was a nephew of the Governor, which until then was held
for a tall man, showed himself there as great a coward, as any of them: for
all of them ran away. And the Indians without any resistance came and set the
town on fire; and tarried without behind the doors for the Christians, which
ran out of the houses, not having any leisure to arm themselves; and as they
ran hither and thither amazed with the noise, and blinded with the smoke and
flame of the fire, they knew not which way they went, neither could they light
upon their weapons, nor saddle their horses, neither saw they the Indians that
shot at them. Many of the horses were burned in the stables, and those which
could break their halters gat loose. The disorder and flight was such, that
every man fled which way he could, without leaving any to resist the Indians.
But God, (which chastises his according to his pleasure, and in the greatest
necessities and dangers sustaineth them with his hand,) so blinded the Indians,
that they saw not what they had done, and thought that the horses which ran
loose, were men on horseback, that gathered themselves together to set upon
them. The Governor only rod on horseback, and with him a soldier called
Tapia, and set upon the Indians, and striking the first he met with his lance,
the saddle fell with him, which with haste was evil girded, and so he fell
from his horse. And all the people that were on foot were fled to a wood out
of the town, and there assembled themselves together. And because it was
night, and that the Indians thought the horses were men on horseback which
came to set upon them, as I said before, they fled; and one only remained
dead, and that was he whom the Governor slew with his lance. The town lay all
burnt to ashes. There was a woman burned, who, after she and her husband were
both gone out of their house, went in again for certain perles, which they
had forgotten, and when she would have come out, the fire was so great at the
door that she could not, neither could her husband succor her. Other three
Christians came out of their lodgings so cruelly burned, that one of them died
within three days, and the other two were carried many days each of them upon
a couch between staves, which the Indians carried on their shoulders, for
otherwise they could not travel. There died in this hurliburlie eleven
Christians, and fifty horses; and there remained an hundred hogs, and four
hundred were burned. The increase of hogs.
If any perchance had saved any clothes from the fire of Mauilla, here they
were burned, and many were clad in skins, for they had no leisure to take
their coats. They endured much cold in this place, and the chiefest remedy
were great fires. They spent all night in turnings without sleep: for if they
warmed one side, they freesed on the other. Some invented the weauing of
certain mats of dry iuie, and did wear one beneath, and another above: many
laughed at this device, whom afterward necessity enforced to do the like. The
Christians were so spoiled, and in such want of saddles and weapons which were
burned, that if the Indians had come the second night, they had overcome them
with little labor. They removed thence to the town where the Cacique was
wont to lie, The town where the Caciqu^ lay.
because it was in a champion country. Within eight days after, there were
many lances and saddles made. There were ashtrees Ashtrees.
in those parts, whereof they made as good lances as in Biscay.

CHAP. XXI.
How the Indians set again upon the Christians, and how the Governor went to
Alimamu, beyond which town in warlike sort they tarried for him in the way.

Upon Wednesday the 15. of March 1541. after the Governor had lodged 8. days
in a plain, half a league from the place which he had wintered in, after he
had set up a forge, and tempered the swords which in Chicaca were burned, and
made many targets, saddles, and lances, on Tuesday night, at the morning watch,
many Indians came to assault the Camp in three squadrons, every one by
themselves: Those which watched gave the alarm. The Governor with great speed
set his men in order in other three squadrons, and leaving some to defend the
Camp, went out to encounter them. The Indians were overcome and put to flight.
The ground was champion and fit for ye Christians to take the advantage of
them; and it was now break of day. But there happened a disorder, whereby
there were not past thirty or forty Indians slain: and this it was: that a
Friar cried out in the Camp without any just occasion, To the Camp, To the
Camp: Whereupon the Governor and all the rest repaired thither, and the
Indians had time to save themselves. There were some taken, by whom the
Governor informed himself of the Country, through which he was to pass.
The 25. of April, 25. of April.
he departed from Chicaca, and lodged at a small town called Alimamu. Alimamu.
They had very little Maiz, and they were to pass a desert of seven days
journey. The next day, the Governor sent three Captains every one his way
with horsemen and footmen to seek provision to pass the desert. And John
Dannusco the Auditor went with fifteen horsemen, and 40. footmen that way
that the Governor was to go, and found a strong fort made, where the Indians
stayed for him, and many of them walked on the top of it with their weapons,
having their bodies, thighs and arms okered and died with black, white,
yellow and red, striped like unto panes, Black, white, yellow and red colors.
so that they showed as though they went in hose and doublets: and some of them
had plumes, and others had horns on their heads, and their faces black, and
their eyes done round about with strakes of red, to seem more fierce. As Soon
as they saw that the Christians approached, with a great cry sounding two
drums with great fury they sallied forth to receive them. John Dannusco and
those that were with him, thought good to avoid them, and to acquaint the
Governor therewith. They retired to a plain place, a crossebow shot from the
fort in sight of it, the footmen, the crossebowmen, and targetters placed
themselves before the horsemen, that they might not hurt the horses. The
Indians sallied out by seven and seven, and eight and eight to shoot their
arrows, and retired again: and in sight of the Christians they made a fire,
and took an Indian, some by the feet, and some by the head, and made as
though they went to cast him into the fire, and gave him first many knocks on
the head: signifying, that they meant so to handle the Christians. John Danusco
sent three horsemen to advertise the Governor hereof. He came presently: for
his intent was to drive them from thence, saying, that if he did it not, they
would be emboldned to charge him another time, when they might do him more
harm. He made the horsemen to alight, and set his men in four squadrons: The
sign being given, they set vp-the Indians, which made resistance till the
Christians came near the fort, and as soon as they saw they could not defend
themselves, by a place where a brook passed near the fort, they ran away, and
from the otherside they shot some arrows: and because at that instant we knew
no ford for the horses to pass, they had time enough to get out of our danger.
Three Indians were slain there, and many Christians were hurt, whereof within
few days, there died fifteen by the way. All men thought the Governor to be
in fault, because he sent not to see the disposition of the place on the other
side of the River, and to know the passage before he set upon them. For with
the hope they had to save themselves by flight that way, when they saw none
other means, they fought til they were broken, and it was an encouragement to
defend themselves until then, and to offend the Christians without any danger
to themselves.

CHAP. XXII.
How the Governor went from Alimamu to Quizquiz, and from thence to Rio
Grande, or the great River.

THree days after they had sought some Maiz, whereof they found but little
store, in regard of that which was needful, and that for this cause, as well
for their sakes that were wounded, it was needful for them to rest, as for the
great journey they were to march to come where store of Maiz was: yet the
Governor was enforced to depart presently toward Quizquiz. A desert of seven
days.
He traveled seven days through a desert of many marshes and thick woods:
but it might all be traveled on horseback, except some lakes which they
swamme over. He came to a town of the Province of Quizquiz without being
descried, A town of Quizquiz.
and took all the people in it before they came out of their houses. The
mother of the Cacique was taken there: and he sent unto him by an Indian, that
he should come to see him, and that he would give him his mother, and all the
people which he had taken there. The Cacique sent him answer again, that his
Lordship should loose and send them to him, and that he would come to visit and
serve him. The Governor, because his people for want of Maiz were somewhat
weak and weary, and the horses also were lean, determined to accomplish his
request, to see if he could have peace with him, and so commanded to set free
his mother and all the rest, and with loving words dismissed them and sent them
to him. The next day, when the Governor expected the Cacique, there came many
Indians with their bows and arrows with a purpose to set upon the Christians.
The Governor had commanded all the horsemen to be armed, and on horseback, and
in a readiness. When the Indians saw that they were ready, they stayed a
crossebow shot from the place where the Governor was near a brook. And after
half an hour that they had stood there still, there came to the Camp six
principal Indians, and said, they came to see what people they were, and that
long ago, An old prophecy.
they had been informed by their forefathers, That a white people should subdue
them: and that therefore they would return to their Cacique, and bid him come
presently to obey and serve the Governor: and after they had presented him
with six or seven skins and mantles which they brought, they took their
leave of him, and returned with the other, which waited for them by the brooks
side. The Cacique never came again nor sent other message. And because in the
town where the Governor lodged, Another ^^^ne.
there was small store of Maiz, he removed to another half a league from Rio
Grande, Rio Grande, (...) Rio de ^^pi^^^ Santo.
where they found plenty of Maiz: And he went to see the River, and found,
that near unto it was great store of timber to make barges, and good situation
of ground to incampe in. Presently he removed himself thither. They made
houses, and pitched their Camp in a plain field a crossebow shot from the
River. And thither was gathered all the Maiz of the towns, which they had
lately passed. They began presently to cut and hew down timber, and to saw
plankes for barges. The Indians came presently down the River: they leaped on
shore, and declared to ye Governor, A^^^xo, (...) Lo^d on the Westside of Rio
grande.
That they were subjects of a great Lord, whose name was Aquixo, who was Lord
of many towns, and governed many people on the other side of the River, and
came to tell him on his behalf, that the next day he with all his men would
come to see, what it would please him to command him. The next day with speed,
the Cacique came with two hundred canoes full of Indians with their bows and
arrows, painted, Two hundred canoes.
and with great plumes of white feathers, and many other colors, with shields
in their hands, wherewith they defended the rowers on both sides, and the men
of war stood from the head to the stern, with their bows and arrows in
their hands. The canoe wherein the Cacique was, had a tilt over the stern, and
he sat under the tilt; and so were other canoes of the principal Indians.
And from under the tilt where the chief man sat, he governed and commanded
the other people. All joined together, and came within a stones cast of the
shore. From thence the Cacique said to the Governor, which walked along the
Rivers side with others that waited on him, that he was come thither to visit,
to honor, and to obey him; because he knew he was the greatest and mightiest
Lord on the earth: therefore he would see what he would command him to do. The
Governor yielded him thanks, and requested him to come on shore, that they
might the better communicate together. And without any answer to that point,
he sent him three canoes, wherein was great store of fish and loaves, Loves
made of prunes.
made of the substance of prunes like unto brickes. After he had received al,
he thanked him, and prayed him again to come on shore. And because the
Caciques purpose was, to see if with dissimulation he might do some hurt, when
they saw that the Governor and his men were in readiness, they began to go
from the shore: and with a great cry, the crossebowmen which were ready, shot
at them, and slew five or six of them. They retired with great order: none did
leave his oar, though the next to him were slain; and shielding themselves,
they went farther off. Afterward they came many times and landed: and when any
of us came toward them, they fled unto their canoes, which were very pleasant
to behold: for they were very great and well made, Goodly great canons.
and had their tilts, plumes, paueses, and flagges, and with the multitude of
people that were in them, they seemed to be a fair army of galleys. In
thirty days space, while the Governor remained there, Four barges made.
they made four barges: In three of which he commanded twelve horsemen to
enter, in each of them four; in a morning, three hours before day, men which
he trusted would land in despite of the Indians, and make sure the passage,
or die, and some footmen being crossebowmen went with them, and rowers to set
them on the other side. And in the other barge he commanded John de Guzman to
pass with the footmen, which was made Captain in stead of Francisco
Maldonado. And because the stream was swift, they went a quarter of a league
up the River along the bancke, and crossing over, fell down with the stream,
and landed right over against the Camp. Two stones cast before they came to
land, the horsemen went out of the barges on horseback to a sandy plot very
hard and clear ground, where all of them landed without any resistance. They
pass over Rio Grande. The River here almost half a league broad.
As Soon as those that passed first, were on land on the other side, the barges
returned to the place where the Governor was: and within two hours after
Sunne-rising, all the people were over. The River was almost half a league
broad. If a man stood still on the other side, it could not be discerned,
whether he were a man or no. The River was of great depth, and of a strong
current: the water was always muddie: there came down the River continually
many trees and timber, which the force of the water and stream brought down.
There was great store of fish in it of sundry sorts, and the most of it
differing from the freshwater fish of Spain, as hereafter shall be showed.

CHAP. XXIII.
How the Governor departed from Aquixo to Casqui, and from thence to Pacaha:
and how this Country differs from that which we had passed.

Having passed Rio grande, the Governor traveled a league and an half, and
came to a great town of Aquixo, which was dispeopled before he came thither.
They espied thirty Indians coming over a plain, which the Cacique sent, to
discover the Christians determination: and as soon as they had sight of them,
they took themselves to flight. The horsemen pursued them, and slew ten, and
took^ fifteen. And because the town, whither the Goue^ ^^ went, was near
unto the River, he sent a Captai^ ^ith as many men as he thought sufficient to
carry (...) barges up the River. And because in his traveling by land many
times he went far from the River to compass the creekes that came from it,
the Indians took occasion to set upon them of the barges, and put them in
great danger, because that by reason of the great current, they durst not leave
the shore, and from the bancke they shot at them. As Soon as the Governor was
come to the town, A town.
he presently sent crossebowmen down the River, which came to rescue them:
and upon the coming of the barges to the town, he commanded them to be
broken, and to save the iron for others, when it should be needful. He lay
there one night, and the day following, he set forward to seek a Province,
called Pacaha: which he was informed to be near unto Chisca, Pacaha near
unto Chisca. Great towns.
where the Indians told him there was gold. He passed through great towns of
Aquixo, which were all abandoned for fear of the Christians. He understood by
certain Indians that were taken, that three days journey from thence dwelt a
great Cacique, whose name was Casqui. He came to a small River, where a bridge
was made, by which they passed: that day till Sunset, they went all in water,
which in some places came to the waste, and in some to the knees. When they saw
themselves on dry land, they were very glad, because they feared they should
wander up and down as forlorn men al night in the water. The first town of
Casqui.
At noone they came to the first town of Casqui: they found the Indians
careless, because they had no knowledge of them. There were many men and women
taken, and store of goods, as mantles and skins, Another town.
as well in the first town, as in another, which stood in a field half a
league from thence in sight of it; whither the horsemen ran. This Country is
higher, drier, and more champion, then any part bordering near the River, that
until then they had seen. There were in the fields many Walnut trees, Walnut
^rees with soft shells.
bearing soft shelled Walnuts in fashion like bullets, and in the houses they
found many of them, which the Indians had laid up in store. The trees differed
in nothing else from those of Spain, nor from those which we had seen before,
but only that they have a smaller lease. There were many Mulberrie trees and
Plum trees, Many Mulberrie trees and plum trees.
which bare red plums like those of Spain, and other gray, somewhat differing,
but far better. And all the trees are all the year so fruitful, as if they
were planted in orchards: and the woods were very thin. The Governor
traveled two days through the Country of Casqui, before he came to the
town where the Cacique was: and the most of the way was always by champion
ground, which was full of great towns, Many great towns.
so that from one town, you might see two or three. He sent an Indian to
certify the Cacique, that he was coming to the place where he was, with
intent to procure his friendship, and to hold him as his brother. Whereunto he
answered, That he should be welcome, and that he would receive him with
special good will, and accomplish all that his Lordship would command him. He
sent him a present upon the way; to wit, skins, mantles, and fish: And after
these complements, the Governor found all the towns, as he passed, inhabited
with people, which peaceably attended his coming, and offered him skins,
mantles, and fish. The Cacique accompanied with many Indians came out of the
town, and stayed half a league on the way to receive the Governor, and when
he came to him, he spoke these words following:

Right high, right mighty, and renowned Lord, your Lordship is most heartily
welcome. As Soon as I had notice of your L^rdship, of your power, and your
perfections, although you came into my Country, killing and taking captives
the inhabitants thereof and my subjects: yet I determined to conform my will
unto yours, and as your own to interpret in good part all that your Lordship
did: believing, that it was convenient it should be so for some just respect,
to prevent some future matter revealed unto your Lordsh^p, and concealed from
me. For well may a mischief be permitted to avoid a greater, and that good may
come thereof: which I believe will so fall out. For it is no reason to presume
of so excellent a Prince, that the nobleness of his heart, and the effect of
his will would permit him to suffer any unjust thing. My ability is so small
to serve you as your Lordship deserves, that if you respect not mine abundant
good will, which humbly offers all kind of service, I deserve but little in
your presence. But if it be reason that this be esteemed, receive the same, my
self, my Country, and subjects for yours, and dispose of me and them at your
pleasure. For if I were Lord of all the world, with the same good will should
your Lordship by me be received, served and obeyed.

The Governor answered him to the purpose, and satisfied him in few words.
Within a while after both of them used words of great offers and courtesy the
one to the other, and the Cacique requested him to lodge in his houses. The
Governor, to preserve the peace the better, excused himself, saying, that he
would lodge in the fields. And because it was very hot, they camped near
certain trees a quarter of a league from the town. The chie e town (...) C^^
que o^ Ca^qu^.
The Cacique went to his town, and came again with many Indians singing.
As Soon as they came to the Governor, all of them prostrated themselves upon
the ground. Among these came two Indians that were blind. The Cacique made a
speech: to avoid tediousness, I will only tell in few words the substance of
the matter. He said, that seeing the Governor was the son of the Sun, and
a great Lord, he besought him to do him the favor to give sight to those two
blind men. The blind men rose up presently, and very earnestly requested the
same of the Governor. He answered, That in the high heavens was he that had
power to give them health, and whatsoever they could ask of him; whose servant
he was: And that this Lord made the heavens and the earth, and man after his
own likeness, and that he suffered upon the cross to save mankind, and rose
again the third day, and that he died as he was man, and as touching his
divinity, he was, and is immortal; and that he ascended into heaven, where he
stands with his arms open to receive all such as turn unto him: and
straightway he commanded him to make a very high cross of wood, which was set
up in the highest place of the town; declaring unto him, that the Christians
worshipped the same in resemblance and memory of that whereon Christ suffered.
The Governor and his men kneeled down before it, and the Indians did the
like. The Governor willed him, that from thencefoorth he should worship the
same, and should ask whatsoever they stood in need of, of that Lord that he
told him was in heaven. Then he asked him how far it was from thence to Pacaha:
He said, one days journey, and that at the end of his Country, there was a
lake like a brook which falls into Rio Grande, and that he would send men
before to make a bridge whereby he might pass. The same day that the Governor
departed thence, A town belonging to Casqui. Other town^,
he lodged at a town belonging to Casqui: and the next day he passed in sight
of other towns, and came to the lake, which was half a crossebow shot over,
of a great depth and current. At the time of his coming, the Indians had made
an end of the bridge, which was made of timber, laid one tree after another:
and on one side it had a course of stakes higher then the bridge, for them that
passed to take hold on. The Cacique of Casqui came to the Governor, and
brought his people with him. The Governor sent word by an Indian to the
Cacique of Pacaha, that though he were enemy to the Cacique of Casqui, and
though he were there, yet he would do him no disgrace nor hurt, if he would
atte^d him peaceably, and embrace his friendship; but rather would entreat
him as a brother. The Indian, which the Governor sent, came again, and said,
that the Cacique made none account of that which he told him, but fled with
all his men out at the other side of the town. Presently the Governor
entered, and ran before with the horsemen, that way, by which the Indians fled;
and at another town distant a quarter of a league from thence, Another town.
they took many Indians: and as soon as the horsemen had taken them, they
delivered them to the Indians of Casqui, whom, because they were their enemies,
with much circumspection and rejoicing, they brought to the town where the
Christians were: and the greatest grief they had, was this, that they could
not get leave to kill them. There were found in the town many mantles,
Mantles, Deeres skins, L ons skins, ^eares skins, and Ca s skins.
and Dear skins, Lions skins, and Bears skins, and many Cats skins. Many
came so far poorly apparrelled, and there they clothed themselves: of the
mantles, they made them cotes and cassocks, and some made gowns, and lined
them with Cats skins; and likewise their cassocks. Of the Deeres skins, some
made them also ierkins, shirts, hose and shoes: and of the Bear skins, they
made them very good clokes: for no water could pierce them. There were targets
of raw ox hides found there; Targets of raw ox hides.
with which hides they armed their horses.

CHAP. XXIIII.
How the Cacique of Pacaha came peaceably to the Governor, and the Cacique of
Casqui absented himself, and came again to make his excuse, and how the
Governor made them both friends.

Upon Wednesday, the 19. of June, the Governor entered into Pacaha: Pacaha, a
very great town beset with towers.
He lodged in the town, where the Cacique used to reside, which was very
great, walled, and beset with towers, and many loopeholes were in the towers
and wall. And in the town was great store of old Maiz, and great quantity of
new in the fields. Within a league and half a league were great towns all
walled. Where the Governor was lodged, Great walled ^ownes.
was a great lake, that came near unto the wall: and it entered into a ditch
that went round about the town, wanting but a little to enuiron it round. From
the lake to the great River was made a wear by the which the fish came into
it; which the Cacique kept for his recreation and sport: with nets, Nets found.
that were found in the town, they took as much as they would: and took they
never so much, there was no want perceived. There was also great store of fish
in many other lakes that were thereabout, but it was soft, and not so good as
that which came from the River, and the most of it was different from the fresh
water fish of Spain. The diverse sorts of excellent fish in Rio Grande.
There was a fish which they called Bagres: the third part of it was head, and
it had on both sides the gilles, and along the sides great pricks like very
sharp aules: those of this kind that were in the lakes were as big as pikes:
and in the River, there were some of an hundred, and of an hundred and fifty
pounds weight, and many of them were taken with the hook. There was another
fish like barbilles; and another like breames, headed like a delicate fish,
called in Spain besugo, between red and gray. This was there of most esteem.
There was another fish called a pele fish: it had a snout of a cubit long, and
at the end of the upper lip it was made like a peele. There was another fish
like a Western shad: And all of them had scales, except the bagres, and the
pele fish. There was another fish, which sometimes the Indians brought us, of
the bigness of an hog, they called it the Pereo fish: it had rows of teeth
beneath and above. The Cacique of Casqui sent many times great presents of
fish, mantles, and skins. He told the Governor, that he would deliver the
Cacique of Pacaha into his hands. He went to Casqui, and sent many canoes up
the River, and came himself by land with many of his people. The Governor
with 40. horsemen, and 60. footmen took him along with him up the River. And
his Indians which were in the canoes, discovered where the Cacique of Pacaha
was in a little Island, situated between two arms of the River. And five
Christians entered into a canoe, wherein Don Antonio Osorio went before, to see
what people the Cacique had with him. There were in the Isle five or six
thousand souls. Five or six thousand Indians.
And as soon as they saw them, supposing that the Indians which were in the
other canoes were also Christians, the Cacique, and certain which were in
three canoes, which they had there with the^, fled in great haste to the other
side of the River: The rest with great fear and danger, lept into the River,
where much people was drowned, especially women, and little children. Presently
the Governor which was on land, not knowing what had happened to Don Antonio,
and those that went with him, commanded ye Christians with all speed to enter
with the Indians of Casqui in the canoes, which were quickly with Don Antonio
in the little Island, where they took many men and women, and much goods.
Great store of goods, which the Indians had laid upon hurdles of canes, and
rafts of timber to carry over to the other side, drove down the river,
wherewith the Indians of Casqui filled their canoes: and for fear lest the
Christians would take it from them, the Cacique went home with them down the
River, without taking his leave of the Governor: whereupon the Governor was
highly offended with him: and presently returning to Pacaha, he ouerran the
Country of Casqui the space of two leagues, where he took twenty or thirty
of his men. And because his horses were weary, and he wanted time that day to
go any farther, he returned to Pacaha, with determination within three or
four days after to invade Casqui. And presently he let loose one of the
Indians of Pacaha, and sent word by him to the Cacique, that if he would have
his friendship, he should repair unto him, and that both of them would make
war upon Casqui And presently came many Indians that belonged to Pacaha, and
brought an Indian, in stead of the Cacique, which was discovered by the
Caciques brother which was taken prisoner. The Governor wished the Indians
that their Master himself should come: for he knew very well that that was
not he, and told them, that they could do nothing, which he knew not before
they thought it. The Cacique o^ Pa a^^ c^^meth to the Gouer^^^^.
The next day the Cacique came, accompanied with many Indians, and with a
present of much fish, skins and mantles. He made a speech that all were glad
to hear, and concluded, saying, That though his Lordship, without his giving
occasion of offense had done him hurt in his Country and subjects, yet he
would not therefore refus^ to be his, and that he would always be at his
commandment. The Governor commanded his brother to be loosed, and other
principal Indians that were taken prisoners. That day came an Indian from the
Cacique of Casqui, and said, that his Lord would come the next day to excuse
himself of the error which he had committed, in going away without license of
the Governor. The Governor willed the messenger to signify unto him, that if
he came not in his own person, he would seek him himself, and give him such
punishment as he deserved. The next day with all speed came the Cacique of
Casqui, and brought a present to the Governor of many mantles, skins, and
fish, and gave him a daughter of his, saying, that he greatly desired to match
his blood with the blood of so great a Lord as he was, and therefore he brought
him his daughter, and desired him to take her to his wife. He made a long and
discreet oration, giving him great commendations, and concluded, saying, that
he should pardon his going away without license, for that Crosses sake, which
he had left with him: protesting, that he went away for shame of that which
his men had done without his consent. The Governor answered him, that he had
chosen a good patron; and that if he had not come to excuse himself, he had
determined to seek him, to burn his towns, to kill him and his people, and
to destroy his Country. To which he replied, saying:

My Lord, I and mine are yours, and my Country likewise is yours: therefore if
you had done so, you should have destroyed your own Country, and have killed
your own people: whatsoever shall come unto me from your hand, I will receive
as from my Lord, as well punishment as reward: And know you, that the favor
which you did me in leaving me the Cross, I do acknowledge the same to be a
very great one, and greater then I have ever deserved. For you shall
understand, that with great droughts, the fields of Maiz of my Country were
withered; and as soon as I and my people kneeled before the Cross, and prayed
for rain, presently our necessity was relieved.

The Governor made him, and the Cacique of Pacaha friends; and set them with
him at his table to dine with him: and the Caciques fell at variance about the
seats, which of them should sit on his right hand. The Governor pacified
them; telling them, that among the Christians, all was one to sit on the one
side, or on the other, willing them so to behave themselves, seeing they were
with him, that no body might hear them, and that every one should sit in the
place that first he lighted on. From thence he sent thirty horsemen, and
fifty footmen to the Province of Caluca, to see if from thence he might
travel to Chisca, Gold and copper in Chisca.
where the Indians said, there was a work of gold and copper. They traveled
seven days journey through a desert, and returned very weary, eating green
plums and stalks of Maiz, which they found in a poor town of six or seven
houses. A poor town, Great store of Oxen toward the North of Pacaha. This is
like Quiu^ra.
From thence forward toward the North; the Indians said, That the Country was
very ill inhabited, because it was very cold: And that there were such store of
Oxen, that they could keep no corn for them: that the Indians lived upon
their flesh. The Governor seeing, that toward that part the Country was so
poor of Maiz, that in it they could not be sustained, demanded of the
Indians, which way it was most inhabited: and they said, they had notice of a
great Province, and a very plentiful Country, which was called Quigaute, and
that it was toward the South.

CHAP. XXV.
How the Governor departed from Pacaha to Quigaute, and to Coligoa, and came
to Cayas.

THe Governor rested in Pacaha forty days. In all which time the two
Caciques served him with great store of fish, mantles, and skins, and strove
who should do him greatest service. At the time of his departure, the Cacique
of Pacaha gave him two of his sisters, saying, that in sign of love that he
might remember him, he should take them for his wives: the ones name was
Macanoche, and the others Mochila: they were well proportioned, tall of body,
and well fleshed. Macanoche was of a good countenance, and in her shape and
physiognomie looked like a Lady: the other was strongly made. The Cacique of
Casqui commanded the bridge to be repaired, and the Governor returned through
his Country, The C^^ ques (...).
and lodged in the field near his town, whither he came with great store of
fish, and two women, which he exchanged with two Christians for two shirts. He
gave us a guide and men for cariages. The Governor lodged at a town of his, A
town of Casqui.
and the next day at another near a River, whither he caused canoes to be
brought for him to pass over, Another town.
and with his leave returned. The Governor took his journey toward Quigaute.
Quigaute.
The fourth day of August, The fourth of August.
he came to the town, where the Cacique used to keep his residencie: on the
way he sent him a present of many mantles and skins, and not daring to stay
for him in the town, he absented himself. The greatest town seen in Florida.
The town was the greatest that was seen in Florida. The Governor and his
people lodged in the one half of it: and within few days, seeing the Indians
became liars, he commanded the other half to be burned, because it should not
be a shelter for them, if they came to assault him by night, nor an hindrance
to his horsemen for the resisting of them. There came an Indian very well
accompanied with many Indians, saying, that he was the Cacique. He delivered
him over to the men of his guard to look unto him. There went and came many
Indians, and brought mantles and skins. The counterfeit Cacique, seeing so
little opportunity to execute his evil thought, as he went one day abroad
talking with the Governor, he showed him such a pair of heels, that there
was no Christian that could overtake him, and he leaped into the River, which
was a crossebow shot from the town: and as soon as he was on the other side,
many Indians that were thereabout making a great cry began to shoot. The
Governor passed presently over to them with horsemen and footmen, but they
durst not tarry for him. Going forward on his way, he came to a town A town.
where the people were fled, and a little further to a lake, where the horses
could not pass, and on the otherside were many women. The footmen passed, and
took many of them, and much spoil. The Governor came to the Camp: And that
night was a spy of the Indians taken by them of the watch. The Governor asked
him, whether he would bring him where the Cacique was? he said, he would. And
he went presently to seek him with twenty horsemen, and fifty footmen: and
after he had sought him a day, and an half, he found him in a strong wood:
And a soldier not knowing him, gave him a wound on the head; and he cried
out, that he should not kill him, saying, that he was the Cacique: so he was
taken, and an hundred and forty of his men with him. The Governor came again
to Quigaute, and willed him to cause his men to come to serve the Christians:
and staying some days for their coming, and seeing they came not, he sent two
Captains, every one his way on both sides of the River with horsemen and
footmen. They took many men and women. Now seeing the hurt which they
sustained for their rebellion, they came to see what the Governor would
command them, and passed to and fro many times, and brought presents of cloth
Cloth.
and fish. The Cacique and his two wives were in the lodging of the Governor
loose, and the halbardiers of his guard did keep them. The Governor asked
them which way the Country was most inhabited? They said, that toward the
South down the River, were great towns and Caciques, which commanded great
Countries, Col^^oa n^^^e to cert^^ne mountains Northwest.
and much people: And that toward the Northwest, there was a Province near to
certain mountains, that was called Coligoa. The Governor and all the rest
thought good to go first to Coligoa: saying, that peradventure the mountains
would make some difference of soil, and that beyond them there might be some
gold or silver: As for Quigaute, Casqui, and Pacaha, they were plain
Countries, fat grounds, and full of good meadows on the Rivers, where the
Indians sowed large fields of Maiz. From Tascaluca to Rio grande, or the great
River, is about 300. leagues: it is a very low Country, and has many lakes.
From Pacaha to Quigaute may be an hundred leagues. The Governor left the
Cacique of Quigaute in his own town: And an Indian, which was his guide, led
him through great woods without any way seven days journey through a desert,
where, at every lodging, they lodged in lakes and pooles in very should water:
there was such store of fish, that they killed them with cudgils; A new way to
take fish.
and the Indians which they carried in chains, with the mud troubled the
waters, and the fish being therewith, as it were, astonished, came to the top of
the water, and they took as much as they listed. The Indians of Coligoa
Coligoa.
had no knowledge of the Christians, and when they came so near the town,
that the Indians saw them, they fled up a River, A River.
which passed near the town, and some leaped into it; but the Christians went
on both sides of the River, and took them. There were many men and women
taken, and the Cacique with them. And by his commandment within three days
came many Indians with a present of mantles and Deeres skins, and two ox
hides: Two ox hides. Store of oxen toward the North.
And they reported, that 5. or 6. leagues from thence toward the North, there
were many of these oxen, and that because the Country was cold, it was evil
inhabited: That the best Country which they knew, the most plentiful, and
most inhabited, was a Province called Cayas, lying toward the south. ^^^m
Qui^^^^e to Coli^^^ (...) 40. leagues.
From Quiguate to Coligoa may be 40. leagues. This town of Coligoa stood at
the foot of an hill, on the bank of a mean River, of the bigness of Cayas,
the River that passes by Estremadura. It was a fat soil and so plentiful of
Maiz, that they cast out the old, to bring in the new. There was also great
plenty of French beans and pompions. The French beans were greater, and
better then those of Spain, and likewise the pompions, and being roasted, they
have almost the taste of chestnuts. The Cacique of Coligoa gave a guide to
Cayas, and stayed behind in his own town. We traveled five days, and came
to the Province of Palisema. The Province of Palisema.
The house of the Cacique was found covered with Deeres skins of diverse
colors and works drawn in them, and with the same in manner of carpets was
the ground of the house covered. The Cacique left it so, that the Governor
might lodge in it, in token that he sought peace and his friendship. But he
durst not tarry his coming. The Governor, seeing he had absented himself,
sent a Captain with horsemen and footmen to seek him: He found much people,
but by reason of the roughness of the Country, he took none save a few women
and children. The town was little and scattering, and had very little Maiz.
For which cause the Governor speedily departed from thence. He came to
another town called Tatalicoya, ^ya.
he carried with him the Cacique thereof, which guided him to Cayas. From
Tatalicoya are four days journey to Cayas. When he came to Caya^, C^^as.
and saw the town scattered; he thought they had told him a lie, and that it
was not the Province of Cayas, because they had informed him that it was well
inhabited: He threatened the Cacique, charging him to tell him where he was:
and he and other Indians which were taken near about that place, affirmed that
this was the town of Cayas, and the best that was in that Country, and that
though the houses were distant the one from the other, yet the ground that was
inhabited was great, and that there was great store of people, and many fields
of Maiz. This town was called Tanico: Tanico.
he pitched his Camp in the best part of it near unto a River. The same day
that the Governor came thither, he went a league farther with certain
horsemen, and without finding any people, he found many skins in a pathway,
which the Cacique had left there, that they might be found, in token of peace.
For so is the custom in that Country.

CHAP. XXVI.
How the Governor discovered the Province of Tulla, and what happened unto him.

THe Governor rested a month in the Province of Cayas. In which time the
horses fattened and thriued more, then in other places in a longer time, with
the great plenty of Maiz and the leaves thereof, which I think was the best
that has been seen, and they drank of a lake of very hot water, and somewhat
brackish, A lake of hot and somewhat brackish water. Store of salt made at
Cayas.
and they drank so much, that it swelled in their bellies when they brought
them from the watering. Until that time the Christians wanted salt, and there
they made good store, which they carried along with them. The Indians do
carry it to other places to exchange it for skins and mantles. They make it
along the River, which when it ebbeth, leaves it upon the upper part of the
sand. And because they cannot make it, without much sand mingled with it, they
throw it into certain baskets which they have for that purpose, broad at the
mouth, and narrow at the bottom, and set it in the air upon a bar, and throw
water into it, and set a small vessel under it, wherein it falls: Being
strained and set to boil upon the fire, when the water is sodden away, the
salt remains in the bottom of the pan. On both sides of the River the
Country was full of sown fields, and there was store of Maiz. The Indians
durst not come over where we were: and when some of them showed themselves,
the soldiers that saw them called unto them; then the Indians passed the
River, and came with them where the Governor was. He asked the^ for the
Cacique. They said, that he remained quiet, but that he durst not show
himself. The Governor presently sent him word, that he should come unto him,
and bring him a guide and an interpretour for his journey, if he made account
of his friendship: and if he did not so, he would come himself to seek him,
and that it would be the worse for him. He waited three days, and seeing he
came not, he went to seek him, and brought him prisoner with 150. of his men.
He asked him, whether he had notice of any great Cacique, and which way the
Country was best inhabited. He answered, that the best Country thereabout
was a Province toward the South, a day and an halfes journey, which was called
Tulla; and that he could give him a guide, but no interpretour, because the
speech of that Country was different from his, and because he and his
ancestors had always wars with the Lords of that Province; therefore they
had no commerce, nor understood one another language. Immediately the Governor
with certain horsemen, and 50. footmen, departed toward Tulla, to see if the
Country were such, as he might pass through it with all his company: and
as soon as he arrived there, Tulla.
and was espied of the Indians, the Country gathered together, and as soon as
15. and 20. Indians could assemble themselves, they set upon the Christians:
and seeing that they did handle them shrewdly, and that the horsemen ouertooke
them when they fled, they gat up into the tops of their houses, and sought to
defend themselves with their arrows: and being beaten down from one, they gat
up upon another. And while our men pursued some, others set upon them another
way. Thus the skirmish lasted so long, that the horses were tired, and they
could not make them run. The Indians killed there one horse, and some were
hurt. There were 15. Indians slain there, and 40. women and boys were taken
prisoners. For whatsoever Indian did shoot at them, if they could come by him,
they put him to the sword. The Governor determined to return toward Cayas,
before the Indians had time to gather a head; and presently that evening, going
part of ye night to leave Tulla, he lodged by the way, and the next day came to
Cayas: The Governor comes again to Tulla with all his company.
and within three days after he departed thence toward Tulla with all his
company: He carried the Cacique along with him, and among all his men, there
was not one found that could understand the speech of Tulla. He stayed three
days by the way, and the day that he came thither, he found the town
abandoned: for the Indians durst not tarry his coming. But as soon as they
knew that the Governor was in Tulla, the first night about ye morning watch,
they came in two squadrons two several ways, with their bows and arrows,
and long staves like pikes. As Soon as they were descried, both horse and foot
sallied out upon them, where many of the Indians were slain: And some
Christians and horses were hurt: Some of the Indians were taken prisoners,
whereof the Governor sent six to the Cacique, Indians have their right hands
and noses cut off.
with their right hands and noses cut off: and sent him word, that if he came
not to him to excuse and submit himself, that he would come to seek him, and
that he would do the like to him, and as many of his as he could find, as
he had done to those which he had sent him: and gave him three days respit
for to come. And this he gave them to understand by signs, as well as he
could, for there was no interpretour. At the three days end, there came an
Indian laden with Ox hides. Ox hides.
He came weeping with great sobs, and coming to the Governor cast himself
down at his feet: He took him up, and he made a speech, but there was none
that understood him. The Governor by signs commanded him, to return to the
Cacique, and to will him, to send him an interpretor, which could understand
the men of Cayas. The next day came three Indians laden with ox hides; Ox
hides.
and within three days after came 20. Indians, and among them one that
understood them of Cayas: Who, after a long oration of excuses of the Cacique,
and praises of the Governor, concluded with this, that he and the other were
come thither on the Caciques behalf, to see what his Lordship would command
him to do, for he was ready at his commandment. The Governor and all his
company were very glad. For in no wise could they travel without an
interpretour. The Governor commanded him to be kept safe, and bad him tell the
men that came with him, that they should return to the Cacique, and signify
unto him, that he pardoned him for that which was past, and thanked him much
for his presents and interpretour, which he had sent him, and that he would be
glad to see him, and that he should come the next day to talk with him. After
three days, the Cacique came, The Cacique of Tulla.
and 80. Indians with him: and himself and his men came weeping into the Camp,
in token of obedience and repentance for the error passed, after the manner of
that Country: Many Ox hides with wool on them, as often as sheep wool.
Comara H stor. Gener. cap. 2^5. Many Oxen tow^rd the North.
He brought a present of many ox hides: which, because the Country was cold,
were very profitable, and served for couerlets, because they were very soft,
and wolled like sheep. Not far from thence toward the North were many oxen.
The Christians saw them not, nor came into the Country where they were,
because those parts were evil inhabited, and had small store of Maiz where
they were bred. The Cacique of Tulla made an oration to the Governor, wherein
he excused himself, and offered him his Country, subjects, and person. As Well
this Cacique as the others, The great eloquence o^ the ^^dians.
and all those which came to the Governor on their behalf, delivered their
message or speech in so good order, that no orator could utter the same more
eloquently.

CHAP. XXVII.
How the Governor went from Tulla to Autiamque, where he passed the winter.

THe Governor informed himself of all the Country round about; and
understood, that toward the West was a scattered dwelling, and that toward the
Southeast were great towns, especially in a Province called Autiamque, ten
days journey from Tulla; which might be about 80. leagues; and that it was a
plenti^ull Country of Maiz. And because winter came on, and that they could
not travel two or three months in the year for cold, A winter of tw^ or t
ree months.
waters, and snow: and fear^ng, that if they should stay so long in the
scattered dwelling, they could not be sustained; and also because the Indians
said, that near to Autiamque was a great water, and according to their
relation, the Gou^rnour thought it was some arm of the Sea: And because he now
desired to send news of himself to Cuba, that some supply of men and horses
might be sent unto him: (for it was above three years, since Donna Isabella,
which was in Hauana, or any other person in Chr^stendome had heard of him, and
by this time he had lost 250. men, and 150. horses) he determined to winter in
Autiamque, and the next spring, to go to the sea cost, and make two
brigantines, and send one of them to Cuba, and the other to Nueua Espanna, that
that which went in safety, might give news of him: H^ping with the goods
which he had in Cuba, to furn^^h hims lfe again, and to attempt the discovery
and conquest toward the West: for he had not yet come where Cabeca de Vaca had
been. Thus having sent away the two Caciques of Cayas and Tulla, he took his
journey toward Autiamque: Quipana, five days ^u^^^e from Tul^a.
^ee traveled five days over very rough mountains, and came to a town
called Quipana, where no Indians could betaken for the roughness of the
Country: and the town being between hills, there was an ambush laid,
wherewith they took two Indians; which told them, that Autiamque was six
days journey from thence, and that there was another Province toward the South
eight days journey off, plentiful of Maiz, and very well people^, which was
called Guahate. Guahate
But because Autiamque was nearer, and the most of the Indians agreed of it,
the Governor made his journey that way. In three days he came to a town
called Anoixi. Anoixi.
He sent a Captain before with 30. horsemen, and 50. footmen, and took the
Indians careless, he took many men and women prisoners. Within two days
after the Governor came to another town called Catamaya, Catamaya.
and lodged in the fields of the town. Two Indians came with a false message
from the Cacique to know his determination. He bad them tell their Lord, that
he should come and speak with him. The Indians returned and came no more, nor
any other message from the Cacique. The next day the Christians went to the
town, which was without people: they took as much Maiz as they needed. That
day they lodged in a wood, and the next day they came to Auti^mque. Au amque
si^e^ (...) ournie from Qui^ana.
They found much Maiz laid up in store, and ^r^nch beans, and walnuts, and
prunes, great store of all sorts. They took some Indians which were gathering
together the stuff which their wines had ^idden. This was a champion Country,
and well inhabited. The Governor lodged in the best part of the town, and
commanded presently to make a fense of timber round about the Camp distant
from the houses, that the Indians might not hurt them without by fire. And
measuring the ground by pases, he appointed every one his part to do
according to the number of Indians which he had: presently the timber was
brought by them; and in three days there was an enclosure made of very hie and
thick posts thrust into the ground, and many railes laid acrosse. Hard by this
town passed a River, A (...).
that came out of the Province of Cavas; and above and beneath it was very well
peopled. Thither came Indians on the Caciques behalf with a present of mantles
and skins; and an halting Cacique, subject to the Lord of Autiamque, Lord of
a town called Tietiquaquo, Tietiquaquo.
came many times to visit the Governor, and to bring him presents of such as
he had. The Cacique of Autiamque sent to know of the Governor, how long time
he meant to stay in his Country? And understanding that he meant to stay
above three days, he never sent any more Indians, nor any other message, but
conspired with the lame Cacique to rebel. Diverse inrodes were made, wherein
there were many men and women taken, and the lame Cacique among the rest. The
Governor respecting the services which he had received of him, reprehended and
admonished him, and set him at liberty, and gave him two Indians to carry him
in a chair upon their shoulders. The Cacique of Autiamque desiring to thrust
the Governor out of his Country, set spies over him. And an Indian coming
one night to the gate of the enclosure, a soldier that watched espied him, and
stepping behind the gate, as he came in, he gave him such a thrust, that he
fell down; and so he carried him to the Governor: and as he asked him
wherefore he came, not being able to speak, he fell down dead. The night
following the Governor commanded a soldier to give the alarm, Great
providence.
and to say that he had seen Indians, to see how ready they would be to
answer the alarm. And he did so sometimes as well there, as in other places,
when he thought that his men were careless, and reprehended such as were
slack. And as well for this cause, as in regard of doing their duty, when the
alarm was given, every one sought to be the first that should answer. They
stayed in Autiamque three months with great plenty of Maiz, French beans,
Walnuts, Prunes, and Conies: Three months abode in Autiamque.
which until that time they knew not how to catch. And in Autiamque the
Indians taught them how to take them: which was, with great sprindges, which
lifted up their feet from the ground: And the snare was made with a strong
string, whereunto was fastened a knot of a cane, which ran close about the neck
of the conie, because they should not gnaw the string. They took many in the
fields of Maiz, especially when it freesed or snowed. Frost and snow. A month
of snow.
The Christians stayed there one whole month so enclosed with snow, that they
went not out of the town: and when they wanted firewood, the Governor with
his horsemen going and coming many times to the wood, which was two crossebow
shot from the towme, made a pathway, whereby the footmen went for wood. In
this mean space, some Indians which went loose, killed many conies with their
gives, and with arrows. These conies were of two sorts, Conies of two sorts.
some were like those of Spain, and the other of the same color and fashion,
and as big as great Hares, longer, and having greater loins.

CHAP. XXVIII.
How the Governor went from Autiamque to Nilco, and from thence to Guacoya.

Upon Monday the sixth of March 1542, March 6. 1542.
the Governor departed from Autiamque to seek Nilco, which the Indians said
was near the Great river, with determination to come to the Sea, and procure
some succor of men and horses: for he had now but three hundred men of war,
and forty horses, and some of them lame, which did nothing but help to make
up the number: and for want of iron they had gone above a year unshod: and
because they were used to it in the pl^ine country, The death of Io^n O^ti^.
an^ the great (...) him being he ^^^erp^etour.
it did them no great harm. John Ortiz di^d in Autiamque; which grieved the
Governor very much: because that without an Interpretour he feared to enter
far into the land, where he might be lost. From thence forward a youth that
was taken in Cutifachiqui did serve for Interpretour, which had by that t^me
learned somewhat of the Christians language. The death of John Ortiz was so
great a mischief for the discovering inward, or going out of the land, that to
learn of the Indians, that which in four words he de^l^red, they needed a
whole day with the youth: and most commonly he understood quite contrary that
which was asked him: whereby it often happen^^ that the way that they went one
day, and sometimes two or three days, they turned back, and went astray
through the wood here and there. The Governor spent ten days in traveling
from Autiamque to a province called Ayays; Ayays. A River.
and came to a town that stood near the River that passes by Cayas and
Autiamque. There he commanded a barge to be made, wherewith he passed the
River. When he had passed the River there fell out such weather, that four
days he could not travel for snow. Great snow about the twentieth of March.
As Soon as it gave over snowing, he went three days journey through a
Wilderness, and a country so low, and so full of lakes and evil ways, that
he traveled one time a whole day in water, sometimes knee deep, sometimes to
the stirrup, and sometimes they swamme. He came to a town called Tutelpinco,
abandoned, and without Maiz: Tutelpinco.
there passed by it a lake, that entered into the river, A great lake.
which carried a great stream and force of water. Five Christians passing over
it in a periagua, which the Governor had sent with a Captain, the periagua
ouerset: some took hold on it, some on the trees that were in the lake. One
Francis Sebastian, an honest man of Villa noua de Barca Rota, was drowned
there. The Governor went a whole day along the lake seeking passage, and could
find none, nor any way that did pass to the other side. Coming again at
night to the town he found two peaceable Indians, which showed him the
passage, and which way he was to go. There they made of canes and of the
timber of houses thatched with canes, rafts wherewith they passed the lake.
Rafts wherewith they passed the lake.
They traveled three days, and came to a town of the territory of Nilco,
called Tianto. Tianto.
Th^re they took thirty Indians, and among them two principal men of this
town. The Governor sent a Captain with horsemen and footmen before to Nilco,
because the Indians might have no time to carry away the provision. They
passed through three or four great towns; Three or ^^u^e great ^^^^es.
and in the town where the Cacique was resident, which was two leagues from
the place where the Governor remained, they found many Indians with their
bows and arrows, in manner as though they would have stayed to fight, which
did compass the town; and as soon as they saw the Christians come near them
without misdoubting them, they set the Caciques house on fire, and sled over a
lake that passed near the town, through which the horses could not pass. The
next day being Wednesday the 29. of March March 29.
the Governor came to Nilco: Nilco.
he lodged with all his men in the Caciques town, which stood in a plain
field, which was inhabited for the space of a quarter of a league: and within a
league and half a league were other very great towns, V^rie great towns.
wherein was great store of Maiz, of French beans, of Walnuts, and Prunes.
This was the best inhabited country, The bent Coun^rie of Fl^rida.
that was seen in Florida, and had most store of Maiz, except Coca, and
Apalache. There came to the camp an Indian accompanied with others, and in the
Caciques name gave the Governor a mantle of Marterns skins, M^r^erns
^kinnes. A cordon of perles.
and a cordon of perles. The Governor gave him a few small Margarites, which
are certain beads much esteemed in Peru, and other things, wherewith he was
very well contented. He promised to return within two days, but never came
again: but on the contrary the Indians came by night in canoes, and carried
away all the Maiz they could, and made them cabins on the other side of the
River in the thickest of the wood, because they might flee if we should go to
seek them. The Governor, seeing he came not at the time appointed, commanded
an ambush to be laid about certain storehouses near the lake, whither the
Indians came for Maiz: where they took two Indians, who told the Governor,
that he which came to visit him, was not the Cacique, but was sent by him
under pretense to spy whether the Christians were careless, and whether they
determined to settle in that country or to go forward. Presently the Governor
sent a Captain with footmen and horsemen over the river; and in their passage
they were descried of the Indians, and therefore he could take but ten or
twelve men and women, with whom he returned to the camp. This River which
passed by Nilco, was that which passed by Cayas and Autiamque, and fell into
Rio grande, A River falling into Rio grande.
or the Great River, which passed by Pachaha and Aquixo near unto the province
of Guachoya: and the Lord thereof came up the River in canoes to make war
with him of Nilco. On his behalf there came an Indian to the Governor and said
unto him, That he was his servant, and prayed him so to hold him, and that
within two days he would come to kiss his Lordships hands: and at the time
appointed he came with some of his principal Indians, which accompanied him,
and with words of great offers and courtesy he gave the Governor a present
of many Mantles and Deeres skins. The Governor gave him some other things in
recompense, and honored him much. He asked him what towns ther^ were down
the River? He answered that he knew none other but his own: and on the other
side of the River a province of a Cacique called Quigalia So he took his
leave of the Governor and went to his own town. Within few days the
Governor determined to go to Guachoya, to learn there whether the Sea were
near, or whether there were any habitation near, where he might relieve his
company, while the brigantines were making, which he meant to send to the land
of the Chris^i^^^. As he pass^d the River of Nilco, there came in c^^^es
Indians of Guachoya up the stream, and when they saw ^im, supposing that he
came to seek them to do them some hurt, they returned down the River, and
informed the Cacique thereof: who with all his people, spoiling the town of
all that they could carry away, passed that night over to the other side of
Rio gr^nde, or the great River. The Governor sent a Captain with fifty men
in six canoes down the River, and went hims^l^e by land with the rest: he
came to Guachoya G^^choya.
upon Sunday the 17. of April: he lodged in the town of the Cacique, which
was enclosed about, and seated a crossebow shot distant from the River. Here
the River is called Tamaliscu, ^ ^^e na^^s (...) Rio grande.
and in Nilco Tapatu, and in Coca Mico, and in the port or mouth Ri.

CHAP. XXIX.
Of the message which the Governor sent to Quigalta, and of the answer which
he returned: and of the things which happened in this time.

As Soon as the Governor came to Guachoya, he sent John Danusco with as many
men as could go in the canoes up the River. For when they came down from
Nilco, they saw on the other side the River new cabins ^^de. John Danusco went
and brought the canoes laden with Maiz, French beans, Prunes, and many loaves
made of the substance of prunes. Many loaves made of prunes.
That day came an Indian to the Governor from the Cacique of Guachoya, and
said, that his Lord would come the next day. The next day they saw many canoes
come up the River, and on the other side of the great River, they assembled
together in the space of an hour: they consulted whether they should come or
not; and at length concluded to come, and crossed the River. In the^ came the
Cacique of Guachoya, and brought with him many Indians with great store of
Fish, Dogs, Deeres skins, and Mantles: And as soon as they landed, they
went to the lodging of the Governor, and presented him their gifts, and the
Cacique uttered these words:

Mighty and excellent Lord, I beseech your Lordship to pardon me the error
which I committed in absenting my self, and not tarrying in this town to have
received and served your Lordship; since, to obtain this opportunity of time,
was, and is as much as a great v^ct^rie to me. But I feared that, which I
needed not to have feared, and so did that which was not reason to do: But as
haste makes waste and I removed without deliberation; so, as soon as I
thought on it, I determined not to follow the opinion of the foolish, which is,
to continue in their error; but to imitate the wise and discreet, in changing
my counsel, and so I came to see what your Lordship will command me to do,
that I may serve you in all things that are in my power.

The Governor received him with much joy, and gave him thanks for his present
and offer. He a^ked him, whether he had any notice of the Sea. He answered,
no, nor of any towns down the River on that side; save that two leagues from
thence was one town of a principal Indian a subject of his; and on the other
side of the River, three days journey from thence down the River, was the
Province of Quigalta, which was the greatest Lord that was in that Country.
The Governor thought that the Cacique lied unto him, to rid him out of his
own towns, and sent John Danusco with eight horsemen down the River, to see
what habitation there was, and to inform himself, if there were any notice of
the Sea. He traveled eight days, and at his return he said, that in all
that time he was not able to go above 14 or 15 leagues, because of the great
creekes that came out of the River, and groves of canes, and thick woods that
were along the bancks of the River, and that he had found no habitation. The
Governor fell into great dumps to see how hard it was to get to the Sea: and
worse, because his men and horses every day diminished, being without succor
to sustain themselves in the country: and with that thought he fell sick. The
Governor falls sick of thought.
But before he took his bed he sent an Indian to the Cacique of Quigalta to
tell him, that he was the Child of the Sun, and that all the way that he
came all men obeyed and served him, that he requested him to accept of his
friendship, and come unto him; for he would be very glad to see him; and in
sign of love and obedience to bring something with him of that which in his
country was most esteemed. The Cacique answered by the same Indian:

That whereas he said he was the Child of the Sun, if he would dry up the
River he would believe him: A most witty and st^ut an^were of the Ca^^que ^f
Q^^galta.
and touching the rest, that he was wont to visit none; but rather that all
those of whom he had notice did visit him, served, obeyed and paid him tributes
willingly or perforce: therefore if he desired to see him, it were best he
should come thither: that if he came in peace, he would receive him with
special goodwill; and if in war, in like manner he would attend him in the
town where he was, and that for him or any other he would not shrink one
foot back.

By that time the Indian returned with this answer, the Governor had betaken
himself to bed, being evil handled with fevers, and was much aggrieued, that
he was not in case to pass presently the River and to seek him, to see if he
could abate that pride of his, considering the River went now very strongly in
those parts; for it was near half a league broad, and 16. fathomes deep, and
very furious, and ran with a great current; and on both sides there were many
Indians, and his power was not now so great, but that he had need to help
himself rather by slights then by force. The Indians of Guachoya came every
day with fish in such numbers, that the town was full of them. The Cacique
said, that on a certain night he of Quigalta would come to give battle to
the Governor. Which the Governor imagined that he had devised, to drive him
out of his country, and commanded him to be put in hold: and that night and
all the rest, there was good watch kept. He asked him wherefore Quigalta came
not? He said that he came, but that he saw him prepared, and therefore durst
not give the attempt: and he was earnest with him to send his Captains over
the River, and that he would aid him with many men to set upon Quigalta. The
Governor told him that as soon as he was recovered, himself would seek him
out. And seeing how many Indians came daily to the town, and what store of
people was in that country, fearing they should al conspire together and plot
some treason against him; and because the town had some open gaps which were
not made an end of enclosing, besides the gates which they went in and out by:
because the Indians should not think he feared them, he let them all a^one
vnrepaired; and commanded the horsemen to be appointed to them, and to the
gates: and all night the horsemen went the round; and two and two of every
squadron rode about, and visited the skouts that were without the town in
their standings by the passages, and the crossebowmen that kept the canoes in
the River. And because the Indians should stand in fear of them, he
determined to send a Captain to Nilco, for those of Guachoya had told him that
it was inhabited; that by using them cruelly, neither the one nor the other
should presume to assail him; and he sent Nunnez de Touar with fifteen
horsemen, and John de Guzman Captain of the footmen with his company in
canoes up the River. The Cacique of Guach^ya sent for many canoes and many
warlike Indians to go with the Christians: and the Captain of the Christians,
called Nunnez de Tou^r, went by land with his horsemen, and two leagues before
he came to Nilco he stayed for John de Guzman, and in that place they passed
the River by night: the horsemen came first, and in the morning by break of
day in sight of the town they lighted upon a spy; which as soon as he
perceived the Christians, crying out amain fled to the town to g^ue warning.
Nunnez de Touar and his company made such speed, that before the Indians of
the town could fully come out, they were upon them: it was chan^i^^ ground
that was inhabited, which was about a quarter of a l^ague. There were about
five or six thousand people in the town: (...)
and, as many people came out of the houses, and fled from one house to
another, and many Indians came flocking together from all parts, there was
never a horseman that was not alone among many. The Captain had commanded that
they should not spare the life of any male. Their disorder was so great, that
there was no Indian that shot an arrow at any Christian. The shreekes of women
and children were so great, that they made the ears deaf of those that
followed them. There were slain an hundred Indians, little more or less: and
many were wounded with great wounds, whom they suffered to escape to strike a
terror in the rest that were not there. There were some so cruel and
butcherlike, that they killed old and young, and all that they met, though they
made no resistance: and those which presumed of themselves for their valor,
and were taken for such, brake through the Indians, bearing down many with
their stirrops and breasts of their horses; and some they wounded with their
lances, and so let them go: and when they saw any youth or woman they took
them, and delivered them to the footmen. These men's sins by Gods permission
lighted on their own heads who, because they would seem valiant, became
cruel; showing themselves extreme cowards in the sight of all men, when as
most need of valor was required, and Chap. 37.
afterward they came to a shameful death. Of the Indians of Nilco were taken
prisoners, fourscore women and children, and much spoil. The Indians of
Guachoya kept back before they came at the town, and stayed without, beholding
the success of the Christians with the men of Nilco. And when they saw them
put to flight, and the horsemen busy in killing of them, they hastened to the
houses to rob, and filled their canoes with the spoil of the goods; and
returned to Guachoya before the Christians; and wondering much at the sharp
dealing which they had seen them use toward the Indians of Nilco, they told
their Cacique all that had passed with great astonishment.

CHAP. XXX.
Of the death of the Adelantado Fernando de Soto: And how Luys Moscoso de
Aluarado was elected Governor in his stead.

THe Governor felt in himself that the hour approached, wherein he was to
leave this present life, and called for the Kings officers, Captains and
principal persons, to whom he made a speech, saying:

That now he was to go to give an account before the presence of God of all
his ^ife past: and since it pleased him t^ take him in such a time, and that
the time was come that he knew his death, that he his most vnw^rthie servant
^^d yield him many thanks therefore; and d^sired all that were present and
absent (whom he confessed himself to be much beholding unto for their singular
virtues, love and loy^ltie, which himself had well tried in the travels, which
they had suffered, which always in his mind he did hope to satisfy and
reward, when it should please God to give him rest, with more prosperity of
his estate,) that they would pray to God for him, that for his mercy he would
forgive him his sins, and receive his soul into eternal glory: and that
they would qu^^ and free him of the charge which he had over them, and ought
unto them all, and that they would pardon him for some wrongs which they might
have received of him: And to avoid some division, which upon his death might
fall out upon the choice of his successor, he requested them to elect a
principal person, and able to govern, of whom all should like well; and when
he was elected, they should swear before him to obey him: and that he would
thank them very much in so doing; because the grief that he had, would
somewhat be assuaged, and the pain that he felt, because he left them in so
great confusion, to wit, in leaving them in a strange Country, where they knew
not where they were.

Baltasar de Gallegos answered in the name of all the rest: And first of all
comforting him, he set before his eyes how short the life of this world was,
and with how many troubles and miseries it is accompanied, and how God showed
him a singular favor which soonest left it: telling him many other things fit
for such a time. And for the last point, that since it pleased God to take him
to himself, although his death did justly grieve them much, yet as well he, as
all the rest, ought of necessity to conform themselves to the will of God. And
touching the Governor which he commanded they should elect, he besought him,
that it would please his Lordship to name him which he thought fit, and him
they would obey. And presently he named Luys de Moscoso de Aluarado his
Captain general. And presently he was sworn by all that were present and
elected for Governor. The next day, The death of Don Ferdinando de Soto the
21. of May, 1542 at Guacoya.
being the 21. of May, 1542. departed out of this life, the valorous, virtuous,
and valiant Captain, Don Fernando de Soto, Governor of Cuba, and Adelantado
of Florida: whom fortune advanced, as it uses to do others, that he might
have the higher fall. He departed in such a place, and at such a time, as in his
sickness he had but little comfort: and the danger wherein all his people were
of perishing in that Country, which appeared before their eyes, was cause
sufficient, why every one of them had need of comfort, and why they did not
visit nor accompany him as they ought to have done. Luys de Moscoso determined
to conceal his death from the Indians, because Ferdinando de Soto had made
them believe, That the Christians were immortal; and also because they took
him to be hardy, wise, and valiant: and if they should know that he was dead,
they would be bold to set upon the Christians, though they lived peaceably by
them. In regard of their disposition, and because they were nothing constant,
and believed all that was told them, the Adelantado made them believe, that he
knew some things that passed in secret among themselves, without their
knowledge, how, or in what manner he came by them: and that the figure which
appeared in a glass, A w^tt^e st^atagem.
which he showed them, did tell him whatsoever they practiced and went about:
and therefore neither in word nor deed durst they attempt any thing that might
be prejudicial unto him.

As Soon as he was dead, Luis de Moscoso commanded to put him secretly in an
house, where he remained three days: and remoouing him from thence, commanded
him to be buried in the night at one of the gates of the town within the
wall. And as the Indians had seen him sick, and missed him, so did they
suspect what might be. And passing by the place where he was buried, seeing
the earth moved, they looked and spoke one to another. Luys de Moscoso
understanding of it, commanded him to be taken up by night, and to cast a great
deal ^f s^^^d into the mantles, wherein he was winded up, wherein he was
carried in a canoe, and thrown into the midst of the River. The Cacique of
Guachoya inquired for him, demanding what was become of his brother and Lord,
the Governor: Luys de Moscoso told him, that he was gone to heaven, as many
other times he did: and because he was to stay there certain days, he had
left him in his place. The Cacique thought with himself that he was dead; and
commanded two young and well proportioned Indians to be brought thither; and
said, This is also the custom of the old Tartars.
that ye use of that Country was, when any Lord died, to kill Indians to wait
upon him, and serve him by the way: and for that purpose by his commandment
were those come thither: and prayed Luys de Moscoso to command them to be
beheaded, that they might attend and serve his Lord and brother. Luys de
Moscoso told him, that the Governor was not dead, but gone to heaven, and that
of his own Christian soldiers, he had taken such as he needed to serve him,
and prayed him to command those Indians to be loosed, and not to use any such
bad custom from thencefoorth: straightway he commanded them to be loosed, and
to get them home to their houses. And one of them would not go; saying, that
he would not serve him, that without desert had judged him to death, but that
he would serve him as long as he lived, which had saved his life.

Luys de Moscoso caused all the goods of the Governor to be sold at an outcrie:
to wit, two men slaves, and two women slaves, and three horses, and 700 hogs.
Seven hundred hogs.
For every slave or horse, they gave two or three thousand ducats: which were
to be paid at the first melting of gold or silver, or at the division of their
portion of inheritance. And they entered into bonds, though in the Country
there was not wherewith, to pay it within a year after, and put in sureties
for the same. Such as in Spain had no goods to bind, gave two hundred ducats
for an hog, giving assurance after the same manner. Those which had any goods in
Spain, bought with more fear, and bought the less. From that time forward,
most of the company had swine, and brought them up, and fed upon them; and
observed Fridaies and Saturdaies, and the euenings of feasts, which before they
did not. For sometimes in two or three months they did eat no flesh, and
whenever they could come by it, they did eat it.

CHAP. XXXI.
How the Governor Luys de Moscoso departed from Guachoya, and went to
Chaguate; and from thence to Aguacay.

SOme were glad of the death of Don Ferdinando de Soto, holding for certain,
that Luys de Moscoso (which was given to his ease) would rather desire to be
among the Christians at rest, then to continue the labors of the war in
subduing and discovering of Countries; whereof they were already weary,
seeing the small profit that insued thereof. The Governor commanded the
Captains and principal persons to meet to consult and determine what they
should do. And being informed what peopled habitation was round about, he
understood that to the West, the Country was most inhabited, and that down
the River beyond Quigalta was uninhabited, and had little store of food He
desired them all, that every one would give his opinion in writing, and set
his hand to it: that they might resolve by general consent, whether they
should go down the River, or enter into the maine land. All were of opinion,
Their general resolution to travel by land Westward.
that it was best to go by land toward the West, because Nueua Espanna was that
way; holding the voyage by sea more dangerous, and of greater hazard, because
they could make no ship of any strength to abide a storm, neither had they
Master, nor Pilot, Compass, nor Chart, neither knew they how far the sea was
off, nor had any notice of it; nor whether the River did make any great turning
into the land, or had any great fall from the rocks, where all of them might be
cast away. And some which had seen the sea-chart, did find, that from the
place where they were by the sea coast to Noua Espanna, might be 400. leagues,
little more or less; and said, that though they went somewhat about by land in
seeking a peopled Country, if some great wilderness which they could not
pass did not hinder the^, by spending that summer in travel, finding
provision to pass the winter in some peopled Country, that the next summer
after they might come to some Christian land, and that it might fortune in
their travel by land to find some rich Country, where they might do
themselves good. The Governor, although he desired to get out of Florida in
shorter time, seeing the inconveniences they laid before him, in traveling by
sea, determined to follow that which seemed good to them all. On Monday the
fifth of June, The fifth o^ June.
he departed from Guachoya. The Cacique gave him a guide to Chaguate, and
stayed at home in his own town. They passed through a Province called
Catalte: Catalt^.
and having passed a wilderness of six days journey, the twentieth day of ye
month he came to Chaguate. ^^aguate.
The Cacique of this Province had visited the Governor Don Ferdinando de Soto
at Autiamque, whither he brought him presents of skins, and mantles and salt.
And a day before Luys de Moscoso came to his town, we lost a Christian that
was sick; which he suspected that the Indians had slain. He sent the
Cacique word, that he should command his people to seek him up, and send him
unto him, and that he would hold him, as he did, for his friend: and if he did
not, that neither he, nor his, should escape his hands, and that he would set
his Country on fire. Presently the Cacique came unto him, and brought a great
present of mantles and skins, and the Christian that was lost, and made this
speech following:

Right excellent Lord, I would not deserve that conceit which you had of me,
for all the treasure of the world. What enforced me to go to visit and serve
the excellent Lord Governor you father in Autiamque, which you should have
remembered, where I offered my self with all loyalty, faith and love, during
my life to serve and obey him? What then could be the cause, I having received
favors of him, and neither you nor he having done me any wrong, that should
move me to do the thing, which I ought not? Believe this of me, that neither
wrong, nor any worldly interest, was able to make me to have done it, nor shall
be able to blind me. But as in this life it is a natural course, that after
one pleasure, many sorrewes do follow: so by your ind^gnation, fortune would
moderate the joy, which my heart conceiueth with your presence; and that I
should err, where I thought surest to have hit the mark; in harboring this
Christian which was lost, and using him in such manner, as he may tell
himself, thinking that herein I did you service, with purpose to deliver him
unto you in Chaguate, and to serve you to the uttermost of my power. If I
deserve punishment for this, I will receive it at your hands, as from my Lord,
as if it were a favor. For the love which I did bear to the excellent
Governor, and which I bear to you has no limit. And like as you give me
chastisement, so will you also show me favor. And that which now I crave of
you is this, to declare your will unto me, and those things, wherein I may be
able to do you the most and best service.

The Governor answered him, that because he did not find him in that town,
he was incensed against him, thinking he had absented himself, as others had
done: But seeing he now knew his loyalty and love, he would always hold him
as a brother, and favor him in all his affairs. The Cacique went with him to
the town where he resided, which was a days journey from thence. They passed
through a small town, A small town.
where there was a lake, where the Indians made salt: Salt made of salt springs
of water.
and the Christians made some one day while they rested there, of a brackish
water, which sprang near the town in ponds like fountains. The Governor
stayed in Chaguate six days. There he was informed of the habitation that was
toward the West. They told him, that three days journey from thence was a
Province called Aguacay. The day that he departed from Chaguate, a Christian,
called Francisco de Guzman, the base son of a Gentleman of Civil, stayed
behind, and went to the Indians, with an Indian woman which he kept as his
concubine, for fear he should be punished for gaming debts, that he did owe.
The Governor had traveled two days before he missed him; he sent the Cacique
word to seek him up, and to send him to Aguacay, whither he traveled: which
he did not perform. From the Cacique of Aguacay, Aguacay.
before they came into the Country, there met him on the way 15. Indians with
a present of skins, fish and roasted venison. The Governor came to his town
on Wednesday, the fourth of Iulie. He found the town without people, and
lodged in it: he stayed there about a day; during which, he made some roades,
and took many men and women. There they had knowledge of the South Sea.
Knowledge of the South Sea.
Here there was great store of salt made of sand, which they gather in a vain
of ground like peeble stones. Store of Salt made.
And it was made as they make salt in Cayas.

CHAP. XXXII.
How the Governor went from Aguacay to Naguatex, and what happened unto him.

THe same day that the Governor departed from Aguacay he lodged in a small
town A small town.
subject to the Lord of that province. The Camp pitched hard by a lake of salt
water; and that evening they made some salt there. The day following he lodged
between two mountains in a thin grove of wood. Salt made here.
The next day he came to a small town called Pato. Pato.
The fourth day after his departure from Aguacay he came to the first
habitation of a province called Amaye. Amaye.
There an Indian was taken, which said that from thence to Naguatex was a day
and a halfes journey; which they traveled, finding all the way inhabited
places. Having passed the peopled country of Amaye, (...)
on Saturday the 20. of Iulie they pitched their Camp at noone between Amaye
and Naguatex along the corner of a grove of very fair trees. In the same place
certain Indians were discovered, which came to view them. The horsemen went
out to them, and killed six, and took two; whom the Governor asked, wherefore
they came? They said, to know what people he had, and what order they kept;
and that the Cacique of Naguatex their Lord had sent them, and that he, with
other Caciques which came to aid him, determined that day to bid him battle.
While they were occupied in these questions and answers, there came many
Indians by two ways in two squadrons: and when they saw they were descried,
giving a great cry they assaulted the Christians each squadron by it self:
but seeing what resistance the Christians made them, they turned their backs
and betook themselves to flight, in which many of them lost their lives; and
most of the horsemen following them in chase, careless of the Camp, other two
squadrons of Indians, which lay in ambush, set upon the Christians that were in
the Camp, which also they resisted, who also had their reward as the first.
After the flight of the Indians, and that the Christians were retired, they
heard a great noise a crossebow shot from the place where they were. The
Governor sent twelve horsemen to see what it was. They found six Christians,
four footmen and two horsemen, among many Indians; the horsemen defending the
footmen with great labor. These being of them that chased the first two
squadrons, had lost themselves, and coming to recover the Camp fell among
those with whom they were fighting: and so they, and those that came to succor
the^, slew many of the Indians, and brought one alive to the Camp: whom the
Governor examined, who they were that came to bid him battle. He told him,
that they were the Cacique of Naguatex, and of Amaye, and another of a province
called Hacanac, Hacanac.
a Lord of great countries and many subjects; and that the Cacique of Naguatex
came for Captain and chiefest of them all. The Governor commanded his right
arm and nose to be cut off, and sent him to the Cacique of Naguatex, charging
him to tell him, that the next day he would be in his country to destroy
him; and if he would withstand his entrance, he should stay for him. That
night he lodged there; and the next day he came to the habitation of Naguatex,
Naguatex.
which was very scattering: he inquired where the Caciques chief town was?
They told him that it was on the other side of a River, A River.
that passed thereby: he traveled thitherward, and came unto it: and on the
other side he saw many Indians, that tarried for him, making show as though
they would defend the passage. And because he knew not whether it could be
waded, nor where the passage was; and that some Christians and horses were
hurt; that they might have time to recover, he determined to rest certain
days in the town where he was. So he pitched his camp a quarter of a league
from the River, because the weather was very hot, near unto the town, in a
thin grove of very fair and hie trees near a brooks side: and in that
place were certain Indians taken; whom he examined, whether the River were
wadeable or no? (...).
They said, yea, at some times, and in some places. Within ten days after he
sent two Captains with fifteen horsemen a piece upward and down the River
with Indians to show them where they should go ever, to see what habitation
was on the other side: And the Indians withstood them both, defending the
passage of the River as far as they were able, but they passed in despite of
them: They pass the River.
and on the other side of the River they saw great habitation, and great store
of victuals; and with these news returned to the Camp.

CHAP. XXXIII.
How the Cacique of Naguatex came to visit the Governor: and how the
Governor departed from Naguatex and came to Nondacao.

THe Governor sent an Indian from Naguatex where he lay, to command the
Cacique to come to serve and obey him, and that he would forgive him all that
was past; and if he came not, that he would seek him, and give him such
punishment as he had deserved for that which he had done against him. Within
two days the Indian returned, and said that the Cacique would come the next
day: which, the same day when he came, sent many Indians before him, among whom
^here were some principal men: he sent them to see what countenance they
found in the Governor, to resolve with himself whether he should go or not.
The Indians let him understand, that he was coming, and went away presently:
and the Cacique came within two hours accompanied with many of his men: they
came all in a rank one before another on both sides, leaving a lane in the
midst where he came. They came where the Governor was, all of them weeping
after the manner of Tulla, Tulla not far from Naguatex, Eastwa^d.
which was not far from thence toward the East. The Cacique made his due
obedience, and this speech following:

Right high and mighty Lord, whom all the world ought to serve and obey, I was
bold to appear before your Lordship, having committed so heinous and
abominable an act, as only for me to have imagined, deserved to be punished;
trusting in your greatness, that although I deserve to obtain no pardon, yet
for your own sake only you will use clemency toward me, considering how small
I am in comparison of your Lordship; and not to think upon my weaknesses,
which, to my grief and for my greater good, I have known. And I believe that
you and yours are immortal; and that your Lordship is Lord of the land of
nature, seeing that you subdue all things, and they obey y u, even the very
hearts of men. For when I beheld the slaughter and destruction of my men in the
battle, which, through mine ignorance, and the counsel of a brother of mine,
which died in the same, I gave your Lordship, presently I repented me in my
heart of the error, which I had committed; and desired to serve and obey you:
and to this end I come, that your Lordship may chastise and command me as your
own.

The Governor answered him, that he forgave him all which was past, that from
thenceforth he should do his duty, and that he would hold him for his friend,
and that he would favor him in all things. Within four days he departed
thence, and coming to the River he could not pass, The ^^uer g^^^e ^^pass^le
(...) at Naguatex.
because it was grown very big; which seemed to him a thing of admiration,
being at that time that it was, and since it had not rained a month before.
The Indians said, that it increased many times after that manner without
raining in all the country. Co^^^^res ^a S^a to the ^^^^a^d.
It was supposed, that it might be the tide that came into it. It was learned
that the flood came always from above, and that the Indians of all that country
had no knowledge of the Sea. The Governor returned unto the place where he had
lodged before: and understanding within eight days after that the River was
passeable, he departed. He passed over and found the town without people: A
town.
he lodged in the field, and sent the Cacique word to come unto him, and to
bring him a guide to go forward. And some days being past, seeing the Cacique
came not, nor sent any body, he sent two Captains sundry ways to burn the
towns, Towns burned.
and to take such Indians as they could find: They burnt great store of
victuals, and took many Indians. The Cacique seeing the hurt that he received
in his country, sent six principal Indians with three men for guides, which
knew the language of the country, through which the Governor was to pass.
He departed presently from Naguatex, and within three days journey came to a
town of four or five houses, which belonged to the Cacique of that province,
which is called Nissoone: Nissoone.
it was evil inhabited and had little Maiz. Two days journey forward the
guides which guided the Governor, if they were to go Westward, guided him to
the East; and sometimes went up and down through very great woods out of the
way. The Governor commanded them to be hanged upon a tree: and a woman that
they took in Nissoone guided him, and went back again to seek the way. In
two days he came to another miserable town, called Lacane: Lacane.
an Indian was taken in that place, that said, that the country of Nondacao
Nondacao.
was a country of great habitation, and the houses scattering the one from the
other, as they use to be in mountains, and had great store of Maiz. The
Cacique came with his men weeping, like them of Naguatex: for this is their use
in token of obedience: he made him a present of much fish, and offered to do
what he would command him. He took his leave, and gave him a guide to the
province of Soacatino.

CHAP. XXXIIII.
How the Governor went from Nondacao to Soacatino and Guasco, and passed
through a desert, from whence, for want of a guide, and an interpretour, he
returned to Nilco.

THe Governor departed from Nondacao toward Soacatino, and in five days
journey came to a Province called Aays. Aays.
The Indians which inhabited it, had no notice of the Christians: but as soon
as they saw that they entered into their country, they assembled themselves: and
as they came together 50. or 100. they came forth to fight: while some fought,
others came and charged our men another way, and while they followed some,
others followed them. The fight lasted the greatest part of the day, till they
came to their town. A town.
Some horses and men were wounded, but not to any hurt of their traveling: for
there was no wound that was dangerous. There was a great spoil made of the
Indians. That day that the Governor departed from thence, the Indian that
guided him said, that in Nondacao he had heard say, that the Indians of
Soacatino had seen other Christians, whereof they all were very glad: thinking
it might be true, and that they might have entered into those parts by Nueua
Espanna; and that if it were so, it was in their own hand to go out of
Florida, if they found nothing of profit: for they feared they should lose
themselves in some wilderness. This Indian led him two days out of the way. The
Governor commanded to torture him. He said, that the Cacique of Nondacao, his
Lord, had commanded him to guide them so, because they were his enemies, and
that he was to do as his Lord commanded him. The Governor commanded him to
be cast to the dogs: and another guided him to Soacatino, Soacatino.
whither he came the day following. It was a very poor Country: there was
great want of Maiz in that place. He asked the Indians, whether they knew of
any other Christians. They said, that a little from thence toward the South
they heard they were. He traveled 20. days through a Country evil
inhabited, 20. days travel toward the South.
where they suffered great scarcity and trouble. For that little Maiz which
the Indians had, they had hidden and buried in the woods, where the Christians,
after they were well wearied with their travel, at the end of their journey
went to seek by digging what they should eat. At last, coming to a Province
that was called Guasco, Guasco: here they found some Turkey stones, and mantles
of cotton wool. Chap. 35.
they found Maiz, wherewith they loaded their horses, and the Indians that they
had. From thence they went to another town called Naquiscoca. Naquiscoca.
The Indians said, they had no notice of any other Christians. The Governor
commanded to torment them. They said, that they came first to another Lordship,
which was called Nacacahoz, Nacacahoz.
and from thence returned again to the West, from whence they came. The
Governor came in two days to Nacacahoz: Some women were taken there: among
whom there was one, which said, that she had seen Christians, and had been
taken by them, and had run away. The Governor sent a Captain with 15.
horsemen to the place where the woman said she had seen them, to see if there
were any sign of horses, or any token of their being there. After they had
gone three or four leagues, the woman that guided them said, that all that she
had told them was untrue. And so they held all the rest that the Indians had
said, of seeing Christians in the land of Florida. And, because the Country
that way was poor of Maiz, and toward the West, there was no notice of any
habitation, they returned to Guasco. They returned to Gua^co.
The Indians told them there, that 10. days journey from thence toward the
West, was a River called Daycao; whither they went sometimes a hunting and
killing of Dear: and that they had seen people on the other side, but knew
not what habitation was there. There the Christians took such Maiz as they
found and could carry, and, going 10. days journey through a wilderness, The
River of Daycao: which see^^th to be R^o del oro.
they came to the River which the Indians had told them of. Ten horsemen, which
the Governor had sent before, passed over the same, and went in a way that led
to the River, and lighted upon a company of Indians that dwelt in very little
cabins: who, as soon as they saw them, took themselves to flight, leaving that
which they had; all which was nothing but misery and poverty. The Country
was so poor, that among them all there was not found half a peck of Maiz. The
horsemen took two Indians, and returned with them to the River, where the
Governor stayed for them. He sought to learn of them what habitation was
toward the West. There was none in the Camp that could understand their
language. The Governor assembled the Captains and principal persons, to
determine with their advice what they should do. And the most part said, that
they thought it best to return back to Rio grande, or the Great River of
Guachoya; because that in Nilco and thereabout was store of Maiz: saying, that
they would make pinaces that winter, and the next summer pass down the River
to the seaward in them, and coming to the Sea they would go along the coast
to Nueua Espanna. For though it seemed a doubtful thing and difficult, by that
which they had already alleged, yet it was the last remedy they had. For by
land they could not go for want of an Interpretour. No trauell^ng by land
without an interpretour.
And they held, that the country beyond the River of Daycao, where they were,
was that which Cabeca de Vaca mentioned in his relation that he passed of the
Indians, which lived like the Alarbes, having no settled place, and fed upon
Tunas and roots of the fields, and wild beasts that they killed. Which if it
were so, if they should enter into it and find no victuals to pass the
winter, they could not choose but perish. For they were entered already into the
beginning of October: and if they stayed any longer, they were not able to
return for rain and snowes, nor to sustain themselves in so poor a
country. The Governor (that desired long to see himself in a place where he
might sleep his full sleep, rather then to conquer and govern a country
where so many troubles presented themselves) presently returned back that same
way that he came.

CHAP. XXXV.
How they returned to Nilco, and came to Minoya, where they agreed to make
ships to depart out of the land of Florida.

WHen that which was determined was published in the Camp, there were many
that were greatly grieved at it: for they held the Sea voyage as doubtful, for
the evil means they had, and of as great danger, as the traveling by land:
and they hoped to find some rich country before they came to the land of the
Christians, by that which Cabeca de Vaca had told the Emperor: and that was
this; That after he had found clothes made of cotton wool, Gold, silver and
pr^ciou^ (...).
he saw gold and silver, and stones of great value. And they had not yet come
wh^re he had been. For until that place he always traveled by the Sea
coast: and they traveled far within the land; and that going toward the
West, of necessity they should come where he had been. For he said, That in a
certain place he traveled many days, and entered into the land toward the
North. And in Guasco they had already found some Turkey stones, Tu^kie stone
and man les (...).
and mantles of cotton wool: which the Indians signified by signs that they
had from the West: and that holding that course they should draw near to the
land of the Christians. But though they were much discontented with it, and it
grieved many to go backward, which would rather have adventured their lives
and have died in the land of Florida, then to have gone poor out of it: yet
were they not a sufficient part to hinder that which was determined, because
the principal men agreed with the Governor. And afterward there was one that
said, he would put out one of his own eyes, to put out another of Luis de
Moscoso; because it would grieve him much to see him prosper: because as well
himself as others of his friends had crossed that which he durst not have
done, seeing that within two days he should leave the government. From
Daycao, where now they were, to Rio grande, or the Great River, was 150
leagues: 150 leagues between the River of Daycao, and Rio grande.
which unto that place they had gone Westward. And by the way as they returned
back they had much ado to find Maiz to eat: for where they had passed, the
country was destroyed: and some little Maiz that was left the Indians had
hidden. The towns which in Naguatex Naguatex.
they had burned (whereof it repented them) were repaired again, and the
houses full of Maiz. This country is well inhabited and plentiful. In that
place are vessels made of clay, Fine earthen vessels.
which differ very little from those of Estremoz, or Monte-mor. In Chaguate
Chaguate.
the Indians by commandment of the Cacique came peaceably, and said, that the
Christian which remained there would not come. The Governor wrote unto him,
and sent him ink and paper that he might answer. The substance of the words
of the letter was to declare unto him his determination, which was, to go out
of the land of Florida, and to put him in remembrance that he was a Christian,
that he would not remain in the subjection of Infidels, that he pardoned him
the fault which he had done in going away to the Indians, that he should come
unto him: and if they did stay him, that he would advertise him thereof by
writing. The Indian went with the letter, and came again without any more
answer, then, on the back side, his name and his seal, that they might know
he was alive. The Governor sent twelve horsemen to seek him: but he, which
had his spies, so hid himself, that they could not find him. For want of Maiz
the Governor could not stay any longer to seek him. He departed from
Chaguete, and passed the River by Aays; A^ys.
going down by it he found a town called Chilano, C^ila^o.
which as yet they had not seen. They came to Nilco, N^l^^.
and found so little Maiz, as could not suffice till they made their ships;
because the Christians, being in Guachoya in the seed time, the Indians for
fear of them durst not come to sow the grounds of Nilco: and they knew not
thereabout any other country where any Maiz was: and that was the most
fruitful soil that was thereaway, and where they had most hope to find it.
Every one was confounded, and the most part thought it bad c^uns^ll to come
back from the River of Daycao, and not to have followed their fortune, going
that way that went over land. For by Sea it seemed impossible to save
themselves, unless God would work a miracle for them: for there was neither
Pilot, nor Sea-chart, neither did they know where the River entered into the
Sea, neither had they notice of it, neither had they any thing wherewith to
make sails, nor any store of Enequem, which is a grass whereof they make
Okam, which grew there: and that which they found they saved to calke the
Pinaces withal, neither had they any thing to pitch them withal: neither
could they m^ke ships of such substance, but that any storm would put the^ in
great danger: and they feared much it would fall out with them, as it did with
Pamphilo de Naruaez, which was cast away upon that coast: And above all other
it troubled them most, that they could find no Maiz: for without it they could
not be sustained, nor could do any thing that they had need of. All of them
were put to great confusion. Their chief remedy was to commit themselves to
God, and to beseeeh him that he would direct them the way that they might save
their lives. And it pleased him of his goodness, that the Indians of Nilco
came peaceably, and told them, that two days journey from thence, near unto
the Great River, were two towns, whereof the Christians had no notice, and
that the province was called Minoya, and was a fruitful soil: that, whether
at this present there was any Maiz or no, they knew not, because they had war
with them: but that they would be very glad with the favor of the Christians
to go and spoil them. The Governor sent a Captain thither with horsemen and
footmen, and the Indians of Nilco with him. He came to Minoya, Minoya. Two
great ^ownes.
and found two great towns seated in a plain and open soil, half a league
distant, one in sight of another, and in them he took many Indians, and found
great store of Maiz. Presently he lodged in one of them, and sent word to the
Governor what he had found: wherewith they were all exceeding glad. They
departed from Nilco in the beginning of December; The beginning of December.
and all that way, and before from Chilano, they endured much trouble: for they
passed through many waters, and many times it rained with a Northren wind,
Rain wi^h Northren wind ^xceeding cold.
and was exceeding cold, so that they were in the open field with water over
and underneath them: and when at the end of their days journey they found dry
ground to rest upon, they gave great thanks to God. With this trouble almost
all the Indians that served them died. And after they were in Minoya, many
Christians also died: and the most part were sick of great and dangerous
diseases, which had a spice of the lethargy. At this place died Andrew de
Vasconcelos, The death of Andrew Vasconcelos.
and two Portugals of Eluas, which were very near him: which were brethren,
and by their surname called Sotis. The Christians lodged in one of the towns,
which they liked best: which was fensed about, and distant a quarter of a
league from the Great River. The Maiz that was in the other town was brought
thither; and in all it was esteemed to be 6000. han^gs or bushels. And there
was the best timber to make ships, that they had seen in all the land of
Florida: wherefore all of them gave God great thanks for so singular a favor,
and hoped that that which they desired would take effect, which was, that they
might safely be conducted into the land of the Christians.

CHAP. XXXVI.
How there were seven Brigandines builded, and how they departed from Minoya.

As Soon as they came to Minoya, the Governor commanded them to gather all the
chains together, which every one had to lead Indians in; and to gather all the
iron which they had for their provision, and all the rest that was in the Camp:
and to set up a forge to make nails, and commanded them to cut down timber
for the brigandines. And a Portugal of Ceuta, who having bin a prisoner in
Fez, had learned to saw timber with a long saw, which for such purposes they
had carried with them, did teach others, which helped him to saw timber. And a
Genowis, whom it pleased God to preserve (for without him they had never come
out of the country: for there was never another that could make ships but he)
with four or five other Biscaine carpenters, which hewed his plancks and other
timbers, made the brigandines: And two calkers, the one of Genua, the other of
Sardinia did calke them with the tow of an herb like hemp, Enequen is an
herb like Hemp.
whereof before I have made mention, which there is named Enequen. And because
there was not enough of it, they calked them with the flax of the Country,
Flax of the country.
and with the mantles, which they rauelled for that purpose. A cooper which
they had among them fell sick, and was at the point of death: and there was
none other that had any skill in that trade: it pleased God to send him his
health: And albeit he was very weak, and could not labor; yet 15. days
before they departed, he made for every brigandine two half hogs heads, which
the mariners call quarterets, because four of them hold a pipe of water. The
Indians which dwelt two days journey above the River in a Province called
Taguanate, Taguanate two days ^^urney above Minoya.
and likewise those of Nilco and Guacoya, and others their neighbors seeing
the brigandines in making, thinking, because their places of refuge are in the
water, that they were to go to seek them: and because the Governor demanded
mantles of them, as necessary for sails, came many times, and brought many
mantles, and great store of fish. And for certain it seemed that God was
willing to favor them in so great necessity, moving the minds of the Indians
to bring them: for to go to take them, they were never able. For in the town
where they were, as soon as winter came in, they were so enclosed and compassed
with water, yt they could go no farther by land, then a league, and a league
and an half. And if they would go father, they could carry no horses, The
great use of horses.
and without the^ they were not able to fight with the Indians, because they
were many: and so many for so many on foot they had the advantage of them by
water and by land, because they were more apt and lighter, and by reason of the
disposition of the Country, which was according to their desire for the use of
their war. They brought also some cords, and those which wanted for cables
were made of the barks of Mulberrie trees. Mulberrie trees.
They made stirrops of wood, and made ankers of their stirrops. In the month
of March, when it had not rained a month before, the River grew so big, that
it came to Nilco, The mighty increasi^g of the (...) for two mon^ths ^pace, to
wit, all March an^ Ap^^ll.
which was nine leagues off: and on the other side, the Indians said, that it
reached other nine leagues into the land. In the town where the Christians
were, which was somewhat high ground, where they could best go, the water
reached to the stirrops. They made certain rafts of timber, and laid many
boughs upon them, whereon they set their hors^s, and in the houses they did the
like. But seeing that n^thing prevailed, they went up to the lofts: and if they
went out of the houses, it was in canoes, or on horsebac^ in those places where
the ground was hiest. So they were two months, and could do nothing, during
which time the River decreased not. The Indians ceased not to come unto the
brigantines as they were wont, and came in canoes. At that time the Governor
feared they would set upon him. He commanded his men to take an Indian
secretly of those that came to the town, and to stay him till the rest were
gone: and they took one. The Governor commanded him to be put to torture, to
make him confess, whether the Indians did practice any treason or no. He
confessed that the Caciques of Nilco, The grand conspiracy of the Indians
against the Christians.
Guachoya, and Taguanate, and others, which in all were about 20. Caciques, with
a great number of people, determined to come upon him; and that three days
before, they would send a great present of fish to color their great treason
and malice, and on the very day they would send some Indians before with
another present: And these with those which were our slaves, Note well.
which were of their conspiracy also, should set the houses on fire, and first
of all possess themselves of the lances which stood at the doors of the
houses; and the Caciques with all their men should be near the town in
ambush in the wood, and when they saw the fire kindled, should come, and make
an end of the conquest. The Governor commanded the Indian to be kept in a
chain, and the selfsame day that he spoke of, there came 30. Indians with
fish. He commanded their right hands to be cut off, Thirty Indians of the
Cacique o Guac^^ya have their righ^ hands cut off.
and sent them so back to the Cacique of Guachoya, whose men they were. He
sent him word, that he and the rest should come when they would, for he desired
nothing more, and that he should know, that they thought not any thing which
he knew not before they thought of it. Hereupon they all were put in a very
great fear: And the Caciques of Nilco and Taguanate came to excuse themselves:
and a few days after came he of Guachoya, and a principal Indian and his
subject, said, he knew by certain^ information, That the Caciques of Nilco and
Taguanate were agreed to come and make war upon the Christians. As Soon as ye
Indians came from Nilco, the Governor examined them, and they confessed it was
true. He delivered them presently to the principal man of Guachoya, which
drew them out of the town and killed them. Another day came some from
Taguanate, The right hands and noses of traitors cut off.
and confessed it likewise. The Governor commanded their right hands and noses
to be cut off, and sent them to the Cacique, wherewith they of Guachoya
remained very well contented: and they came oftentimes with presents of mantles
and fish, and hogs, Hogg^s in Flo^ida.
which bred in the Country of some swine that were lost by the way the last
year. As Soon as the waters were slaked, they persuaded the Governor to send
men to Taguanate: They came and brought canoes, wherein the footmen were
conveyed down the River, and a Captain with horsemen went by land; and the
Indians of Guachoya, which guided him, till they came to Taguanate, Taguanate
taken.
assaulted the town, and took many men and women, and mantles, which with
those that they had already were sufficient to supply their want. The
brigandines being finished in the month of June, June. The River increases
but once a were when the snowes do me^^ in March and April. A ^^^^calous
^^^ent.
the Indians having told us, That the River increased but once a year, when
the snowes did melt, in the time wherein I mentioned it had already increased,
being now in summer, and having not rained a long time, it pleased God, that
the flood came up to the town to seek the brigandines, from whence they
carried them by water to the River. Which, if they had gone by land, had been
in danger of breaking and splitting their keeles, and to be all undone;
because that for want of iron, the spikes were short, and the planckes and
timber were very weak. The Indians of Minoya, during the time that they were
there, came to serve them (being driven thereunto by necessity) that of the
Maiz which they had taken from them, they would bestow some crummes upon them.
And because the Country was fertile, and the people used to feed of Maiz, and
the Christians had gotten all from them that they had, and the people were
many, they were not able to sustain themselves. Those which came to the town
were so weak and feeble, that they had no flesh left on their bones: and many
came and died near the town for pure hunger and weakness. The Governor
commanded upon grievous punishments to give them no Maiz. Yet, when they saw
that the hogs wanted it not, and that they had yielded themselves to serve
them, and considering their misery and wretchedness, having pity of the^, they
gave them part of the Maiz which they had. And when the time of their
embarkment came, there was not sufficient to serve their own turns. That
which there was, they put into the brigandines, and into great canoes tied two
and two together. They shipped 22. of the best horses, that were in the Camp,
the rest they made dried flesh of; and dressed the hogs which they had in
like manner. They departed from Minoya the second day of Iulie, 1543.

CHAP. XXXVII.
As the Christians went down the great River on their voyage, the Indians of
Quigalta did set upon them, and what was the success thereof.

THe day before they departed from Minoya, they determined to dismiss all the
men and women of the Country, which they had detained as slaves to serve them,
save some hundred, little more or less, which the Governor embarked, and
others whom it pleased him to permit. And because there were many men of
quality, whom he could not deny that which he granted to others, he used a
policy, saying, that they might serve them as long as they were in the River,
but when they came to the sea, they must send them away for want of water,
because they ha^ but few vessels. He told his friends in secret, that they
should carry theirs to Nueua Espanna: And all those whom he bare no good will
unto (which were the greater number) ignorant of that which was hidden from
them, which afterward time discovered, thinking it inhumanitie for so little
time of service, in reward of the great service that they had done them, to
carry them with them, to leave them slaves to other m^n out of their own
Countries; 500. Slave (...) the Country.
left five hundred men and women; among whom were many boys and girls, which
spoke and understood the Spanish tongue. The most of them did nothing but
weep: which moved great compassion; seeing that all of them with good will
would have become Christians, and were left in state of perdition. There went
from Minoya 322 Spaniards in seven brigandines, They sail down Rio Grande
from Minoya 17. days before they came to the mou^h thereof.
well made, save that the plankes were thin, because the nails were short, and
were not pitched, nor had any decks to keep the water from coming in. In stead
of decks they laid planks, whereon the mariners might run to trim their
sails, and the people might refresh themselves above and below. The Governor
made his Captains, and gave to every one his brigandine, and took their oath
and their word, that they would obey him, until they came to the land of the
Christians. The Governor took one of the brigandines for himself, which he
best liked. The same day that they departed from Minoya, they passed by
Guachoya, where the Indians tarried for them in canoes by the River. And on the
shore, they had made a great arbor with boughs: They desired him to come on
shore; but he excused himself, and so went along: The Indians in their canoes
accompanied him; and coming where an arm of the River declined on the right
hand, they said, that the Province of Quigalta was near unto that place, and
importuned the Governor to set upon him, and that they would aid him. And
because they had said, that he dwelt three days journey down the River, the
Governor supposed that they had plotted some treason against him, and there
left them; and went down with the greatest force of the water. The current was
very strong, and with the help of ores, they went very swiftly. The first day
they landed in a wood on the left hand of the River, and at night they withdrew
themselves to the brigandines. The second day.
The next day they came to a town, where they went on shore, and the people
that was in it durst not tarry. A woman that they took there being examined,
said, that that town belonged to a Cacique named Huasene, Huasene.
subject to Quigalta, and that Quigalta tarried for them below in the River
with many men. Certain horsemen went thither, and found some houses, wherein
was much Maiz. Immediately more of them went thither and tarried there one day,
in which they did beat out, Another day.
and took as much Maiz as they needed. While they were there, many Indians
came from the nether part of the River, and on the other side right against
them somewhat carelessely set themselves in order to fight. The Governor sent
in two canoes the crossebowmen that he had, and as many more as could go in
them. They ran away, and seeing the Spaniards could not overtake them, they
returned back, and took courage; and coming nearer, making an outcrie, they
threatened them: and as soon as they departed thence, they went after them, some
in canoes, and some by land along the River; and getting before, coming to a
town that stood by the Rivers side, they joined altogether, making a show that
they would tarry there. Every brigandine towed a canoe fastened to their
sternes for their particular service. Presently there entered men into every
one of them, which made the Indians to fly, ^ ^owne bur^^d.
and burned the town. The same day they presently landed in a great field,
where the Indians durst not tarry. The third day.
The next day there were gathered together an hundred canoes, among which were
some that carried 60. and 70. men, (...) ca(...).
and 70. men, and the principal men's canoes had their tilts, and plumes of
white and red feathers for their ensigns: and they came within two crossebow
shot of the brigandines, and sent three Indians in a small canoe with a fained
message to view the manner of the brigandines, and what weapons they had. And
coming to the side of the Governors brigandine, one of the Indians entered,
and said:

That the Cacique of Quigalta his Lord, sent him his commendations, and did let
him understand, that all that the Indians of Guachoya had told him concerning
himself, was false, and that they had incensed him, because they were his
enemies; that he was his servant, and should find him so.

The Governor answered him, that he believed all that he said was true, and
willed him to tell him, that he esteemed his friendship very much. With this
answer they returned to the place where the rest in their canoes were waiting
for them, and from thence all of them fell down, and came near the Spaniards,
shouting aloud, and threatening of them. The Governor sent John de Guzman,
which had been a Captain of footmen in Florida, with 15. armed men in canoes
to make them give way. As Soon as the Indians saw them come toward them, they
divided themselves into two parts, and stood still till the Spaniards came nie
them, and when they were come near them, they joined together on both sides,
taking John de Guzman in the midst, and them that came first with him, and
with great fury borded them: And as their canoes were bigger, and many of them
leaped into the water to stay them, and to lay hold on the canoes of the
Spaniards, and ouerwhelme them; so presently they overwhelmed them. The
Christians fell into the water, and with the weight of their armor sunk down
to the bottom: and some few, that by swimming or holding by the canoe could
have saved themselves, with oars and staves, which they had, they struck them
on the head and made them sink. When they of the brigandines saw the
overthrow, though they went about to succor them, yet through the current of
the River they could not go back. Four Spaniards fled to the brigandine that
was nearest to the canoes; and only these escaped of those that came among the
Indians. They were eleven that died there: Eleven Spaniards drowned. The death
of John de Guzman.
among whom John de Guzman was one, and a son of Don Carlos, called John de
Vargas: the rest also were persons of account and men of great courage. Those
that escaped by swimming, said, that they saw the Indians enter the canoe of
John de Guzman at the stern of one of their canoes, and whether they carried
him away dead or alive they could not certainly tell.

CHAP. XXXVIII.
Which declares how they were pursued by the Indians.

THe Indians, seeing that they had gotten the victory, took such courage,
that they assaulted them in the brigandines, which they durst not do before.
They came first to that brigandine wherein Calderon went for Captain, and was
in the rereward: and at the first volie of arrows they wounded 25 men. 25.
Spaniards wounded.
There were only four armed men in this brigandine: these did stand at the
brigandines side to defend it. Those that were unarmed, seeing how they hurt
them, left their oars and went under the deck: whereupon the brigandine began
to cross, and to go where the current of the stream carried it. One of the
armed men seeing this, without the commandment of the Captain, made a footman
to take an oar and stir the brigandine, he standing before him and
defending him with his target. The great use o^ large targets.
The Indians came no nearer then a bowshot, from whence they offended and were
not offended, receiving no hurt: for in every brigandine was but one crossebow,
and those which we had were very much out of order. So that the Christians did
nothing else but stand for a butte to receive their arrows. Having left this
brigandine they went to another, and fought with it half an hour; and so from
one to another they fought with them all. The Christians had mattes to lay
under them, which were double, and so close and strong, that no arrow went
through them. And as soon as the Indians gave them leisure, Strong mats a good
defense against arrows.
they fensed the brigandines with them. And the Indians seeing that they could
not shoot level, shot their arrows at randon up into the air, which fell
into the brigandines, and hurt some of the men: and not therewith contented,
they sought to get to them which were in the canoes with the horses. Those of
the brigandines environed them to defend them, and took them among them. Thus
seeing themselves much vexed by them, and so wearied that they could no longer
endure it, they determined to travel all the night following, thinking to get
beyond the country of Quigalta, and that they would leave them: but when they
thought least of it, supposing they had now left them, they heard very near
them so great outcries, that they made them deaf, and so they followed us all
that night, and the next day till noone, by which time we were come into the
country of others, Another Province.
whom they desired to use us after the same manner; and so they did. The men of
Quigalta returned home; and the other in fifty canoes fought with us a whole
day and a night: and they entered one of the brigandines, that came in the
rereward by the canoe which she had at her stern, and took away a woman which
they found in it, and afterward hurt some of the men of the brigandines. Those
which came with the horses in the canoes, being weary with rowing night and
day, lingered behind; and presently the Indians came upon them, and they of the
brigandines tarried for them. The Governor resolved to go on shore and to
kill the horses, because of the slow way which they made because of them.
As Soon as they saw a place convenient for it, they went thither and killed the
horses, Dried horseflesh for food.
and brought the flesh of them to dry it aboard. Four or five of them
remained on shore alive: the Indians went unto them, after the Spaniards were
embarked. The horses were not acquainted with them, and began to neigh, and
run up and down, in such sort, that the Indians, for fear of them, leaped
into the water: and getting into their canoes went after the brigandines,
shooting cruelly at them. They followed us that evening and the night following
till the next day at ten of the clock, and then returned up the River.
Presently from a small town ^^al town.
that stood upon the River came seven canoes, and followed us a little way
down the River, shooting at us: but seeing they were so few that they could
do us but little harm, they returned to their town. From thence forward,
until they came to the Sea, (...) ^^^led (...) ^he Ri^ ^h^ch is about 250
l^^gu^s.
they had no encounter. They sailed down the River seventeen days: which may
be two hundred and fifty leagues journey, little more or less: and near unto
the Sea the River is divided into two arms; each of them is a league and an
half broad.

CHAP. XXXIX.
How they came unto the sea: and what happened unto them in all their voyage.

Half a league before they came to the sea, they came to anchor to rest
themselves thereabout a day: for they were very weary with rowing and out of
heart. For by the space of many days they had eaten nothing but parched and
sodden Maiz; which they had by allowance every day an headpeece full by strike
for every three me^. While they rode there at anchor seven canoes of Indians
came to set upon those, which they brought with them. The Governor commanded
armed men to go aboard them, and to drive them farther off. They came also
against them by land through a thick wood, and a moorish ground, and had staves
with very sharp forked heads made of the bones of fishes, and fought very
valiantly with us, which went out to encounter them. And the other that came in
canoes with their arrows stayed for them that came against them, and at their
coming both those that were on land, and those in the canoes wounded some of
us: And seeing us come near them, they turned their backs, and like swift
horses among footmen gat away from us; making some returns, and reuniting
themselves together, going not past a bow shot off: for in so retiring they
shot, without receiving any hurt of the Christians. For though they had some
bows, yet they could not use them; and brake their arms with rowing to
overtake them. And the Indians easily in their compass went with their canoes,
staying and wheeling about as it had been in a skirmish, perceiving that those
that came against them could not offend them. And the more they strove to come
near them, the more hurt they received. As Soon as they had driven them
farther off, they returned to the brigandines. They stayed two days there: And
departed from thence unto the place, where the arm of the River enters into
the sea. They sounded in the River near unto the Sea, and found 40. fathoms
water. They stayed there. And the Governor commanded al and singular persons
to speak their minds touching their voyage, whether it were best to cross
over to Nueua Espanna, committing themselves to the hie sea, or whether they
should keep along the coast. There were sundry opinions touching this matter:
wherein John Danusco, which presumed much, and took much upon him in the
knowledge of navigations, and matters of the sea, although he had but little
experience, moved the Governor with his talk: and his opinion was seconded
by some others. And they affirmed, that it was much better to pass by the hie
sea, and cross the gulf, which was three of four parts the lesser travel,
because in going along ye coast, they went a great way about, by reason of the
compass, which the land did make. John Danusco said, that he had seen the
seacard, and that from the place where they were, the coast ran East and West
unto Rio de las Palmas; and from Rio de las Palmas to Nueua Espanna from North
to South: and therefore in sailing always in sight of land would be a great
compassing about and spending of much time; and that they would be in great
danger to be overtaken with winter before they should get to the land of the
Christians: and that in 10. or 12. days space, having good weather, they might
be there in crossing over. The most part were against this opinion, and said,
that it was more safe to go along the coast, though they stayed the longer:
because their ships were very weak and without decks, so that a very little
storm was enough to cast them away: and if they should be hindered with calmes,
or contrary weather, through the small store of vessels which they had to
carry water in, they should likewise fall into great danger: and that although
the ships were such as they might venture in them, yet having neither Pilot nor
Seacard to guide themselves, it was no good counsel to cross the gulf. This
opinion was confirmed by the greatest part: and they agreed to go along the
coast. At the time wherein they sought to depart from thence, the cable of the
anchor of the Governors brigandine brake, and the anchor remained in the River.
And albeit, they were near the shore, yet it was so deep, that the Diverse
diuing many times could never find it: which caused great sadness in the
Governor, and in all those that went with him in his brigandine: But with a
grindstone which they had, and certain bridles which remained to some of the
Gentlemen, and men of worship which had horses, they made a weight which served
in stead of an anchor. The 18. of July, They landed the 30. of May, 1539. Chap.
7. they went forth to sea July 18. 1543.
they went forth to sea with fair and prosperous weather for their voyage.
And seeing that they were gone two or three leagues from the shore, the
Captains of the other brigandines ouertooke them, and asked the Governor,
wherefore he did put off from the shore? and that if he would leave the coast,
he should say so; and he should not do it without the consent of all: and that
if he did otherwise, they would not follow him, but that every one would do
what seemed best unto himself. The Governor answered, that he would do
nothing without their counsel, but that he did bear off from the land to
sail the better and safer by night; and that the next day when time served, he
would return to the sight of land again. They sailed with a reasonable good
wind that day and the night following, and the next day till evening song,
Fresh water almost two days sailing in the Sea.
always in fresh water: whereat they wondered much: for they were very far
from land. But the force of the current of the River is so great, The coast
shallow.
and the coast there is so shallow and gentle, that the fresh water enters
far into the Sea. That evening on their right hand they saw certain creekes,
C^rtaine creekes where they rested a ^^ght.
where whither they went, and rested there that night: where John Danusco with
his reasons won them at last, that all consented and agreed to commit
themselves to the maine Sea, alleging, as he had done before, that it was a
great advantage, and that their voyage would be much shorter. They sailed two
days, and when they would have come to sight of land they could not, for the
wind blew from the shore. On the fourth day, seeing their fresh water began to
fail, fearing necessity and danger, they all complained of John Danusco, and
of the Governor that followed his counsel: and every one of the Captains
said, that they would no more go from the shore, though the Governor went
whither he would. It pleased God that the wind changed though but a little:
and at the end of four days after they had put to sea, being already
destitute of water, by force of rowing they got within sight of land, and with
great trouble recovered it, in an open road. An open Road.
That evening the wind came to the South, which on that coast is a cross
wind, and drove the brigandines against the shore, because it blew very hard,
and the anchors were so weak, that they yielded and began to bend. The
Governor commanded all men to leap into the water, and going between them and
the shore, and thrusting the brigandines into the Sea as soon as the wave was
past, they saved them till the wind ceased.

CHAP. XL.
How they lost one another by a storm, and afterward came together in a creek.

IN the bay where they rode, after the tempest was past, they went on shore,
and with mattockes, which they had, they dug certain pits, Fresh water is
commonly found by digging in the sands on the sea side.
which grew full of fresh water, where they filled all the cask which they had.
The next day they departed thence, and sailed two days, and entered into a
creek like unto a poole, fenced from the South wind, which then did blow, and
was against them: and there they stayed four days, not being able to get out:
and when the Sea was calm they rowed out: they sailed that day, and toward
evening the wind grew so strong that it drove them on the shore, and they were
sorry that they had put forth from the former harbor: for as soon as night
approached a storm began to rise in the Sea, and the wind still waxed more and
more violent with a tempest. The brigandines lost one another: two of them,
which bare more into the Sea, entered into an arm of the Sea, An arm of the
sea.
which pierced into the land two leagues beyond the place where the other were
that night. The five which stayed behind, being always a league, and half a
league the one from the other, met together, without any knowledge the one of
the other, in a wild road, A wild road.
where the wind and the waves drove them on shore: for their anchors did
streighten and came home; and they could not rule their oars, putting seven or
eight men to every oar, which rowed to seaward: and all the rest leaped into
the water, and when the wave was past that drove the brigandine on shore, they
thrust it again into Sea with all the diligence and might that they had.
Others, while another wave was in coming, with bowls laued out the water that
came in ouerboord. While they were in this tempest in great fear of being cast
away in that place, from midnight forward they endured an intolerable torment
of an infinite swarm of Moskitoes which fell upon them, A swarm of grievous
Mos^^o^s.
which as soon as they had stung the flesh, it so infected it, as though they
had bin venomous. In the morning the Sea was assuaged and the wind slaked, but
not the Muskitoes: for ye sails which were white seemed black with them in
the morning. Those which rowed, unless others kept them away, were not able to
row. Having pass^d the fear and danger of the storm, beholding the
deformities of their faces, and the blows which they gave themselves to drive
them away, one of them laughed at another. They met all together in the creek
where the two brigandines were, which outwent their fellows. There was found a
skumme, A skumme of the sea like (...), called ^^pee.
which they call Copee, which the Sea casts up, and it is like pitch,
wherewith in some places, where pitch is wanting, they pitch their ships: there
they pitched their brigandines. They rested two days, and then eftsoons
proceeded on their voyage. They sailed two days more, and landed in a Bay or
arm of the Sea, Anoth^r deep ^^y.
where they stayed two days. The same day that they went from thence six men
went up in a canoe toward the head of it, and could not see the end of it. They
put out from thence with a South wind, which was against them: but because it
wa^ little, and for the great desire they had to shorten their voyage, they put
out to sea by force of oars, and for all that made very little way with great
labor in two days, and went under the lee of a small Island A small Island.
into an arm of the Sea, which compassed it about. While they were there,
there fell out such weather, that they gave God many thanks, that they had
found out such an harbor. There was great store of fish in that place, Great
store of fish.
which they took with nets, which they had, and hooks. Here a man cast an
hook and a line into the Sea, and tied the end of it to his arm, and a fish
caught it, and drew him into the water unto the neck: and it pleased God that
he remembered himself of a knife that he had, and cut the line with it. There
they abode fourteen days: Fourteen days abode ^n this place.
and at the end of them it pleased God to send them fair weather, for which
with great devotion they appointed a procession, and went in procession along
the strand, beseeching God to bring them to a land, where they might serve him
in better sort.

CHAP. XLI.
How they came to the River of Panuco in Nueua Espanna.

IN all the coast wheresoever they dug they found fresh water: there they
filled their vessels; and the procession being ended, embarked themselves, and
going always in sight of the shore they sailed six days. Six da^es sailing.
John Danusco said that it would do well to bear out to seaward: for he had
seen the Sea-card, and remembered that from Rio de las Palmas forward the coast
did run from North to South, and thitherto they had run from East to West,
and in his opinion, by his reckoning, Rio de las Palmas could not be far off,
from where they were. That same night they put to sea, and in the morning they
saw Palm leaves floting, (...) of (...) ^aues. (...).
and the coast, which ran North and South: from midday forward they saw great
Mountains, which until then they had not seen: for from this place to Puerto
de Spiritu Santo, (...) North (...) the (...).
where they first landed in Florida, was a very plain and low country: and
therefore it cannot be descried, unless a man come very near it. By that which
they saw, they thought that they had ouershot Rio de Palmas that night, which
is 60 leagues from the River of Panuco, which is in Nueua Espanna. They
assembled all together, and some said it was not good to sail by night, l^st
they should ouershoot the River of Panuco: and others said, it was not well to
lose time while it was favorable, and that it could not be so near that they
should pass it that night: and they agreed to take away half the sails, and
so sail all night. Two of the brigandines, which sailed that night with all
their sails, by break of day had ouershot the River of Panuco without seeing
it. Of the five that came behind, the first that came unto it was that wherein
Calderan was Captain. A quarter of a league before they came at it, and before
they did see it, they saw the water muddie, and knew it to be fresh water: and
coming right against the River, they saw, where it entered into the Sea, that
the water brake upon a should. And because there was no man there that knew it,
they were in doubt whether they should go in, or go along, and they resolved
to go in: and before they came unto the current, they went close to the shore,
and entered into the port: and as soon as they were come in, they saw Indian men
and women apparelled like Spaniards: whom they asked in what country they
were? They answered in Spanish, that it was the River of Panuco, The River of
Panuco: the town 15. leagues from the mouth of the River.
and that the town of the Christians was 15 leagues up within the land. The
joy that all of them received upon these news cannot sufficiently be
expressed: for it seemed unto them, that at that instant they were borne again.
And many went on shore and kissed the ground, and kneeling on their knees, with
lifting up their hands and eyes to heaven, they all ceased not to give God
thanks. Those which came after, as soon as they saw Calderan come to an anchor
with his brigandine in the River, presently went thither, and came into the
haven. The other two brigandines which had ouershot the place, put to sea to
return back to seek the rest, and could not do it, because the wind was
contrary and the Sea grown: they were afraid of being cast away, and
recovering the shore they cast anchor. While they rode there a storm arose:
and seeing that they could not abide there, much less endure at Sea, they
resolved to run on shore; and as the brigandines were but small, so did they
draw but little water; and where they were it was a sandy coast. By which
occasion the force of their sails drove them on shore, without any hurt of
them that were in them. As those that were in the port of Panuco at this time
were in great joy; so these felt a double grief in their hearts: for they knew
not what was become of their fellows, nor in what country they were, and
feared it was a country of Indian enemies. They landed two leagues below the
port: and when they saw themselves out of the danger of the Sea, every one
took of that which he had, as much as he could carry on his back: and they
traveled up into the country, and found Indians, which told them where their
fellows were; and gave them good entertainment: wherewith their sadness was
turned into joy, and they thanked God most humbly for their deliverance out of
so many dangers.

CHAP. XLII.
How they came to Panuco, and how they were received of the inhabitants.

FRom the time that they put out of Rio Grande to the sea, at their departure
from Florida, until they arrived in the River of Panuco were 52. days. They
came into the River of Panuco the 10. of September, 1543. They arrived in the
River of Panuco, 1543. Septem. 10.
They went up the River with their brigandines. They traveled four days; and
because the wind was but little, and many times it served them not, because of
the many turnings which the River makes, and the great curr^nt, drawing them
up by towing, and that in many places; for this cause they made very little
way, and with great labor: and seeing the execution of their desire to be
deferred, which was to come among Christians, and to see the celebration of
divine service, which so long time they had not seen; they left the
brigandines with the mariners, and went by land to Panuco. All of them were
apparrelled in Deeres skins tanned and died black, to wit, cotes, hose, and
shoes. When they came to Panuco, presently they went to the Church to pray and
give God thanks, that so miraculousely had saved them. The townsmen which
before were advertised by the Indians, and knew of their arriual, carried some
of them to their houses, and entertained them, whom they knew, and had
acquaintance of, or because they were their Countrymen. The Alcalde Mayor took
the Governor home to his house: and commanded all the rest, as soon as they
came, to be lodged 6. and 6. and 10. and 10. according to the ability of
every townesman. And all of them were provided for by their hosts of many
hens and bread of Maiz, and fruits of the Country, which are such as be in
the Isle of Cuba, The descr^^tion o^ Panuco.
whereof before I have spoken. The town of Panuco may contain above 70.
families; the most of their houses are of lime and stone, and some made of
timber, and all of them are thatched. It is a poor Country, and there is
neither gold nor silver in it: The inhabitants live there in great abundance of
victuals and servants. The richest have not above 500. crowns rent a year,
and that is in cotton clothes, hens, and Maiz, which the Indians their
servants do give them for tribute. 311. Christians arrived at Panuco.
There arrived there of those that came out of Florida, three hundred and
eleven Christians. Presently the Alcalde Mayor sent one of the townsmen in post
to advertise the Viceroy, Don Antonio de Mendoca, which was resident in Mexico,
that of ye people that went with Don Ferdinando de Soto to discover and conquer
Florida, three hundred and eleven men were arrived there, that seeing they were
employed in his Majesty's service, he would take some order to provide for
them. Whereat the Viceroy, and all the inhabitants of Mexico wondered. For they
thought they were miscarried, because they had traveled so far within the
maine land of Florida, and had no news of them for so long a time: and it
seemed a wonderful thing unto them, how they could save themselves so long
among Infidels, without any fort, wherein they might fortify themselves, and
without any other succor at all. Presently the Viceroy sent a warrant, wherein
he commanded, that whithersoeuer they sent, they should give them victuals,
and as many Indians for their cariages as they needed: and where they would not
furnish them, they might take those things that were necessary perforce
without incurring any danger of law. This warrant was so readily obeyed, that
by the way before they came to the towns, they came to receive them with
hens, and victuals.

Of the favor which they found at the hands of the Viceroy, and of the
inhabitants of the City of Mexico.
FRom Panuco to the great City Temistitan Mexico is 60. leagues; and other 60.
from Panuco to the Port de Vera Cruz, where they take shipping for Spain, and
those that come from Spain do land to go for Nueua Espanna. These three towns
stand in a triangle: to wit, Vera Cruz, to the South, Panuco to the North, and
Mexico to the West, 60. leagues asunder. The Country is so inhabited with
Indians, that from town to town, those which are farthest, are but a league,
and half a league asunder. Some of them that came from Florida stayed a month
in Panuco to rest themselves, others fifteen days, and every one as long as
he listed: for there was none that showed a sower countenance to his guests,
but rather gave them any thing that they had, and seemed to be grieved when
they took their leave. Which was to be believed. For the victuals, which the
Indians do pay them for tribute, are more then they can spend: and in that
town is no commerce; and there dwelt but few Spaniards there, and they were
glad of their company. The Alcalde Mayor divided all the Emperors clothes
which he had (which there they pay him for his tribute) among those that would
come to receive them. Those which had shirts of maile lest, were glad men: for
they had a horse for one shirt of maile: Some horsed themselves: and such as
could not (which were the greatest part) took their journey on foot: in which
they were well received of the Indians that were in the towns, and better
served, then they could have been in their own houses, though they had been
well to live. For if they asked one hen of an Indian, they brought them four:
and if they asked any of the Country fruit, though it were a league off, they
ran presently for it. And if any Christian found himself evil at ease, This is
the manner of China, to carry men in chaires.
they carried him in a chair from one town to another. In whatsoever town
they came, the Cacique, by an Indian which carried a rod of Justice in his
hand, whom they call Tapile, that is to say, a sergeant, commanded them to
provide victuals for them, and Indians to bear burdens of such things as they
had, and such as were needful to carry them that were sick. The Viceroy sent
a Portugal 20. leagues from Mexico, with great store of sugar, raisons of the
Sun, and conserues, and other things fit for sick folks, for such as had
need of them: and had given order to cloth them all at the Emperors charges.
And their approach being known by the citizens of Mexico, they went out of the
town to receive them: and with great courtesy, requesting them in favor to
come to their houses, every one carried such as he met home with him, and
clothed them every one the best they could: so that he which had the meanest
apparel, it cost above 30. ducats. As many as were willing to come to the
Viceroyes house he commanded to be apparelled, and such as were persons of
quality sat at his table: and there was a table in his house for as many of
the meaner sort as would come to it: and he was presently informed, who every
one was, to show him the courtesy that he deserved. Some of the Co^querors did
set both gentlemen and clownes at their own table, and many times made the
servant sit cheek by cheek by his master: and chiefly the officers and men of
base condition did so: for those which had better education did enquire who
every one was, and made difference of persons: but all did what they could with
a good will: and every one told them whom they had in their houses, that they
should not trouble themselves, nor think themselves the worse, to take that
which they gave them: for they had bin in the like case, and had bin relieved
of others, and that this was the custom of that country. God reward them all:
and God grant, that those which it pleased him to deliver out of Florida, and
to bring again into Christendom, may serve him: and unto those that died in
that country, and unto all that believe in him and confess his holy faith,
God for his mercy sake grant the kingdom of heaven. Amen.

CHAP. XLIV.
Which declares some diversities and particularities of the land of Florida:
and the fruits, and beasts, and fowls that are in that Country.

FRom the Port de Spiritu Santo, Port de Spiritu Santo is in 29. degrees on the
West side of Florida.
where they landed when they entered into Florida, to the Province of Ocute,
which may be 400. leagues, little more or less, is a very plain Country,
and has many lakes and thick woods, and in some places they are of wild
pinetrees; and is a weak soil: There is in it neither Mountain nor hill. The
Country of Ocute is more fat and fruitful; it has thinner woods, and very
goodly medows upon the Rivers. From Ocute Ocute.
to Cutifachiqui Cu^ifachiqui.
may be 130. leagues: 80. leagues thereof are desert, and have many groves of
wild Pine trees. Through the wilderness great Rivers do pass. From
Cutifachiqui to Xuala, Xuala.
may be 250. leagues: it is al an hilly Country. Cutifachiqui and Xuala stand
both in plain ground, hie, and have goodly medows on the Rivers. From thence
forward to Chiaha, Coca, and Talise, Chiaha, Coca, and Talise.
is plain ground, dry and fat, and very plentiful of Maiz. From Xuala to
Tascaluca Tascaluca.
may be 250. leagues. From Tascaluca to Rio Grande, or ye Great River, may be
300. leagues: the Country is low, and full of lakes. From Rio Grande Rio
Grande.
forward, the Country is hier and more champion, and best peopled of all the
land of Florida. And along this River from Aquixo Aquixo.
to Pacaha, and Coligoa, are 150. leagues: the Country is plain, and the
woods thin, and in some places champion, very fruitful and pleasant. From
Coligoa Coligoa.
to Autiamque are 250. leagues of hilly Country. From Autiamque A^^^^qu^
to Agua^ay, ^^^acay.
may be 230. leagues of plain ground. From Aguacay to the Riu^r of Daycao 120.
leagues, all hilly Country.

From the Port de Spiritu Santo unto Apalache, they traveled from East to
W^st, (...) 72.
and Northwest. From Cutifachiqui to Xuala from South to North. From Xuala to
Coca from East to West. from Coca to Tascaluca, and to Rio Grande, as far as
the Provinces of Quizquiz and Aquixo from East to West. From Aquixo to Pacaha
to the North. From Pacaha to Tulla from East to West: and from Tulla to
Autiamque from North to South, to the Province of Guachoya and Daycao.

The bread which they eat in all the land of Florida is of Maiz, Ma^z
which is like course millet. And this Maiz is common in all the Islandes and
West Indies from the Antiles forward. There are also in Florida great store of
Walnuts, (...).
and Plummes, Mulberries, and Gr^pes. They sow and gather their Maiz every one
th^^r s^uerall crop. The fruits are common to all: for they grow abroad in the
open fields in great abundance, without any need of planting or dressing.
Wh^re there be Mountains, (...).
there be chestnuts: they are somewhat smaller then the chestnuts of Spain.
From Rio Gra^de Westward, the Walnuts differ from those that grow more
Eastward: (...)
for they are soft, and like unto Acornes: And those which grow from Rio Grande
to Puerto del Spi^itu Santo for the most part are hard; and the trees and
Walnuts in show like those of Spain. There is a fruit through all the Country
which grows on a plant lik^ Ligoacan, which the Indians do plant. (...)
The fruit is like unto Pears Riall: it has a very good smell, and an
excellent taste. There grows another plant in the open field, which bears a
fruit like unto strawberries, Strawb^rries.
close to the ground, which has a very good taste. The Plummes are of two
kind^s, (...) of two ^^^ds.
red and gray, of the making and bigness of nuts, and have three or four
stones in them. These are better then all the plummes of Spain, and they make
far better Prunes of them. In the Grapes there is only want of dressing:
for though they be big, they have a great kirnell. All other fruits are very
perfect, and less hurtful then those of Spain.

There are in Florida many Bears, and Lions, Beasts.
Wolves, Dear, Dogs, Cattes, Martems and Conies.

There be many wild Hens as big as Turkies, Fowls.
Partridges small like those of Africa, Cranes, Duckes, Pigeons, Thrushes, and
Sparrowes. There are certain Black birds bigger then Sparrows, and lesser
then Stares. There are Gosse Hawks, Falcons, Ierfalcons, and all Fowls of
prey that are in Spain.

The Indians are well proportioned. Those of the plain Countries are taller of
body, and better shapen, then those of the Mountains. Those of the Inland
have greater store of Maiz, and commodities of the Country, then those that
dwell upon the sea coast. The Country along the sea coast is barren and poor:
and the people more warlike. The coast runs from Puerto del Spiritu Santo to
Apalache, E^st and West; and from Apalache to Rio de las Palmas from East to
West: from R^o de las Palmas unto Nueua Espanna from North to South. It is a
gentle coast, but it has many sholdes, and great shelues of sand.

Deo gratias.

This Relation of the discovery of Florida was printed in the house of Andrew
de Burgos, Printer and Gentleman of the house of my Lord Cardinal the Infant.

It was finished the tenth of February in the year one thousand, five
hundred, fifty and seven, in the noble and most loyal city of Euora.

FINIS.

