Moeoniae. OR, CERTAIN excellent Poems and spiritual Hymns:

Omitted in the last Impression of Peter's Complaint; being needful thereunto
to be annexed, as being both Divine and Witty.

All composed by R. S.

LONDON Printed by Valentine Sims, for John Busbie 1595.

The Printer to the Gentlemen Readers.
Having beheld (kind Gentlemen) the numberless Judges of not to be reckoned
labors, with what kind admiration you have entertained the divine Complaint of
holy Peter; and having in my hands certain especial Poems and divine
Meditations, full as worthy belonging to the same, I thought it a charitable
de ede to give them life in your memories, which else should die in an obscure
sacrifice, gently embrace them, gentle censurers of gentle endeavors: so shall
you not be fantastike in diversity of opinions, nor contradict your resolves by
denying your former judgments, but still be your selves discreetely virtuous,
nor could I other wish, but that the courteous reader of these labors, not
having already bought Peter's Complaint, would not for so small a mite of money
loose so rich a treasure of heavenly wisdom as these two Treatises should
minister unto him, the one so needefully depending on the other. One thing
amongst the rest I am to admonish thee of, that having in this Treatise read
Mary's visitation, the next that should follow is Christ's nativity, but being
before printed in the end of Peter's Complaint, we have here of purpose
omitted; that thou should not be abridged of that and the other like comfort
which that other treatise profereth thee.

Yours (kind Gentlemen) in all his abilities. I. B.

The Virgin Mary's conception.
OUR second Eve puts on her mortal shroude*
Earth breeds a heaven, for Gods new dwelling place,
Now rises up Elias little cloud
That growing, shall distill the shower of grace:
Her being now begins, who ere she end,
Shall bring our good that shall our ill amend,
Both Grace and Nature did their force unite,
To make this babe the sum of all their best,
Our most, her least, our million, but her mite:
She was at easiest rate worth all the rest,
What grace to men or Angels God did part,
Was all united in this infants heart.
Four only wights bred without fault are namde,
And all the rest conceived were in sin,
Without both man and wife was Adam framde
Of man, but not of wife did Eve begin,
Wife without touch of man Christ's mother was,
Of man and wife this babe was borne in grace.
Her Nativity.
Joy in the rising of our Orient star,
That shall bring forth the Sun that lent her light,
Joy in the peace that shall conclude our war,
And soon rebate the edge of Satan's spite,
Load-starre of all enclosed in worldly waves,
The care and compass that from ship-wracke saues,
The Patriarchs and Prophets were the flowers,
Which Time by course of ages did distill,
And called into his little cloud the showers,
Whose gracious drops the world with joy shall fill,
Whose moisture suppleth every soul with grace,
And brings life to Adams dying race.
For God on earth which is the royal throne,
The chosen cloth to make his mortal weed,
The quarry to cut out our corner stone,
Soil full of fruit, yet free from mortal seed,
For heavenly flower she is the Iessa rod,
The child of man, the parent of a god,
Her Spousals.
WIfe did she live, yet virgin did she die,
Untaught of man, yet mother of a son*
To save her self and child from fatal lie,
To end the web whereof the thread was spon
In marriage knots to Joseph she was tide.
Unwonted works with wonted wiles to hide
God lent his paradise to Joseph's care,
Wherein he was to plant the tree of life,
His son of Joseph's child the title bare:
Just cause to make the mother Joseph's wife,
O blessed man betrothed to such a spouse,
More blessed to live with such a child in house:
No carnal love this sacred league procurde,
Al vain delights were far from their assent,
Though both themselves in wedlock bands assurde,
Yet chaste by vow they sealed their chaste intent.
Thus had the Virgins, wives, and widows crown,
And by chaste childbirth doubled their renown.
The Virgins salutation.
SPell Eua back and Aue shall you find,
The first began, the last reuerst our harms,
An Angels Aue disinchants the charms,
Death first by woman's weakness entered in,
In woman's virtue life does now begin.
O Virgins breast the heavens to thee incline,
In thee they joy, and sovereign thee agnize,
Too mean their glory is to match with thine,
Whose chaste receipt God more then heaven did prize,
Hail fairest heaven, that heaven and earth do bless,
Where virtues star Gods sun of justice is,
With hauty mind to godhead man aspirde,
And was by pride from place of pleasure chac'de,
With loving mind our manhood God desirde,
And us by love in greater pleasure plac'de,
Man laboring to ascend procurde our fall,
God yielding to descend cut off our thrall.
The Visitation.
PRoclaimed Queen and mother of a God,
The light of earth, the sovereign of Saints,
With Pilgrim foot, up tiring hills she trod,
And heavenly style with handmaids toil acquaints
Her youth to age, her self to sick she lends,
Her heart to God, to neighbors hand she bends,
A prince she is, and mightier prince does bear,
Yet pomp of princely train she would not have,
But doubtless heavenly Quires attendant were,
Her child from harm her self from harm to save,
Word to the voice, song to the tune she brings,
The voice her word, the tune her dittie sings,
Eternal lights enclosed in her breast,
Shot out such piercing beams of burning love,
That when her voice her cosens ears possessed,
The force thereof did cause her babe to move,
With secret signs the children greet each other,
But open praise each leaves to his mother.
His circumcision.
THe head is launst to work the bodies cure,
with angry salve it smarts to heal our wou^d
To faultlesse son from al offenses pure,
The faulty vassals scourges do redound,
The Judge is cast the guilty to acquit,
The sun defaced to lend the star his light,
The vine of life distilleth drops of grace,
Our rock gives issue to an heavenly spring,
Tears from the eyes, blood runs from wounded place
Which showers to heaven, of joy a harvest bring*
This sacred dew let angels gather up,
Such sacred drops best fit their nectared cup.
With weeping eyes his mother rewd his smart,
If blood from him, tears came from her as fast,
The knife that cut his flesh did pierce his heart,
The pain that Jesus set did Mary taste,
His life and hers hung by one fatal twist,
No blow that hit the son the mother mist.
The Epiphanie.
TO blaze the rising of this glorious sun,
A glittering star appears in the east,
Whose sight to pilgrims toil three sages wun
To seek the light they long had in request:
And by this star to nobler star they pace,
Whose arms did their desired sin embrace:
Stall was the sky wherein those plannets shinde,
And want the cloud that did eclipse their raines,
Yet through this cloud their passage they did find,
And pierced these sages hearts by secret ways,
Which made them know the ruler of the skies,
By infant tongue and looks of babish eyes,
Heaven at her light, earth blushes at her pride,
And of their pomp these peers ashamed be,
Their crowns, their robes, their trains they set aside.
When Gods poor cottage, clouts, and crew they see,
All glorious things their glory now despise,
Since God Contempt does more then glory praise,
Three gifts they bring, three gifts they bear away,
For incense mirre, and gold, faith, hope, and love,
And with their gifts the giuers hearts do stay,
Their mind from Christ, no parting can remove,
His humble state, his stall, his poor retinew
They fancy more then all their rich reuenew.
The Presentation.
TO be redeemed the worlds Redeemer brought
Two silly turtle doves for ransom paies,
O wares with empires worthy to be bought,
This casie rate does sound, not drown thy praise,
For since no price can to thy worth amount,
A dove, yea love, due price thou do account,
Old Simeon, cheap penny worth and sweet,
Obteind when thee in arms he did embrace,
His weeping eyes thy smiling looks did meet,
Thy love his heart, thy kisses blessed his face,
O eyes, O heart, mean sights and loves avoid,
Base not your selves, your best you have enioyde,
O virgin pure thou do those doves present
As due to law, not as an equal price,
To buy such ware thou would thy self have spent,
The world to reach his worth could not suffice,
If God were to be bought, not worldly pelf,
But thou were fittest price next God himself.
The flight into Egypt.
ALas our day is forced to fly by night
Light without light, and sun by silent shade,
O nature blush that suffrest such a wight,
That in thy sun thy dark eclipse have made,
Day to his eyes, light to his steps deny,
That hates the light which graceth every eye,
Sun being fled the stars do loose their light,
And shining beams, in bloody streams they drench*
A cruel storm of Herod's mortal spite
Their lives and lights with bloody showers do quench
The tyrant to be sure of murdring one,
For fear of sparing him does pardon none.
O blessed babes, first flowers of christian spring,
Who though untimely cropped fair garlandes frame,
With open throats and silent mouths you sing,
His praise whom age permits you not to name,
Your tunes are tears, your instruments are swords,
Your ditty death, and blood in hew of words.
Christ's return out of Egypt.
When death and hell their right in Herod claim,
Christ from exile returns to native soil:
There, with his life more deeply death to maime
Then death did life by all the infantes spoil.
He showed the parents that the babes did moan,
That all their lives were less then his alone.
But hearing Herod's son to have the crown,
The impious offspring of the bloody sire,
To Nazareth (of heaven beloved) town,
Flower to a flower he fitly does retire,
For he is a flower, and in a flower he bred,
And from a thorn now to a flower he fled.
And well deserud this flower his fruit to view
Where he invested was in mortal weed,
Where first unto a tender bud he grew
In virgin branch unstained with mortal seed.
Young flower, with flowers, in flower well may he be:
Ripe fruit he must with thorns hang on a tree.
Christ's bloody sweat.
FAt soil, full spring, sweet olive, grape of bliss,
That yields, that streams, that powers, that do distill
Untilled, vndrawne, vnstampt, untouched of press,
Dear fruit, clear brooks, fair oil, sweet wine at will:
Thus Christ vnforst preuents in sheeding blood
The whips, the thorns, the nail, the spear, and roode.
He Pelicans, he Phoenix fate does prove,
Whom flames consume when streams enforce to die,
How burns blood, how bleedeth burning love?
Can one in flame and stream both bath and fry?
How would he join a Phoenix fiery pains
In fainting Pelicans still bleeding veins?
Christ's fleeping friends.
WHen Christ with care and pangs of death oppressed
From frighted flesh a bloody sweat did rain,
And full of fear without repose or rest
In agony did watch and pray in vain
Three sundry times he his disciples finds
With heavy eyes, but far more heavy minds,
With mild rebuke he warned them to wake:
Yet sleep did still their drousie senses hold.
As when the sun the brightest show does make
In darkest shrouds the night birds them infolde,
His foes did watch to work their cruel spite,
His drousie friends slept in his hardest night.
As Jonas sailed once from Ioppaes shore,
A boystrous tempest in the air did broile,
The waves did rage, the thundering heavens did roar,
The stones, the rocks, the lightnings threatened spoil,
The ship was billows game, and chances pray,
Yet careless Jonas mute and slumbring lay:
So now though Judas like a blustering gust,
Do stir the furious sea of Jewish ire,
Though storming troops in quarrels most unjust
Against the bark of all our bliss conspire,
Yet these disciples sleeping lie secure,
As though their wonted calmes did still endure.
Jonas once his heavy limbs to rest,
Did shroud himself in iuy pleasant shade,
But lo, while him a heavy sleep oppressed,
His shadowy bower, to withered stalk did fade,
A cankered worm did gnaw the root away,
And brought the glorious branches to decay*
O gracious plant, O tree of heavenly spring,
The paragon for lease, for fruit and flower,
How sweet a shadow did thy branches bring
To shroud these souls that chose thee for their bower,
But now while they with Jonas fall asleep,
To spoil their plant an envious worm does creep.
Awake you slumbring wights, lift up your eyes,
Mark Judas how to tear your root he strives,
Alas the glory of your arbor dies,
Arise and guard the comfort of your lives.
No Jonas iuy, no Zacheus tree,
Were to the world so great a loss as he.
The virgin Mary to Christ on the Cross.
WHat mist has dimd that glorious face, what seas of griefemy sun does toss?
The golden rays of heavenly grace lies now ecclipsed on the cross.
Jesus my love, my son, my God, behold thy mother washed in tears:
Thy bloody wounds be made a rod, to chasten these my latter years.
You cruel Jews come work your ire, upon this worthless flesh of mine.
And kindle not eternal fire by wounding him which is divine.
Thou messenger that did impart, his first descent into my womb,
Come help me now to cleave my heart, that there I may my son intombs.
You Angels all that present were, to show his birth with harmony,
Why are you now not ready here, to make a mourning symphony.
The cause I know you wail alone, and shed your tears in secrecy,
Lest I should moved be to moan, by force of heavy company.
But wail my soul, thy comfort aies, my woeful womb lament thy fruit,
My heart giueteares unto my eyes, let sorrow string my heavy lute.
A holy Hymn.
PRaise, O Sion, praise thy Savior,
Praise thy Captain and thy Pastor,
With hymns and solemn harmony.
What power affords perform indeed,
His works all praises far exceed:
No praise can reach his dignity.
A special theme of praise is read,
A living and a life giving bread
Is on this day exhibited
Within the supper of our Lord,
To twelve disciples at his board,
As doubtless it was delivered.
Let our praise be loved and free,
Full of joy and decent glee,
With minds and voices melody.
For now solemnize we that day,
Which does with joy to us display.
The privy use of this mystery
At this board of our new ruler,
Of new Law, new pascall order.
The ancient rite abolisheth.
Old decrees by new annild,
Shadows are in truth fulfilld:
Day former darkness finisheth,
That at supper Christ performed
To be done he straightly charged,
For his eternal memory.
Guided by his sacred orders
Bread and wine upon our altars
To saving host we sanctify,
Christians are by faith assured,
That to flesh the bread is changed,
The wine to blood most precious,
That no wit nor sense conceiueth
Firm and grounded faith belieueth
In strange affects not curious.
Under kinds two in appearance
Two in show bnt one in substance,
Be things beyond comparison:
Flesh is meat, blood drink most heavenly:
Yet is Christ in each kind wholly.
Most free from al division.
None that eats him does chew him,
None that takes him does deny him
Received he whole perseuereth.
Be there one or thousands housoled.
One as much as all received,
He by no eating perishes.
Both the good and bad receive him,
But effects are diverse in them,
True life, or true destruction,
Life to the good, death to the wicked:
Mark how both alike received
With far unlike conclusion:
When the priest the host deuideth,
Know that each part abides:
All that the whole host covered,
Form of bread not Christ is broken,
Not of Christ but of his token
Is state or stature altered.
Angels bread made Pilgrims feeding,
Truly bread for childrens eating
To dogs not to be offered:
Signd by Isacke on the alter
By the Lamb and paschall supper,
And in the manna figured.
Jesus food and feeder of us,
Here with mercy feed and friend us,
Then grant in heaven felicity,
Lord of all whom here thou feedest,
Fellow heirs, guests with thy dearest,
Make us in heavenly company.
S. Peter's afflicted mind.
IF that the sick may groan,
Or Orphane mourn his loss:
If wounded wretch may rue his harms*
Or caitife show his cross:
If heart consumde with care
May utter signs of pain,
Then may my breast be sorrows home,
And tongue with cause complain.
My malady is sin,
And langour of the mind,
My body but a lazars couch,
Wherein my soul is pinde.
The care of heavenly kind
Is death to my relief,
Forlorn and left like Orphan child
With sighs I feed my grief.
My wounds with mortal smart
My dying soul torment,
And prisoner to mine own mishaps
My follies I repent,
My heart is but the haunt
Where all dislikes do keep:
And who can blame so lost a wretch,
Though tears of blood he weep.
S. Peter's remorse.
REmorse vpbraids my faults,
Self blaming conscience cries,
Sin claims the host of humbled thoughts,
And streams of weeping eyes*
Let penance Lord prevail,
Let sorrow sue release,
Let love be vmpier in my cause,
And pass the doom of peace,
If doom go by desert,
My least desert is death,
That robs from soul immortal ioies,
From body mortal breath*
But in so high a God,
So base a worms annoy
Can add no praise unto thy power,
No bliss unto thy joy.
Well may I fry in flames
Due fuel to hell fire,
But on a wretch to wreake thy wrath
Can not be worth thine ire.
Yet since so vile a woorme
Has wrought his greatest spite,
Of highest treason well thou may
In rigor him endite*
But mercy may relent
And temper justice rod:
For mercy does as much belong
As justice to a God.
If former time or place
More right to mercy win,
Thou first were author of my self,
The vmpier of my sin.
Did mercy spin the thread
To weaue in Justice loome,
Were thou a father to conclude
With dreadful Judges doom?
It is a small relief
To say I was thy child,
If as an ill deserving foe
From grace I am exilde.
I was, I had, I could,
All words importing want*
They are but dust of dead supplies,
Where needful helps are scant.
Once to have been in bliss
That hardly can return,
Does but bewray from whence I fell,
And wherefore now I mourn.
All thoughts of passed hopes
Increase my present cross:
Like ruins of decayed ioies,
They still vpbraide my loss.
O mild and mighty Lord,
Amend that is amiss:
My sin my soar, thy love my salve,
Thy cure my comfort is.
Comfirme thy former deeds,
Reform that is defilde:
I was, I am, I will remain
Thy charge, thy choice, thy child.
Man to the wound in Christ's side.
O Pleasant port, O place of rest,
O royal rist, O worthy wound,
Come harbor me a weary guest,
That in the world no case have found,
I lie lamenting at thy gate,
Yet dare I not adventure in:
I bear with me a troublous mate,
And cumbred am, with heap of sin*
Discharge me of this heavy load,
That easier passage I may find.
Within this bower to make aboade,
And in this glorious tomb be shrin'd*
Here must I live, here must I die,
Here would I utter all my grief:
Here would I all those pains discrie,
Which here did meet for my relief
Here would I view the bloody sore,
Which dint of spiteful spear did breed,
The bloody wounds laid there in store
Would force a stony heart to bleed.
Here is the spring of trickling tears,
The mirror of all mourning wights,
With doleful tunes, for dumpish cares
And solemn shows for sorrowed sights.
O happy soul that flies so hie,
As to attain this sacred cave:
Lord send me wings that I may fly,
And in this harbor quiet have.
Upon the Image of death.
BEfore my face the picture hangs,
That daily should put me in mind
Of those cold names and bitter pangs,
That shortly I am like to find:
But yet alas full little I
Do think hereon that I must die.
I often look upon a face
Most ugly, grisly, bare and thin,
I often view the hollow place,
Where eyes, and nose, have sometimes bin
I see the bones acrosse that lie:
Yet little think that I must die.
I read the Labell underneath
That tells me whereto I must,
I see the sentence eake that says,
Remember man that thou art dust:
But yet alas but seldom I
Do think indeed that I must die.
Continually at my beds head,
A hearse does hang which does me tell,
That I yer morning may be dead,
Though now I feel my self full well:
But now alas, for all this I
Have little mind that I must die.
The gown which I do use to wear,
The knife wherewith I cut my meat,
And eke that old and ancient chair,
Which is my only usual seat:
All those do tell me I must die,
And yet my life amend not I.
My ancestors are turned to clay,
And many of my mates are gone,
My yongers daily drop away,
And can I think to escape alone?
No, no, I know that I must die*
And yet my life amend not I*
Not Solomon for all his wits,
Nor Sampson though he were so strong,
No king nor ever person yet
Could escape, but death laid him along:
Wherefore I know that I must die?
And yet my life amend not I.
Though all the East did quake to hear,
Of Alexanders dreadful name,
And all the West did likewise fear.
To hear of Julius Cesars fame,
Yet both by death in dust now lie,
Who then can escape but he must die:
If none can escape deaths dreadful dart,
If rich and poor his beck obey,
If strong, if wise, if all do smart,
Then I to escape shall have no way.
Oh grant me grace O God that I,
My life may mend since I must die.
A vale of tears.
AVale there is enwrapt with dreadful shades,
Which thick of mourning pines shrouds from the sun
Where hanging clifts yield short and dumpish glades,
And snowie floods with broken streams do run,
Where eie-roume is from rock to cloudie sky,
From thence to dales which stormy ruins shroud,
Then to the crushed waters frothie fry,
Which tumbleth from the tops where snow is thow'd:
Where ears of other sound can have no choice,
But various blustering of the stubburne wind
In trees, in caves, in straits with diverse noise,
Which now does hiss, now howl, now roar by kind:
Where waters wrestle with encountering stones,
That break their streams and turn them into foame,
The hollow clouds full fraught with thundering groans,
With hideous thumps discharge their pregnant womb.
And in the horror of this fearful quier,
Consists the music of this doleful place.
All pleasant birds their tunes from thence retire,
Where none but heavy notes have any grace.
Resort there is of none but pilgrim wights,
That pass with trembling foot and panting heart,
With terror cast in cold and shuddring frights,
And all the place to terror framde by art:
Yet natures work it is of art untouched,
So strait indeed, so vast unto the eye,
With such disordred order strangely coucht,
And so with pleasing horror low and hie.
That who it viewes must needs remain aghast,
Much at the work, more at the makers might,
And muse how Nature such a plot could cast,
Where nothing seemed wrong, yet nothing right:
A place for mated minds, and only bower,
Where every thing does sooth a dumpish mood.
Earth lics forlorn, the cloudie sky does lower,
The wind here weeps, her sighs, her cries aloude.
The struggling flood between the marble groans,
Then roaring beats upon the craggie sides,
A little off amidst the pibble stones,
With bubling streams a purling noise it glides:
The pines thick set, hie grown, and ever green,
Still cloathe the place with shade and mourning veil.
Here gaping cliffes, there moss grown plain is seen,
Here hope does spring, and there again does quail.
Huge massy stones that hang by tickle stay,
Still threaten foul, and seem to hang in fear,
Some withered trees ashamde of their decay,
Be set with green, and forcde gray coats to wear.
Here crystal springs crept out of secret vain,
Strait find some envious hole that hides their grain.
Here seared tufts lament the wants of grace,
There thunder wrack gives terror to the place.
All pangs and heavy passions here may find
A thousand motives suitly to their griefs,
To feed the sorrows of their troubled mind,
And chase away dame pleasures vain reliefes.
To plaining thoughts this veil a rest may be,
To which from wordly toys they may retire.
Where sorrow springs from water, stone and tree,
Where every thing with mourners does conspire.
Sit here my soul mourn tears afloate,
Here all thy sinful foiles alone recount,
Of solemn tunes make thou the dolefulst note,
That to thy ditties dolor may amount,
When Echo does repeat thy painful cries,
Think that the very stones thy sins bewray,
And now accuse thee with their sad replies,
As heaven and earth shall in the latter day,
Let former faults be fuel of the fire,
For grief the Limbecke of thy heart to still.
Thy pensive thoughts, and dumps of thy desire,
And vapoure tears up to thy eyes at will.
Let tears to tunes, and pains to plaints be pressed,
And let this be the burden to thy song,
Come deep remorse, possess my sinful breast:
Delights adue I harbourd you too long.
The prodigal child's soul wrack.
DIsankered srom a blisfull shore, and lancht into the mean of cares
Grown rich in vice, in virtue poor, from freedom fallen in fatal snares
I found my self on every side enwrapped in the waves of woe,
And tossed with a toil some tide, could to no port for refuge go.
The wrestling wind with raging blasts still hold me in a cruel chase.
They break my anchors, sail, and masts, permitting no reposing place.
The boistrous seas with swelling floods, on every side did work their spite
Heaven ouercast with stormy clouds, denide the Planets guiding light.
The hellish furies lay in wait, to win my soul into their power,
To make me bite at every bait, wherein my bane I might devour.
Thus heaven and hell, thus sea land, thus storms and te^pests did conspire
With just revenge of scourging hand, to witness Gods deserved ire,
I plunged in this heavy plight, found in my faults just cause to fear:
My darkness taught to know my light, the loss whereof enforced tears.
I felt my inward bleeding sores, my festred wounds began to smart*
Stepped far within deaths fatal doors, the pangs whereof were nere my heart
I cried truce, I craved peace, a league with death I would conclude,
But vain it was to sue release, subdue I must or be subdude.
Death deceit had pitched their snares and put their wonted proofs in ure
To sink me in dispairing cares, or make me stoop to pleasures lure:
They fought by their bewitching charms, so to enchant my erring sense,
That when they sought my greatest harms, I might neglect my best defense.
My dazzled eyes could take no view, no heed of their receiving shifts,
So often did they alter hew, and practice new devised drifts:
With sirens song they fed mine ears, till luld a sleep on errors lap,
I found their tunes turned into tears, and short delights to long mishap.
For I enticed to their lore, and soothed with their idle toies
Was trained to their prison door, the end of all such flying ioies:
Where chainde in sin I lay in thrall, next to the dungeon of despair,
Till mercy raisde me from my fall, and grace my ruin did repair.
Man's civil war.
MY houering thoughts would fly to heaven, and quiet nestle in the sky,
Feign would my ship in virtues shore without remove at anchor lie:
But mounted thoughts are hailed down with heavy poise of mortal load,
And blustering storms deny my ship, in virtues haven sure abode.
When inward eye to heavenly sights does draw my longing hearts desire,
The world with lesses of delights, would to her perch my thoughts retire,
Fond fancy trains to pleasures lure, though reason stiffely do repine.
Though wisdom woo me to the saint, yet sense would win me to the shrine,
Where reason loathes, there fancy loves, and ever rules the captive will
Foes senses; and to virtues lore, they draw the wit their wish to fill.
Need craves consent of soul to sense, yet diverse bents breed civil fray,
Hard hap where halues must disagree, or trust of halues the hole betray,
O cruel fight where fighting friend with love does kill a favoring foe,
Where peace with sense is war with God and selfdelight the seed of woe.
Dame pleasures drugges are steept in sin, their sugared taste does breed anoy,
O fickle sense beware her ginne, sell not thy soul for brittle toy.
Seek flowers of heaven.
Soar up my soul unto thy rest, cast off this loathsome lode:
Long is the date of thy exile, too long the strickt abode,
Graze not on worldly withered weed, it fitteth not thy taste,
The flowers of everlasting spring, do grow for thy repaste.
Their leaves are staind in beauties die, and blazed with their beams,
Their stalks inameld with delight, and limbde with glorious gleames.
Life giving juice of living love their sugared veins does fill,
And watered with everlasting showers* they nectared drops distill.
These flowers do spring from fertile soil, though from vnmanurde field,
Most glittering gold in lieu of glebe these fragrant flowers do yield:
Whose sovereign sent surpassing sense, so rauisheth the mind,
That worldly weeds needs must he loath, that can these flowers find.
FINIS.

