Ester has hanged Haman: OR AN ANSWER TO a lewd Pamphlet, entitled, The
Arraignment of Women. With the arraignment of lewd, idle, froward, and
unconstant men, and HVSBANDS.

Divided into two Parts. The first proves the dignity and worthiness of
Women, out of divine Testimonies. The second showing the estimation of the
Foeminine Sex, in ancient and Pagan times; all which is acknowledged by men
themselves in their daily actions.

Written by Ester Sowernam, neither Maid, Wife nor Widdowe, yet really all,
and therefore experienced to defend all.

JOHN 8.7. He that is without sin among you, let him first cast a stone at
her. Neque enim lex iusticior vlla
-- Quam necis Artificem art perire sua.
LONDON, Printed for Nicholas Bourne, and are to be sold at his shop at the
entrance of the Royal Exchange. 1617.

TO ALL RIGHT Honorable, Noble, and worthy Ladies, Gentlewomen, and others,
virtuously disposed, of the Foeminine Sex.
RIght Honorable, and all others of our Sex, upon my repair to London this
last Michaelmas Term; being at supper amongst friends, where the number of
each sex were equal; As nothing is more usual for table-talke; there fell
out a discourse concerning women, some defending, others obiecting against our
Sex: Upon which occasion, there happened a mention of a Pamphlet entitled The
Arraignment of Women, which I was desirous to see. The next day a Gentleman
brought me the Book, which when I had superficially run over, I found the
discourse as far off from performing what the Title promised, as I found it
scandalous and blasphemous: for where the Author pretended to write against
lewd, idle, and unconstant women, he does most impudently rage and rail
generally against all the whole sex of women. Whereupon, I in defense of our
Sex, began an answer to that full Pamphlet. In which, after I had spent some
small time, word was brought me that an Apology for women was already
undertaken, and ready for the Press, by a Ministers daughter: Upon this news
I stayed my pen, being as glad to be eased of my intended labor; as I did
expect some fitting performance of what was undertaken: At last the Maidens
Book was brought me, which when I had likewise run over, I did observe, that
whereas the Maid does many times excuse her tenderness of years, I found it
to be true in the slenderness of her answer, for she undertaking to defend
women, does rather charge and condemn women, as in the ensuing discourse shall
appear: So that whereas I expected to be eased of what I began, I do now find
my self double charged, as well to make reply to the one, as to add supply to
the other.

In this my Apology, Right Honorable, Right Worshipful, and all others of
our Sex, I do in the first part of it plainly and resolutely deliver the
worthiness and worth of women; both in respect of their Creation, as in the
work of Redemption. Next I do show in examples out of both the Testaments:
what blessed and happy choice has been made of women, as gracious instruments
to derive Gods blessings and benefits to mankind.

In my second part I do deliver of what estimate women have been valued in all
ancient and modern times, which I prove by authorities, customs, and daily
experiences. Lastly, I do answer all material objections which have or can be
alleged against our Sex: in which also I do arraigne such kind of men, which
correspond the humor and disposition of the Author; lewd, idle, furious and
beastly disposed persons.

This being performed, I doubt not but such as heretofore have been so forward
and lavish against women, will hereafter pull in their horns, and have as
little desire, and less cause so scandalously and slanderously to write
against us then formerly they have.

The ends for which I undertook this enterprise, are these. First, to set out
the glory of Almighty God, in so blessed a work of his Creation. Secondly, to
encourage all Noble, Honorable, and worthy Women, to express in their course
of life and actions, that they are the same Creatures which they were designed
to be by their Creator, and by their Redeemer: And to parallel those women,
whose virtuous examples are collected briefly out of the Old and New
Testament. Lastly, I write for the shame and confusion of such as degenerate
from woman-hoode, and disappoint the ends of Creation, and Redemption.

There can be no greater encouragement to true Nobility, then to know and stand
upon the honor of Nobility, nor any greater confusion and shame, then for
Nobility to dismount and abase it self to ignoble and degenerate courses.

You are women; in Creation, noble; in Redemption, gracious; in use most
blessed; be not forgetful of your selves, nor unthankful to that Author from
whom you receive all.

TO ALL WORTHY AND Hopeful young youths of Great-Brittaine; But respectively
to the best disposed and worthy Apprentifes of LONDON.
Hopeful and gallant youths of Great-Brittaine, and this so famous a Cit^^.
There has been lately published a Pamphlet entitled The Arraignment of lewd,
idle froward and inconstant Women. This patched and misshapen hotch-potch, is so
directed, that if Socrates did laugh but once to see an Ass ^nce Thistles, he
would surely laugh twice to see an idle frantic direct his misshapen Labors
to giddy headed young men: he would say, as he did when the Ass did eat
Th^stles, like lips, like L^^n^^, so a franticks writer does aptly choose giddy
favorites.

The Author of the Arraignment, and my self, in our labors do altogether
disagree; he raileth without cause, I defend upon direct proof. He says,
women are the worst of all Creatures, I prove them blessed above all
Creatures: He writes, that men should abhor them for their had conditions: I
prove that men should honor them for their best dispositions he says, women
are the cause^ of (...), I prove, if there be any offense in a woman, men were
the beginners. Now, in that it is far^e more woman like to maintain a right,
then it is man like to offer a wrong, I conceived that I could not err in my
choice, if I did direct a labor well intended, to worthy young youths, which
are well disposed.

When you have past your minority, or served your Apprenships under the
government of others, when you begin the world for your selves, the chiefest
thing you look for is a good Wife.

The world is a large field, and it is full of brambles, briars, and weeds: If
there be any more tormenting, more scratting, or more poysonable weed then
other, the Author has collected them in his loathsome Pamphlet, and does utter
them to his giddy company.

Now my self presuming upon your worthy and hanest dispositions, I have entered
into the Garden of Paradise, and there have gathered the choysest flowers which
that Garden may afford, and those I offer to you.

If you believe our aduersury, no woman is good, howsoever she be used: if you
consider what I have written, no woman is had except she be abused.

If you believe him that women are so bad Creatures, what a dangerous and
miserable life is marriage?

If you examine my proofs to know directly what women are, you shall then
find there is no delight more exceeding then to be joined in marriage with a
Paraditian Creature. Who as she comes out of the Garden, so shall you find
her a flower of delight, answerable to the Country from whence she comes.

There can be no love betwixt man and wife, but where there is a respective
estimate the one toward the other. How could you love? nay, how would you
loath such a monster, to whom Joseph Swetnam poynteth?

Whereas in view of what I have described, how can you but regardfully love
with the uttermost strain of affection so incomparable a Jewel.

Some will perhaps say, I am a woman and therefore write more for women then
they do deserve: To whom I answer, if they misdoubt of what I speak, let
them impeach my credit in any one particular: In that which I write, Eve was a
good woman before she met with the Serpent, her daughters are good Virgins, if
they meet with good Tutors.

You my worthy youths are the hope of Man-hoode, the principal point of
Man-hoode is to defend, and what more man-like defense, then to defend the just
reputation of a woman. I know that you the Apprentises of this City are as
forward to maintain the good, as you are vehement to put down the bad.

That which is worst I leave to our adversary, but what is excellently best,
that I commend to you: do you find the gold, I do here deliver you the
Jewel, a rich stock to begin the world withal, if you be good husbands to
use it for your best advantage.

Let not the title of this Book in some point distaste you, in that men are
arraigned, for you are quit by Nonage. None are here arraigned, but such old
fornicators as came with full mouth and open cry to Jesus, and brought a woman
to him taken in adultery, who when our Savior stoopt down and wrote on the
ground, they all fled away. Joseph Swetnam says, A man may find Pearls in
dust, Page 47. But if they who sled had seen any Pearls, they would rather
have stayed to have had share, then to fly and to lean the woman alone, they
found some foul reckoning against themselves in our Saviors writing, as they
shall do who are hear arraigned. And if they dare do like, as our Savior
had the woman's accusers, He that is without sin throw the first stone at her;
so let them rail against women, who never tempted any woman to be bad: Yet
this is an hard case. If a man rail against a woman, and know no lewdness by
any, he shall prove himself a compound fool. If he rail at woman, who in his
own experienced trial had made many bad, he shall show himself a
decompounded K. I do not mean Knight: The best way is, he that knows none
bad, let him speak well of all: he who has made more bad then he ever
intended to make good, let him hold his peace least he shame himself.
Farewell.

Ester Sowrenam.

AN ANSWER TO THE FIRST CHAPTER OF THE Arraignment of Women.
CHAP. I.
IF the Author of this Arraignment had performed his discourse either
answerable to the Title, or the Arguments of the Chapters; he had been so
far off from being answered by me, that I should have commended so good a
labor, which is employed to give vice just reproof, and virtue honorable
report. But at the very first entrance of his discourse, in the very first
page, he discovers himself neither to have truth in his promise, nor
religious performance. If in this answer I do use more vehement speeches then
may seem to correspond the natural disposition of a Woman; yet all judicious
Readers shall confess that I use more mildness then the cause I have in hand
provoke me unto.

I am not only provoked by this Author to defend women, but I am more
violently urged to defend divine Majesty, in the work of his Creation. In
which respect I say with Saint Jerome, Epist. ad Ciprianum.
Meam iniuriam patienter sustinui, impietatem contra deum far non potui. For
as Saint Chrysostom says, Sup. Math.
iniurias Dei dissimulare impium est.

If either Julian the Apostata, or Lucian the Atheist should undertake the like
work, could the own devise to write more blasphemously, or the other to
scoff and flout at the divine Creation of Woman, more profanely then this
irreligious Author does?

Homer does report in his Illiads, that there was at the siege of Troy, a
Grecian, called Thersites, whose wit was so blockish, he was not worthy to
speak: yet his disposition was so precipitate, he could not hold his tongue
Joseph Swetnam in all record of Histories cannot be so likely paraleld as with
this Thersites. What his composition of body is I know not, but for his
disposition otherwise, in this Pamphlet I know, he is as monstrous as the work
is misshapen, which shall plainly appear in the examination of the first page
only.

The Argument of the first Chapter is, to show to what use Women were made; it
also shows, That most of them degenerate from the use they were framed unto,
etc.

Now, to show to what use woman was made, he begins thus. At the first
beginning a Woman was made to be an helper to Man: And so they are indeed, for
they help to consume and spend, etc. This is all the use, and all the end
which the Author sets down in all his discourse for the creation of woman.
Mark a ridiculous jest in this: Spending and consuming of that which Man
painfully gets, is by this Author the use for which Women were made. And
yet (says he in the Argument) most of them degenerate from the use they were
framed unto. Woman was made to spend and consume at the first: But women do
degenerate from this use, Ergo, Midasse does contradict himself. Beside this
egregious folly, he runs into horrible blasphemy. Was the end of Gods
creation in Woman to spend and consume? Is helper to be taken in that sense,
to help to spend? etc. Is spending and consuming, helping?

He runs on, and says, They were made of a Rib, and that their froward and
crooked nature does declare, for a Rib is a crooked thing, etc.

Woman was made of a crooked rib, so she is crooked of conditions. Joseph
Swetnam was made as from Adam of clay and dust, so he is of a durty and muddy
disposition: The inferences are both alike in either; woman is no more crooked,
in respect of the one; but he is blasphemous in respect of the other. Did Woman
receive her soul and disposition from the rib; Or as it is said in Genesis,
God did breath in them the spirit of life? Admit that this Authors doctrine be
true, that woman receives her froward and crooked disposition from the rib,
Woman may then conclude upon that Axiom in Philosophy, To take a vantage upon
a disadvantage.
Quicquid efficit tale, illud est magis tale, That which gives quality to a
thing, does more abound in that quality; as fire which heateth, is it self
more hot: The Sun which gives light, is of it self more light: So, if Woman
received her crookedness from the rib, and consequently from the Man, how does
man excel in crookedness, who has more of those crooked ribs? See how this
vain, furious, and idle Author furnishes woman with an Argument against
himself, and others of his Sex.

The Author having desperately begun, does more rashly and impudently run
on in blasphemy, which he does evidently show in the inference upon his former
speeches: And therefore (says he) Ever since they have been a woe unto Man,
and follow the live of the first leader. Now let the Christian Reader please to
consider how dishonestly this Author deals, who undertaking a particular,
prosecuteth and persecuteth a general, under the cloak and color of lewd,
idle, and froward women, to rage and rail against all women in general.

Now, having examined what collections Joseph Swetnam has wrested out of
Scriptures, to dishonor and abuse all women: I am resolved, before I answer
further particulars made by him against our sex, to collect and note out of
Scriptures; First, what incomparable and most excellent prerogatives God has
bestowed upon women, in honor of them, and their Creation: Secondly, what
choice God has made of women, in using them as instruments to work his most
gracious and glorious designs, for the general benefit of mankind, both
during the law of Nature, and of Moses: Thirdly, what excellent and divine
graces have been bestowed upon our Sex, in the law of Grace, and the work of
Redemption: With a conclusion, that to manifest the worthiness of women, they
have been chosen to perform and publish the most happy and joyful benefits
which ever came to mankind.

CHAPTER II. What incomparable and excellent prerogatives God has bestowed
upon Women, in their first Creation.
IN this ensuing Chapter I determine briefly to observe (not curiously to
discourse at large) the singular benefits and graces bestowed upon Women: In
regard of which, it is first to be considered; That the Almighty God in the
worlds frame in his Divine wisdom, designed to himself a maine end to which
he ordained all the works of his Creation, in which he being a most excellent
worke-master, did so Create his works, that every succeeding work was ever
more excellent then what was formerly Created: he wrought by degrees,
providing in all for that which was and should be the end.

It appears by that Sovereignty which God gave to Adam over all the Creatures
of Sea and Land, The prerogatives given to women in their Creation.
that man was the end of Gods creation, whereupon it does necessarily, without
all exception follow, that Adam, being the last work, is therefore the most
excellent work of creation: yet Adam was not so absolutely perfect, but that
in the sight of God, he wanted an Helper: Whereupon God created the woman his
last work, as to supply and make absolute that imperfect building which was
unperfected in man, as all Divines do hold, till the happy creation of the
woman. Now of what estimate that Creature is and ought to be, The last work.
which is the last work, upon whom the Almighty set up his last rest: whom he
made to to add perfection. to the end of all creation I leave rather to be
acknowledged by others, then resolved by my self.

It is furthermore to be considered, as the Maid, in her Mussell for
Melastomus has observed: that God intended to honor woman in a more excellent
degree, Created upon a refined subject.
in that he created her out of a subject refined, as out of a Quintissence: For
the ribbe is in Substance more solid, in place as most near, so in estimate
most dear, to man's heart, which does presage that as she was made for an
helper, so to be an helper to stay, to settle all joy, all contents, all
delights, to and in man's heart, as hereafter shall be showed.

That delight, A better country.
solace, and pleasure, which shall come to man by woman, is prognosticated by
that place wherein woman was created: for she was framed in Paradise, a place
of all delight and pleasure, every element has his creatures, every creature
does corresponde the temper and the inclination of that element wherein it has
and took his first and principal esse, or being. So that woman neither can or
may degenerate in her disposition from that natural inclination of the place,
in which she was first framed, she is a Paradician, that is, a delightful
creature, borne in so delightful a country.

When woman was created, Men are worldlings, Women paradicians.
God brought her unto Adam, and then did solempnise that most auspicious
Marriage betwixt them, with the greatest Majesty, and magnificence that
heaven, or earth might afford. God was the Father, which gave so rich a jewel:
God was the Priest which tied so inseparable a knot. Woman's marriage.
God was the Steward which provided all the pleasures, all the dainties, all
the blessings, which his divine wisdom might afford, in so delightful a
place.

The woman was married to Adam, as with a most sure and inseparable band, so
with a most affectionate and dutiful love: Adam was enjoined to receive his
wife, as is noted in the Bible printed 1595.

There is no love (always excepting the transcending love) which is so highly
honored, so graciously rewarded, so straightly commanded, or which being
broken, is so severely punished, as the love and duty which Children owe to
their Parents: Yet this love albeit never so respective, is dispensed withal
in respect of that love which a man is bound to bear to his wife: For this
cause, says Adam, (as from the mouth of God) shall a man leave Father and
Mother, and cleave only to his Wife. This word cleave is uttered in the Hebrew
with a more significant emphasie, then any other Language may express; such a
cleaving and joining together, which admits no separation. It may be
necessarily observed, that that gift of the woman was most singularly
excellent, which was to be accepted and entertained with so inestimable a
love, The wedding Ring.
and made inseparable by giving and taking the Ring of Lone, which should be
endless.

Now, the woman taking view of the Garden, she was assaulted with a Serpent of
the masculine gender; who maliciously envying the happiness in which man was
at this time, like a mischievous Politician, Woman's temptation.
he practiced by supplanting of the woman, to turn him out of all: For which
end he most craftily and cunningly attempteth the woman; and tells her, that
therefore they were forbidden to eat of the fruit which grew in the midst of
the Garden, that in eating, they should not be like unto God: Whereupon the
woman accepted, tasted, and gave to her Husband. In accepting the Serpents
offer, there was no sin; for there was no sin till the fruit was eaten:
Now, albeit I have undertaken the defense of women, and may in that respect be
fanoured, in taking all advantages I may, to defend my sex.

There are many pregnant places in the Scripture which might be alleged to
extenuate the sin of the Woman, in respect of the sin of Adam: it is said
Ecclesiast. 25. Sin had his beginning in woman, Ergo, his fullness in man.

Saint Paul says, Chap. 5.
Romans 5. By one man's sin death came into the world, without mention of the
woman^ The same Saint Paul writes to the Corinthians, Chap. 9.
to whom he affirms, that all die in Adam, in which the fullness and effects
of sin are charged upon Adam alone, not but that woman had her part in the
Tragedy, but not in so high a degree as the man.

When Adam had eaten, Adam his offenses upon his fall.
and sin was now in fullness, he begins to multiply sin upon sin:
first he flies from the sight of God; next, being called to account, he
excuses his sin; and does expostulate (as it were) with Almighty God, and
tells him, That woman which thou gave me, gave me, and I did eat: As who
should say, if thou had not given the cause, I had not been guilty of the
effect; making (herein) God the Author of his fall.

Now what is become of that love, Adams love like his childrens in these days.
which Adam was bound to bear toward his wife? He charge her with all the
burden; so he may discharge himself he cares little how he clog her.

God having examined the offenders, and haueing heard the uttermost they could
allege for themselves, he pronounces sentence of death upon them, Adam
punished with justice.
as a punishment in justice due and deserved. Justice he administered to Adam:
Albeit the woman does taste of justice, yet mercy is reserved for her, and of
all the works of mercy which mankind may hope for, the greatest, the most
blessed, Woman punished by Justice, relieved by Mercy.
and the most joyful is promised to woman.

Woman supplanted by tasting of fruit, she is punished in bringing forth her
own fruit. Yet what by fruit she lost, by fruit she shall recover.

What more gracious a gift could the Almighty promise to woman, The
incomparable inventions of women's wits.
then to bring forth the fruit in which all nations shall be blessed? so that
as woman was a means to loose Paradise, she is by this, made a means to
recover Heaven. Adam could not vpbraid her for so great a loss, but he was to
honor her more for a greater recovery: all the punishments inflicted upon
women, are encountered with most gracious blessings and benefits; she has not
so great cause of dolor in one respect, as she has infinite cause of joy in
another. She is commanded to obey her husband; the cause is, the more to
increase her glory. Obedience is better then Sacrifice: 1 Samuel 1:
for nothing is more acceptable before God then to obey: women are much bound
to God, to have so acceptable a virtue enioyn^^ them for their penance.

Amongst the curses and punishments heaped upon the Serpent, what greater joy
could she hear, or what greater honor could be done unto her, then to hear
from the voice of God these words; I will put cumitie betwixt the woman and
thee, betwixt thy seed and her seed, and that her seed should break the
Serpents head? This must perforce be an exceeding joy for the woman, to hear
and to be assured that her fruit should revenge her wrong.

After the fall, and after they were all arraigned and censured, and that now
Adam saw his wives dowry, and what blessings God has bestowed upon her,
Woman's name answerable to her nature.
he being now a bondslaue to death and hell, stroke dead in regard of
himself, yet he comforts himself, he takes heart from grace, he engages
his hope upon that promise which was made to the woman. Out of this most
comfortable and blessed hope he now calls his wife by a name, in whose
effects not only he, but all mankind should most blessedly share: he calls
her Eve, which is, the mother of the living: which is suitable as well in
respect of the promise made to her and her seed, as in respect of those
employments for which in her creation she and all women are designed, to be
helpers, comforters, Joys, and delights, and in true use and government they
ever have been and ever will be, as hereafter shall be showed, maugre the
shameful, blasphemous and profane speech of Joseph Swetnam, page 31. beginning
line 15. as follows.

If God had not made them only to be a plague to a man, he would never have
called them necessary evils.

Out of what Scripture, out of what record, can he prove these impious and
impudent speeches? They are only feigned and framed out of his own idle,
giddie, furious, and frantic imaginations. If he had cited Euripides for his
Author, he had had some color, for (...) profane Poet in Medea, uses these
speeches, Quod si Deorum aliquis mulierem formauit, opificem se malorum sciat,
maximum and hominibus inimicum. If any of the Gods framed woman, let him know
he was the worker of that which is naught, and what is most hurtful to men.
Thus a Pagan writes profanely, but for a Christian to say, that God calls
women necessary evils, is most intolerable and shameful to be written and
published.

CHAP. III. What choice God has made of women to be instruments to derive his
benefits to Mankind.
ABraham being in danger, Genes. 20.
was blessed and preserved in respect of Sara.

Rebecca by Gods providence was the means to bring the blessing of Isaac to
fall upon Jacob. Genes. 27.
Exodus 1.


The Egyptian Mid-wiues were a means to preserve the male children of the
Israelites from the murder intended by Pharao.

Moses was preserved by the daughter of Pharao. Exodus 2.


The Messengers sent by Duke Iosuab to view the Land of Promise, Iosu^ 2.6.
were harbored and freed from danger by a woman.

When the Children of Israel had been twenty years oppressed by Iabin King
of Canaan, Judges 4.
Debbora and Iahell, two women; the one w^^^e the battle, the other slew the
General.

When Abimilech had murdered seauenty of his Brethren, Judges 9.
he was punished and slain by a woman at the siege of Thebes.

Micholl adventured the hazard of her Fathers displeasure to preserve her
Husband David. 1 Kings 19.


Abigail by incomparable wisdom with held David from shedding of innocent
blood. 1 Kings 25.


The City of Abdela being in danger, 2 Kings 20.
was preserved by a wise woman of that City.

In the great famine of Samaria, 3 Kings 17.
the widow of Sarepta was chosen to preserve Elias, and Elias to preserve her.

The like provision did the woman, 4 Kings 4.
a Sunamite, make for Elizeus, and Elizeus for the woman.

When the bloud-Royall of Judah had been all murdered, 4 Kings 11.
Ioas afterward King, was preserved by a woman.

What was that noble adventure so blessedly performed by Judith, Judith.
in cutting off the head of Holofernes?

With what wisdom did Queen Hester preserve her people, Hester.
and caused their enemies to be hanged?

What a chaste mirror was Susanna, Susanna.
who rather hazarded her life, then offend against God?

Never was greater magnanimity showed by a woman, 2 Match. 7.
then by that Mother which saw her seven children tormented most cruelly, yet
she encouraged them to the death.

CHAP. IIII. What excellent blessings and graces have been bestowed upon women
in the Law of Grace.
THe first which comes in this place to be mentioned, is that blessed mother
and mirror of al woman-hood, the Virgin Marie, who was magnified in the birth
of Jesus, glorified by Angels, chosen by the Almighty to bear in her womb the
Savior of mankind.

With what a faithful salutation did Elizabeth, Luke 1.
Saint John Baptist Mother, entertain the Virgin upon her repair unto her?

Anna the old Prophetess did miraculously demonstrate our Savior. Luke 2.


The woman which had the issue of blood: Math. 917.
the woman of Canaan, Ioh. 4. The Samaritan woman. Martha, the 11. of John: all
these and sundry others are saved, healed, and have their sins forgiven, in
respect of their true and lively faith.

What faith? what zeal? what devotion did Marie Magdelen show toward Jesus,
Luke 7.
in prostrating her self at the feet of Jesus, annoynting them with precious
ointment, washing them with tears, and drying them with the hair of her head?

With what bounty and devotion did the Maryes, Luke 8.
the wife of Herod's steward, did Ioanna, with other women contribute of their
goods to Jesus?

How charitable was that poor widow, Luke 2.2.
whose two Mites our Savior valued at a greater estimate, then any gift of any
other whatsoever?

In all dangers, Luke 2.3.
troubles, and extremities, which fell to our Savior, when all men fled from
him, living or dead, women never forsook him.

I should be ouer-tedious to repeat every example of most zealous, faithful,
and devout women, which I might in the new Testament, whose faith and denotion
was censured by our Savior to be without compare.

I will conclude for women that they have been chosen both to set out Gods
glory, and for the benefit of all mankind, in more glorious and gracious
employments then men have been.

The first promise of a Messiah to come was made to a woman: the birth and
bearing of that promised Messiah was performed by a woman.

The triumphant resurrection with the conquest over death and hell, was first
published and proclaimed by a woman.

I might hereunto add those wives, widows, and virgins, which flourished in
the primative Church, and all succeeding ages sithence, who in all virtues have
excelled, and honored both their sexeen general, and themselves in
particular, who in their martyrdomes, in their confession of Jesus, and in all
Christian, and divine virtues, have in no respect been inferior unto men.

THus out of the second and third Chapters of Genesis, and out of the Old and
New Testaments, The summon of woman's blessings and graces.
I have observed in proof of the worthiness of our Sex: First, that woman
was the last work of Creation, I dare not say the best: She was created out of
the chosen and best refined substance: She was created in a more worthy
country: She was married by a most holy Priest: She was given by a most
gracious Father: Her husband was enjoined to a most inseparable and
affectionate care over her: The first promise of salvation was made to a woman:
There is inseparable hatred and enmity put betwixt the woman and the Serpent:
Her first name, Eua, does presage the nature and disposition of all women, not
only in respect of their bearing, but further, for the life and delight of
heart and soul to all mankind.

I have further showed the most gracious, blessed, and rarest benefits, in all
respects, bestowed upon women; all plainly and directly out of Scriptures.

All which does demonstrate the blasphemous impudency of the author of the
Arraignement, who would or durst write so basely and shamefully, in so general
a manner, against our so worthy and honored a sex.

To the courteous and friendly READER.
GEntle READER, in my first Part I have (what I might) strictly observed a
religious regard, not to entermingle any thing unfitting the gravity of so
respective an Argument.

Now that I am come to this second Part, I am determined to solace my self
with a little liberty: What advantages I did forbear to take in the former, I
mean to make use of in this second. Joseph Swetnam has been long unanswered,
which had been performed sooner, if I had heard of his Book before this last
Term: Or if the report of the Maidens answer had not stayed me. I have not so
amply and absolutely discharged my self in this Apology as I would have done,
if either my leisure had been such, as I could have wished, or the time more
favorable, that I might have stayed. What my repair into the Country
enforces me so leave rather begun then finished; I mean (by Gods grace) to
make perfect the next Term: In the mean time (gentle READER) I bid thee
kindly farewell.

Ester Sowrenam.

CHAP. IIII. At what estimate Women were valued in ancient and former times.
PLato in his Books de Legibus, estimateth of Women, which do equal Men in
all respects, only in body they are weaker, but in wit and disposition of
mind nothing inferior, if not superior. Whereupon he does in his so absolute
a Commonwealth, admit them to government of Kingdoms and Commonweales, if
they be either borne thereunto by Nature, or seated in government by Election.

It is apparent, that in the prime of antiquity, women were valued at highest
estimate, in that all those most inestimable and incomparable benefits which
might either honor or preserve Mankind, are all generally attributed to the
invention of women, as may appear in these few examples following.

When meum and tuum, Mine and Thine, The incompara^^^ ^^u^ntiens of women's wit.
when right and wrong were decided by wars, and their weapons then were the
furniture of Nature, as Fists, Teeth, Stones, Stakes, or what came next to
hand: A Lady of an heroical disposition, called Bellona, did first invent a
more man-like and honorable weapon for war, which was the sword, with other
Armor correspondent, for which she was at first (and so ever since) honored,
as the Goddess of war.

When at the first the finest Manchet and best bread in use was of Acorns, by
the singular and practical wit of a Lady called Ceres, the sowing of Corn,
and Tillage was invented.

The invention of the seven liberal Sciences, of all Arts, of all Learning,
has been generally with one consent ascribed to the invention of Jupiters
daughters, the nine Muses, whose Mother was a royal Lady Mneneosum.

Carmentis a Lady, first invented Letters, and the use of them by reading and
writing.

The royal and most delightful exercise of Hunting was first found out and
practiced by Diana, who thereupon is celebrated for the Goddess of Hunting.

The three Graces, which add a decorum, and yield favor to Persons, Actions,
and Speeches, are three Ladies, Aglaia, Thalia, and Enphrosune.

The heroical exercises of Olimpus, were first found and put in practice by
Palestra a woman.

The whole world being divided into three parts in more ancient times, every
division to this day keeps the name in honor of a woman.

The foeminine Sex is exceedingly honored by Poets in their writings: They
have Gods as well for good things, as for bad; but they have no
women-Goddesses, but in things which are especially good. They have Bacchus for
a drunken God, but no drunken Goddess. They have Priapus the lustful God of
Gardens, but no garden-Goddesses, except of late in the garden-Allies. They
will object here unto me Venus, she indeed is the Goddess of Love, but it is
her blind Son which is the God of Lust; poor Lady, she has but her
ioynture in the Manor of Love, Cupid is Lord of all the rest, he has the
royalty; she may not strike a Dear, but she must employ her Son that saucy
Boy.

For Pride, they held it so far from women, that they found out Nemesis or
Rhamnusia, to punish and revenge pride, but none to infect with pride.

They have Pluto the God of Hell, but no proper Gods of hell; but Proserpina,
whom Pluto forcibly took from Mount Aetna, and carried her away, and made her
Queen of Hell; yet she does not remain in Hell but one half of the year, by
a decree from Jupiter.

If I should recite and set down all the honorable records and Monuments for
and of women, I might write more Books then I have yet written lines. I will
leave and pass over the famous testimonies of foreign Kingdoms and
Commonwealths, in honor of our Sex: and I will only mention some few
examples of our own Country and Kingdom, which have been incomparably
benefited and honored by women.

Amongst the old Britains, our first Ancestors, the valiant Boadicea, that
defended the liberty of her Country, against the strength of the Romans, when
they were at the greatest, and made them feel that a woman could conquer them
who had conquered almost all the men of the then known world.

The devout Helen, who besides that, she was the Mother of that religious and
great Constantine, who first seated Christian Religion in the Imperial throne,
and in that respect may be styled the mother of Religion, is still more
honored for her singular piety and charity toward him and his members, who
dyed for us upon the Cross, then for her care and industry in finding out the
wood of that Cross on which he dyed.

In the time of the Danes, chaste Aemma, whose innocence carried her naked
feet over the fire-hot Plow shares unfelt; with the Saxons Queen Elfgiue the
holy widow, and the Kings daughter Edith a Virgin Saint, both greater
Conquerers then Alexander the great, that men so much boast of, who could not
conquer himself.

Since the Normans, the heroical virtues of Elenor wife to Edward the first,
who when her Husband in the Holy Land was wounded with a poisoned Arrow, of
which there was no hope of recovery from the Chyrurgions, she sucked the poison
into her own body to free him: together, curing that mortal wound, and making
her own fame immortal: so that I think this one act of hers may equal all
the acts that her great Husband did in those wars besides.

Philip, wife to Edward the third, no less to be honored for being the Mother
of so many brave children, then of so many good deeds, which worthily got her
the title of good.

Margaret the wise, wife to Henry the sixth, who if her Husbands fortune,
valor, and foresight, had been answerable to hers, had left the Crown of
England to their own Son, and not to a stranger.

The other Margaret of Richmond, mother to Henry the seventh, from whose
breasts he may seem to have derived as well his virtues as his life, in respect
of her heroical prudence and piety; whereof, besides other Monuments, both
the Universities are still witnesses.

Besides this, it was by the blessed means of Elizabeth, wife to Henry the
seventh, that the bloody wars betwixt the houses of York and Lancaster were
ended, and the red Rose and the white united, etc.

It was by the means of the most renowned Queen (the happy Mother of our
dread Sovereign) that the two Kingdoms once mortal foes, are now so
blessedly conjoined.

And that I may name no more (since in one only were comprised all the
qualities and endowments that could make a person eminent) Elizabeth our late
Sovereign, not only the glory of our Sex, but a pattern for the best men to
imitate, of whom I will say no more, but that while she lived, she was the
mirror of the world, so then known to be, and so still remembered, and ever
will be.

Daily experience, and the common course of Nature, does tell us that women
were by men in those times highly valued, and in worth by men themselves
preferred, and held better then themselves,

I will not say that women are better then men, but I will say, men are not so
wise as I would wish them to be, to woo us in such fashion as they do, except
they should hold and account of us as their betters.

What travail? what charge? what study? Men sue to Women.
do not men undertake to gain our good will, love, and liking? what vehement
suits do they make unto us? with what solemn vows and protestations do they
solicit us? they write, they speak, they send, to make known what entire
affection they bear unto us, that they are so deeply engaged in love, except
we do compassion them with our love and favor, they are men utterly cast
away. One he will starve himself, another will hang, another drown, another
stab, another will exile himself from kindred and country, except they may
obtain our loves: What? will they say that we are baser then themselves? then
they wrong themselves exeedingly, to prefer such vehement suits to creatures
inferior to themselves: Suitors do ever in their suites confess a more
worthiness in the persons to whom they sue. Suint is always preferred to the
better.
These kind of suits are from Nature, which cannot deceive them: Nature does
tell them what women are, and custom does approve what nature does direct.
Aristotle says, Omnia appetunt bonum, every thing by nature does seek after
that which is good. Nature then does carry men with violence, to seek and sue
after women: They will answer, and seek to elude this Maxim with a
distinction, that bonum is duplex, aut verum, aut apparens, that goodness or
the thing which is good, is either truly good, or but apparently good; so they
may say, women are but apparently good. But the heathen Orator and the divine
philosopher to, affirm, if we follow the true direction of nature we shall
never be deceived. Nature in her vehement motions is not deceived with apparent
shows. It is natural, they will say, for the Male to follow the Female; so it
is as natural, for the Female to be better then the Male, as appears to be
true in observation of Hawks: the Spar-hawke is of more esteem then the
Musket; the Goshawke more excellent then the Tersell; so in Falcons, the
females do excel: The like men are bound to acknowledge women; the rather in
respect of their own credit and honor. To what obsequious duty and service
do men bind themselves, to obtain a favor from their devoted Mistress,
which if he may obtain he thinks himself to be much honored, and puts in
place of most noted view, that the world may take note: He wears in his hat,
or on his breast, or upon his arm, the Glove, Women's savors est imated as
relics.
the Scarf, or Ring of his Mistrisse: If these were not relickes from Saintly
creatures, men would not sacrifice so much devotion unto them.

Amongst diverse causes which proceed from nature and custom, why men are so
earnest Suitors to women, I have observed one, which by practice is daily
confessed. Plato says, that Honesty is of that worthiness, that men are
greatly enflamed with the love of it; and as they do admire it, so they study
how to obtain it: it is apparent, young men which are unmarried, and called
batchelers, they may have a disposition, or may serve an apprentiship to
honesty, Honesty comes by marriage, the vvomans dovvrie.
but they are never freemen, nor ever called honest men, till they be married:
for that is the portion which they get by their wives. When they are once
married, they are forthwith placed in the rank of honest men, If question be
asked, what is such a man? it is presently resolved, he is an honest man: And
the reason presently added, for he has a wife; she is the sure sign and
seal of honesty. It is usual amongst old and grave fathers, if they have a
son given to spending and companie-keeping, who is of a wild and riotous
disposition, such a father shall presently be counseled, help your son to a
good wife, marry him, marry him, that is the only way to bring him to good
order, to tame him, to bring him to be an honest man: The ancient fathers do
herein acknowledge a greater worthiness in women then in men; the hope which
they have of an untowardly son, to reclaim him, is all engaged upon the
woman.

In no one thing, men do acknowledge a more excellent perfection in women then
in the estimate of the offenses which a woman does commit: the worthiness of
the person does make the sin more markeable. Women's faults more markable
because they are the better.
What an hateful thing is it to see a woman overcome with drink, when as in
men it is noted for a sign of goodfellowship? and whosoever does observe it,
for one woman which does make a custom of drunkenness, you shall find an
hundred men: it is abhorred in women, and therefore they avoid it: it is
laughed at and made but as a jest amongst men, and therefore so many do
practice it: Likewise if a man abuse a Maid and get her with child, no matter
is made of it, but as a trick of youth; but it is made so heinous an offense in
the maid, that she is disparaged and vterly undone by it. So in all offenses
those which men commit, are made light and as nothing, slighted over; but those
which women do commit, those are made grievous and shameful, and not without
just cause: for where God has put hatred betwixt the woman and the serpent, it
is a foul shame in a woman to carry favor with the devil, to stayne her
womanhoode with any of his damnable qualities, that she will shake hands where
God has planted hate.

Joseph Swetnam in his Pamphlet aggrauateth the offenses of women in the
highest degree, not only exceeding, but drawing men into all mischeife. If I
do grant, that woman degenerating from the true end of womanhood, prove the
greatest offenders, yet in granting that, I do thereby prove that women in
their creation are the most excellent creatures: for corruption, boni pessima,
the best thing corrupted proves the worst, as for example, the most glorious
creature in heaven is by his fall the most damned devil in hell: all the
Elements in their purity are most precious, in their infection and abuse most
dangerous: so the like in women, in their most exellent purity of nature, what
creature more gracious! but in their fall from God, and all goodness, what
creature more mischievous? which the devil knowing he does more assault woman
then man, because his gain is greater, by the fall of one woman, then of
twenty men. Let there be a fair maid, wife, or woman, in Country, town or
City, The devil does more violently tempt women then men. He is sure of them
when he will.
she shall want no resort of Serpents, nor any variety of tempter: let there
be in like sort, a beautiful or personable man, he may sit long enough before
a woman will solicit him. For where the devil has good acquaintance, he is
sure of entertainment there, without resistance: The Serpent at first tempted
woman, he dare assault her no more in that shape, now he imployeth men to
supply his part; and so they do: for as the Serpent began with Eve to delight
her taste, so do his instruments draw to wine and banqueting; the next, the
Serpent enticed her by pride, and told her she should be like to God; so do
his instruments; first, they will extol her beauty, what a paragon she is in
their eyes; Dissembling in men.
next, they will promise her such maintenance, as the best woman in the Parish
or Country shall not have better: What care they, if they make a thousand
oaths, and commit ten thousand periuries, so they may deceive a woman? When
they have done all and gotten their purpose, then they discover all the woman's
shame, and employ such an Author as this (to whose Arraignment I do make
haste) to rail upon her and the whole Sex.

THE ARRAIGNMENT OF Joseph Swetnam, who was the Author of the Arraignment of
Women; And under his person, the arraignment of all idle, frantic, froward,
and lewd men.
CHAPTER V.
Joseph Swetnam having written his rash, idle, furious and shameful discourse
against Women, it was at last delivered into my hands, presently I did acquaint
some of our Sex with the accident, with whom I did advise what course we
should take with him. It was concluded (that his unworthiness being much like
to that of Thersites, whom I have formerly mentioned) we would not answer him
either with Achilles fist, or Stafford-law; neither pluck him in pieces as the
Thracian woman did Orpheus, for his intemperate railing against women: But as
he had arraigned women at the bar of fame and report; we resolved at the
same bar where he did us the wrong, to arraigne him, that thereby we might
defend our assured right: And withal (respecting our selves) we resolved to
favor him so far in his trial that the world might take notice there was no
partial or indirect dealing, but that he had as much favor as he could
defire, and far more then he did or could deserve.

So that we brought him before two Iudgesses, The Iudgesses.
Reason, and Experience, who being both in place, no man can suspect them with
any indirect proceedings: For albeit, Reason of it self may be blinded by
passion, yet when she is joined with Experience, she is known to be absolute,
and without compare. As for Experience, she is known of her self to be
admirable excellent in her courses, she knows how to use every man in her
practice; she will whip the fool to learn him more wit; she will punish the
knave to practice more honesty; she will curb in the prodigal, and teach him
to be wary; she will trip up the heels of such as are rash and giddy, and bid
them hereafter look before they leap. To be short, there is not in all the
world, for all estates, degrees, qualities and conditions of men, so singular a
Mistress, or so fit to be a Iudgesse as she, only one property she has above
all the rest, no man comes before her but she makes him ashamed, and she
will call and prove almost every man a fool, especially such who are wise in
their own conceits.

For his Jury, The Jury.
albeit we knew them to be of his dearest, and nearest inward familiar friends,
in whose company he was ever, and did spend upon them all that he could get, or
devise to get; yet we did challenge no one of them, but were well pleased that
his five Senses, and the seven deadly sins should stand for his Jury.

The party which did give evidence against him, The Evidence.
we knew to be a sure Card, and one which would not fail in proof of any
thing, and such proof which should be without all exception, Conscience is a
sure witness.

So all things being accordingly provided, the prisoner was brought to the
bar, where he was called and bid hold up his hand, which he did, but a false
hand God he knows, his enditement was red, which was this which follows.

CHAP. VI. Joseph Swetnam his Enditement.
I Oseph Swetnam, thou art endited by the name of Joseph Swetnam of Bedlemmore,
in the County of Onopolie Pamphletmaker.
: For that thou the twentieth day of December, in the year etc. Did most
wickedly, An Enditement.
blasphemously, falsely, and scandalously publish a lewd Pamphlet, entitled the
Arraignment of Women; In which, albeit thou did honestly pretend to
arraigne lewd, idle, froward and unconstant women, yet contrary to thy
pretended promise thou did rashly, and maliciously rail and rage against
all women, generally writing and publishing most blasphemously that women by
their Creator were made for Helpers, for Helpers (thou fayest) to spend and
consume that which Man painefully gets; furthermore, thou do write, That
being made of a rib, which was crooked, they are therefore crooked and froward
in conditions, and that Woman was no sooner made, but her heart was set upon
mischief; which thou do derive to all the Sex generally, in these words,
And therefore ever since they have been a woe unto man, and follow the line of
their first leader. Further then all this, thou do affirm an impudent lie
upon Almighty God, in saying, that God calls them necessary evils, and that
therefore they were created to be a plague unto man. Thou writest also, That
women are proud, lasciuous, froward, cursed, unconstant, idle, impudent,
shameless, and that they deck and dress themselves to tempt and allure men
to lewdness, with much and many more foul, intemperate, and scandalous
speeches, etc.

When Joseph Swetnam was asked what he said to his enditement, Guilty, or not
guilty, he pleaded the general issue, not guilty, being asked how he would
be tried, he stood mute, for Conscience did so confront him, that he knew upon
trial there was no way but one; whereupon he thought it much better to put
himself upon our mercy, then to hazard the trial of his own Jury.

Whereupon we did consider if we should have urged him to be pressed, the
disadvantage had been ours: for then his favorites would have said as some
did say, Stands mute.
that Joseph Swetnam did not stand mute, as misdoubting the proof of what he
had written: But seeing the Iudgesses, the Jury, the Accuser, and all others,
most of them of the foeminine gender, he suspelled the question by us, being
made General, that they would rather condemn him to please a general,
although in particular respect of himself he knew they would favor him. And
besides that he held it a strange course, that the self and the same persons
should be Judges and Accusers, whereupon we resolved to grant him longer time
to advice with himself whether he would put himself to trial, or upon better
deliberation to recall his errors.

But that the world might be satisfied in respect of the wrongs done unto us,
and to maintain our honorable reputation, it was concluded, that my self
should deliver before the Judges, to all the assembly, speeches to these
effects following.

CHAP. VII. The answer to all objections which are material, made against
Women.
RIght Honorable and Worshipful, and you of all degrees; it has ever been a
common custom amongst Idle, and humerous Poets, Pamphleters, and Rimers, out
of passionate discontents, or having little otherwise to employ themselves
about, to write some bitter Satire-Pamphlet, or Rhyme, against women: in which
argument he who could denise any thing more bitterly, or spitefully, against
our sex, has never wanted the liking, allowance, and applause of giddy headed
people. Amongst the rabble of scurill writers, this prisoner now present has
acted his part, whom albeit women could more willingly let pass, then bring
him to trial, and as ever heretofore, rather contemn such authors the^ deigne
them any answer, yet seeing his book so commonly bought up, which argues a
general applause; we are therefore enforced to make answer in defense of our
selves, who are by such an author so extremely wronged in public view.

You all see he will not put himself upon trial: if we should let it so
pass, our silence might implead us for guilty, so would his Pamphlet be
received with a greater current and credit then formerly it has been: So
that as well in respect of our sex, as for a general satisfaction to the
world, I will take this course with our prisoner, I will at this present
examine all the objections which are most material, which our adversary has
vomited out against woman, and not only what he has objected, but what other
authors of more import then Joseph Swetnam have charged upon women: alas, seely
man he obiecteth nothing but what he has stolen out of English writers, as
Euphues, the Palace of Pleasure, with the like, which are as easily answered as
vaynly objected. He never read the vehement and professed enemies against our
sex, as for Gracians, Euripides, Menander, Simonides, Sophocles, with the
like, amongst Latin writers Invenall, Plautus, etc.

But of all that ever I read, I did never observe such general sincerity in
any, as in this adversary, which you shall find I will make as manifest as
the Sun to shine at midday.

It is the maine end that our adversary aims at in all his discourse, to
prove and say that women are bad; if he should offer this upon particulers, no
one would deny it: but to lavish generally against all women, who can endure
it? You might Mr. Swetnam, with some show of honesty have said, some women are
bad, both by custom and company, but you cannot avoid the brand, both of
blasphemy and dishonestie, to say of women generally they are all naught, both
in their creation and by nature, and to ground your inferences upon Scriptures.

I let pass your objections in your first page; because they are formerly
answered, only whereas you say, woman was no sooner made, but her heart was
set upon mischief: if you had then said, she had no sooner eaten of the fruit,
but her heart was set upon mischief, you had had some color for your
speeches; not in respect of the woman's disposition, but in consideration both
of her first Tutor and her second instructor: For whereas scripture does say,
The Devil took the shape of man.
Woman was supplanted by a Serpent, Joseph Swetnam does say, she was supplanted
by the devil, which appeared to her in the shape of a beautiful young man. Men
are much beholding to this author, who will seem to insinuate, that the devil
would in so friendly and familier a manner, put on the shape of man, when he
first began to practice mischief: The devil might make bold of them, whom he
knew in time would prove his familier friends. Hereupon it may be imagined it
comes to pass that Painters, and Picture-makers, when they would represent
the devil, they set him out in the deformed shape of a man; because under that
shape he began first to act the part of a devil: and I doubt he never changed
his suite sithence. Here it is to be observed, that which is worst is expressed
by the shape of a man; but what is the most glorious creature is represented in
the beauty of a woman, (...) ^erpent gave the woman bad counsel and her
husband bad example.
as Angels. Woman at the first might easily learn mischief, where or how
should she learn goodness? her first Schoolmasters was abundant in mischief,
and her first husband did exceed in bad examples. First, by his example he
taught her how to fly from God: next how to excuse her sin: then how to
cample and contest with God, and to say as Adam did, thou art the cause, for,
the woman whom thou gave me, was the cause I did eat. What Adam did at the
first, bad husbands practice with their wives ever sithence, I mean in bad
examples. It was no good example in Adam, who having received his wife from the
gift of God, and bound to her in so inseparable a bond of love, that forthwith
he being taken tardie would presently accuse his wife and put her in all the
danger; but the woman was more bound to an upright judge, then to a loving
husband: it would not serve Adams turn, to charge her, thereby to free
himself: Men do show themselves the children of Adam.
It was an hard and strange course, that he who should have been her defender,
is now become her greatest accuser. I may hear say with Saint Paul, by one
man's sin, death, etc. so by the contagion of original sin in Adam, all men
are infected with his diseases; and look what examples he gave his wife at the
first, the like examples and practices do all men show to women ever sithence.
Let me speak freely, for I will speak nothing but truly, neither shall my
words exceed my proof.

In your first and second Page, you allege David and Solomon, for exclaiming
bitterly against women: And that Solomon says, Women (like as Wine) do make
men drunk with their devices. What of all this?

Joseph Swetnam, a man which has reason, will never object that unto his
adversary, which when it comes to examination will disadvantage himself.
Your meaning is, in the disgrace of women to exalt men: but is this any
commendation to men, that they have been and are ouer-reacht by women? Can you
glory of their holiness, whom by women prove sinful? or in their wisdom,
Foolish men tempted with outward sheves.
whom women make fools? or in their strength, whom women overcome? can you
excuse that fall which is given by the weaker? or color that foil which is
taken from women? Is holiness, wisdom, and strength, so slightly seated in
your Masculine gender, as to be stained, blemished, and subdued by women? But
now I pray you let us examine how these virtues in men so potent, came by women
to be so impotent. Do you mean in comparatiue degree, that women are more
holy, more wise, more strong, then men? if you should grant this, you had
small cause to write against them. But you will not admit this: What is, or are
the causes then why men are so overtaken by women? You set down the causes in
your fourth Page; there you say, They are dangerous for men to deal withal,
for their faces are Lures, their beauties baytes, their looks are nets, and
their words are charms, and all to bring men to ruin: Incidit in Scyllam qui
vult vitare Charibdim, whilst he seeks to avoid one mischief, he falls
into another. It were more credit for men to yield our sex to be more holy,
wise, and strong, then to excuse themselves by the reasons alleged: for by
this men are proved to have as little wit as they are charged to exceed in
wickedness. Are external and dumb shows such potent baits, nets, lures,
charms, to bring men to ruin? Why? wild Asses, dotterels, and woodcockes,
are not so easily entangled and taken? are men so idle, vain, and weak, as
you seem to make them? Let me now see how you can free these men from
dishonest minds, who are overtaken thus with beauty, etc. How can
beautiehurt? If men be hurt thank themselves.
how can it be a cause of a man's ruin, of it self? what, do women forcibly
draw? why, men are more strong? are they so eloquent to persuade? why, men are
too wise; are they mischievous to entise? men are more holy; how then are women
causes to bring men to ruin? direct causes they cannot be in any respect; if
they be causes, they are but accident all causes: A cause as Philosophers say,
Causa sine qua non: a remote cause, which cause is seldom alleged for cause,
but where want of wit would say somewhat, and a guilty conscience would excuse
it self by something. Philosophers say, Nemo leditur nisi a seipso, no man is
hurt but the cause is in himself. The prodigal person amongst the Gracians is
called Asotes, as a destroyer, an vndoer of himself: When an heart fraughted
with sin does prodigally lavish out a lascivious look out of a wanton eye;
when it does surfeit upon the fight, who is Asotos? who is guilty of his
lascivious disease but himself? Volenti non fit iniuria, he who is wounded
with his own consent, has small cause to complain of another wrong: Might
not a man as easily, and more honestly, when he sees a fair woman, which
does make the best use that she can to set out her beauty, rather glorify God
in so beautiful a work, then infect his soul with so lascivious a thought?
And for the woman, who having a Jewel given her from so dear a friend, is she
not to be commended rather that in the estimate which she shows, she will as
carefully and as curiously as she may set out what she has received from
Almighty God, then to be censured that she does it to allure wanton and
lascivious looks? The difference is in the minds, things which are called
Adiaphora, things indifferent, whose qualities have their name from the uses,
are commonly so censured, and so used, as the mind is inclined which does
pass his verdict. A man and a woman talk in the fields together, an honest
mind will imagine of their talk answerable to his own disposition, whereas
an evil disposed mind will censure according to his lewd inclination. Woman's
beauty is good, but the heart which does surieit is naught.
When men complain of beauty, and say, That women's dressings and attire are
prouocations to wantonness, and baits to allure men, It is a direct means to
know of what disposition they are, it is a shame for men in censuring of women
to condemn themselves; but a common Inn cannot be without a common sign; it
is a common sign to know a leacher, by complaining upon the cause and occasion
of his surfeit; who had known his disease but by his own complaint? It is
extreme folly to complain of another, when the root of all rests within
himself; purge an infected heart, and turn away a lacinious eye, and then
neither their dreffings, nor their beauty can any ways hurt you. Do not men
exceed in apparel, and therein set themselves out to the view? Shall women
betray themselves and make it known that they are either so bad in their
disposition, or so wanton in their thoughts, or so weak in their government as
to complain that they are tempted and allured by men? Should women make
themselves more vain then youngest children, to fall in love with babyes. Women
are so far off from being in any sort provoked to love upon the view of men's
apparel, Women do not fall in lone with men for their apparel.
and setting forth themselves, that no one thing can more draw them from love,
then their vanity in apparel. Women make difference betwixt colors and
conditions, betwixt a fair show, and a foul substance: It shows a leuitie in
man to furnish himself more with trim colors, then manlike qualities: besides
that, how can we lone at whom we laugh? We see him gallant it at the Court one
day, and brave it in the Country the next day; we see him wear that on his
back one week, which we hear is in the brokers shop the next: furthermore we
see diverse wear apparel and colors made of a Lordship, lined with Farms and
Granges, embrodered with all the plate, gold, and wealth, their Friends and
Fathers left them: Are these motives to love or to laughter? Will or dare a
woman trust to their love for one Month, who will turn her of the next? This
is the surfeit which women take by brave apparel. They rather suspect his
worth, then wish his love, who does most exceed in bravery. So Mr. Swetnam,
do you and all yours forbear to censure of the dressings and attires of women
for any such lewd intent, as you imagine: Bad minds are discovered by bad
thoughts and hearts. Do not say and rail at women to be the cause of men's
overthrow, when the original root and cause is in your selves. If you be so
affected that you cannot look but you must forthwith be infected, I do
marvel (Joseph Swetnam) you set down no remedies for that torment of Love,
as you call it: You bid men shun and avoid it, but those be common and
ordinary rules and instructions: yet not so ordinary, as able to restrain the
extraordinary humors of your giddy company. I will do you and your friends a
kindness if you be so scorched with the flames of love. Diogines did long
since discover the sovereign salve for such a wound: The receipt is no great
charge, your self may be the Apothecarie, A medicine for Love. Taken. Hunger. A
Halter.
it is comprehended in three words: First, try with (...), next with (...), if
both these fail, the third is sure, (...). This was Diogenes Antidote against
that venomous infection. There are more milder remedies which you may put in
practice: If your hearts be so fleshly, or your eyes so tender that you dare
trust neither of them, then trust to your reason to turn your eyes away, or
trust to your heels as Joseph did, to carry all away.

After you have railed against women, you bring in a fable of a contempt
betwixt the Wind and the Same; and you apply the morrall to women, when as it
has a far other relation: for it ever has been applied to men, to instruct
them in the government of woman, for I pray you who is to govern, or who are
to be governed? You should seem to come from the Sauromatians, whose wives
were their Masters: but I will set you down both the Fable and the Morrall, as
it was written in English verse long sithence.

THe Sun and Wind at variance did fall,
Whose force was greatest in the open field:
A trauailer they choose to deal withal;
Who makes him first unto their force to yield
To cast off Cloak, they that agreement make,
The honor of the victory must take.
The Wind began and did increase, each blast
With raging beat upon the silly man;
The more it blew, the more he grasped fast
And kept his Cloak, let Wind do what it can?
When all in vain the Wind his worst had done,
It ceast, and left a trial to the Sun.
The Sun begins his beams for to display,
And by degrees in heat for to increase;
The Trauailer then warm, does make a stay,
And by degrees his Cloak he does release:
At length is forced both Coat and Cloak to yield,
So gives the Sun the honor of the field.
Who by extremes does seek to work his will,
By raging humors thinking so to gain;
May like the Wind augment his tempest still,
But at the length he finds his fury vain:
For all he gets by playing frantic parts,
He hard neth more the mild and gentle hearts.
Like as all Plants, when at the first they spring,
Are tender, and soft barked on every fide;
But as they grow continual storms do bring
Those are more hard which Northern blasts abide:
What Is toward the Southern tenderer we find,
And that more hard which feels the Northern wind.
Nautre his course most carefully does bend,
From violence to seek it self to arm;
Where raging blasts the trees would break and rend,
There Nature strives to keep her Plants from harm:
Where violence is unto Nature strange,
Continual custom there does Nature change.
So 't is with women, who by Nature mild,
If they on froward crabbed Husbands light;
Continual rage by custom makes them wild,
For crooked natures alter gentle quite;
Men evermore shall this in trial find,
Like to her usage so is woman's mind.
As of themselves, let men of others judge,
What man will yield to be compelled by rage?
At crabbednesse and crustnesse hearts do grudge,
And to resist, themselves they more engage:
Forbear the Wind, shine with the Sun a while,
Though she be angry, she will forthwith smile.
This is the true application of the Morrall. As for that crookedness and
frowardness with which you charge women, look from whence they have it; for
of themselves and their own disposition it does not proceed, which is proved
directly by your own testimony: Woman of her own disposition gentle, and
mild.
for in your 46. Page, Line 15. You say, A young woman of tender years is
flexible, obedient, and subject to do any thing, according to the will and
pleasure of her Husband. How comes it then that this gentle and mild
disposition is afterward altered? your self does give the true reason, for
you give a great charge not to marry a widow. But why? because say you in the
same Page, A widow is framed to the conditions of another man. Why then, if a
woman have froward conditions, they be none of her own, she was framed to
them. Is not our adversary ashamed of himself, to rail against women for
those faults which do all come from men? Does not he most grievously charge
men to learn their wives bad and corrupt behavior? Men infect.
for he says plainly, Thou must unlearn a widow, and make her forget and
forgo her former corrupt and disordered behaniour. Thou must unlearn her,
Ergo, what fault she has, she learned, her corruptnes comes not from her
own disposition, but from her Husbands destruction. Is it not a wonder, that
your Pamphlets are so dispersed? Are they not wise men to cast away time and
money upon a Book which cutteth their own throats? It Is pity but that men
should reward you for your writing; if it be but as the Roman Sertorius did
the idle Poet, he gave him a reward, but not for his writing, but because he
should never write more; as for women, they laugh that men have no more able a
champion. This author comes to bait women, or as he foolishly says, the
Bear bayting, of Women, and he brings but a mungrell Curre, who does his
kind, to braule and bark, but cannot bite. The mild and flexible disposition
of a woman is in philosophy proved in the composition of her body, for it is a
Maxim, The disposition of the mind does answer the composition of the body.
Mores animi sequntur temperaturam corporis, The disposition of the mind is
answerable to the temper of the body. A woman in the temperature of her body is
tender, soft, and beautiful, so does her disposition in mind corresponde
accordingly; she is mild yielding, and virtuous; what disposition accidentally
happens unto her, is by the contagion of a froward husband, as Joseph Swetnam
affirms.

And experience proves. It is a shame for a man to complain of a froward
woman, in many respects all concerning himself. It is a shame he has no more
government over the weaker vessel. It is a shame he has hardened her tender
sides, and gentle heart with his boistrous and Northren blasts. May men
complain of women without cause?
It is a shame for a man to publish and proclaim household secrets, which is a
common practice amongst men, especially Drunkards, Leachers, and prodigal
spend-thrifts: These when they come home drunk, or are called in question for
their riotous misdemeanors, they presently show themselves, the right children
of Adam. They will excuse themselves by their wives, and say that their
vnquitenesse and frowardness at home, is the cause that they run abroad. An
excuse more fitter for a beast then a man. If thou were a man thou would
take away the cause which urges a woman to grief and discontent, and not by
thy frowardness increase her distemperature: forbear thy drinking, thy
luxurious riot, thy gaming, and spending, and thou shall have thy wife give
thee as little cause at home, as thou give her great cause of disquiet
abroad. Men which are men, if they chance to be matched with froward wives,
either of their own making, or others marring, they would make a benefit of the
discommodity, either try his skill to make her mild, or exercise his patience
to endure her curstness: for all crosses are inflicted either for punishment
of finnes, or for exercise of virtues; but humorous men will sooner mar a
thousand women, then out of an hundred make one good.

And this shall appear in the imputation which our adversary charge upon
our sex, Men are the Serpents
to be laciuious, wanton and lustful: He says, Women tempt, alure, and
provoke men. How rare a thing is it for women to prostitute and offer
themselves? how common a practice is it for men to seek and solicit women to
lewdness? what charge do they spare? what travel do they bestow? what
vows, oaths and protestations do they spend, to make them dishonest? They
hyer Pandors, they write letters, they seal them with damnations, and
execrations, to assure them of love, when the end proves but lust: They know
the flexible disposition of Women and the sooner to ouerreach them, some will
pretend they are so plunged in love that except they obtain their desire they
will seem to drowned, hang, stab, poison, or banish themselves from friends
and country: What motives are these to tender dispositions? Some will pretend
marriage, another offer continual maintenance, but when they have obtained
their purpose, what shall a woman find, just that which is her everlasting
shame and grief, she has made her self the unhappy subject to a lustful
body; and the shameful stall of a lascivious tongue. Men may with foul shame
charge women with this sin which they had never committed if she had not
trusted, nor had ever trusted if she had not been deceived with vows,
oaths, and protestations. To bring a woman to offend in one sin, how many
damnable sins do they commit? I appeal to their own consciences. The lewd
disposition of sundry men does appear in this: If a woman or maid will yield
unto lewdness, what shall they want? But if they would live in honesty, what
help shall they have? How much will they make of the lewd? how base account of
the honest? how many pounds will they spend in bawdie houses? but when will
they bestow a penny upon an honest maid or woman, except it be to corrupt
them?

Our adversary brings many examples of men which have been overthrown by
women. Show a woman's offense, but that man was the first beginner.
It is answered, before the fault is their own. But I would have him, or any
one living, to show any woman that offended in this sin of lust, but that she
was first solicited by a man.

Helen was the cause of Troyes burning; first, Paris did solicit her; next,
how many knaves and fools of the male kind had Troy, which to maintain
whoredom would bring their City to confusion.

When you bring in examples of lewd women, and of men which have been stained
by women, you show your self both frantic, and a profane irreligious fool
to mention Indith for cutting off Holoferues head, in that rank.

You challenge women for untamed and unbridled tongues; there was never woman
was ever noted for so shameless, so brutish, so beastly a scold as you prove
your self in this base and odious Pamphlet: You blaspheme God, you rail at
his Creation, you abuse and slander his Creatures; and what immodest or
impudent scurilitie is it, which you do not express in this lewd and lying
Pamphlet?

Hitherto I have so answered all your objections against Women, that as I have
not defended the wickedness of any; so I have set down the true state of the
question. As Eve did not offend without the temptation of a Serpent; so women
do seldom offend, but it is by provocation of men. Let not your impudency,
nor your conforts dishonestie, charge our sex hereafter, with those sins of
which you your selves were the first procurers. I have in my discourse, touched
you, and all yours, to the quick. I have taxed you with bitter speeches; you
will (perhaps) say I am a railing scold. In this objection, Joseph Swetnam, A
difference betwixt accusing and slandering.
I will teach you both wit and honesty: The difference betwixt a railing
scold, and and an honest accuses, is this, the first rages upon passionate
fury, without bringing cause or proof; the other brings direct proof for
what she alleges: you charge women with clamorous words, and bring no proof;
I charge you with blasphemy, with impudency, scurilitie, foolery, and the
like. I show just and direct proof for what I say; it is not my desire to
speak so much, it is your desert to provoke me upon just cause so far; it is
no railing to call a Crow black, or a Wolf a rauenour, or a drunkard a beast;
the report of the truth is never to be blamed, the deseruer of such a report,
deserves the shame.

Now, for this time, to draw to an end; let me ask according to the question
of Cassian, Cui bono? what have you gotten by publishing your Pamphlet; good I
know you can get none. You have (perhaps) pleased the humors of some giddy,
idle conceited persons: But you have died your self in the colors of shame,
lying, slandering, blasphemy, ignorance, and the like.

The shortness of time and the weight of business call me away, and urge me
to leave off thus abruptly, but assure your self where I leave now, I will by
Gods grace supply the next Term, to your small content. You have exceeded in
your fury against Widows, whose defense you shall hear of at the time
aforesaid, in the mean space recollect your wits, write out of deliberation,
not out of fury; write out of advice, not out of idleness; forbear to charge
women with faults which come from the contagion of Masculine serpents.

A DEFENSE OF Women, against the Author of the Arraignment of Women.
CHAP. VIII.
AN idle companion was raging of late,
Who in fury against Women expresses his hate:
He writes a Book, an Arraignment he calls,
In which against women he currishly bawleth.
He deserves no answer but in Ballat or Ryme,
Upon idle fantastickes who would cast away time:
Any answer may serve an impudent liar,
Any mangie scab'd horse does fit a scaled Squire:
In the ruff of his fury, for so himself faith,
The blasphemous companion he shamefully plays.
The woman for an Helpler, God did make he does say,
But to Help to consume and spend all away.
Thus, at Gods creation to flout and to jest,
Who but an Atheist would so play the beast?
The Scriptures do prove that when Adam did fall,
And to death and damnation was thereby a thrall.
Then woman was an Helper, for by her blessed seed,
From Hell and damnation all mankind was freed.
He says, women are froward, which the rib does declare,
For like as the Rib, so they crooked are:
The Rib was her Subject for body we find,
But from God came her Soul, and dispose of her mind.
Let no man think much if women compare,
That in their creation they much better are:
More blessings therein to women do fall,
Then unto mankind have been given at all.
Women were the last work, and therefore the best,
For what was the end, excels the rest.
For woman's more honor, it was so assigned,
She was made of the rib of metal refined:
The Country does also the woman more grace,
For Paradise is far the more excellent place.
Yet women are mischienous, this Author does say,
But Scriptures to that directly say nay:
God said, 'twixt the Woman and Serpent for ever,
Strong hatred he would put, to be qualified never.
The woman being hateful to the Serpents condition,
How excellent is she in her disposition?
The Serpent with men in their works may agree,
But the Serpent with women that never may be.
If you ask how it happens some women prove naught,
By men turned to Serpents they are ouer-wrought.
What the Serpent began, men follow that still,
They tempt what they may to make women do ill.
They will tempt, and provoke, and follow us long:
They deceive us with aithes, and a flattering tongue.
To make a poor Maiden or woman a whore,
They care not how much they spend of their store.
But where is there a man that will any thing give
That woman or maid may with honesty live?
If they yield to lewd counsel they nothing shall want,
But for to be honest, then all things are scant.
It proves a bad nature in men does remain.
To make women lewd their purses they strain.
For a woman that is honest they care not a whit,
They Will say she is honest because she lackes wit.
They Will call women whores, but their stakes they might save,
There can be no Whore, but there must be a Knave.
They say that our dressings, and that our attire
Are causes to move them to lustful fire.
Of all things which are we evermore find,
Such thoughts do arise as are like to the mind.
Men's thoughts being wicked they wrack on us thus,
That scandal is taken, not given by us.
If their sight be so weak, and their frailty be such,
Why do they then gaze at our beauty so much?
Pluck away those ill roots whence sin does arise,
Amend wicked thoughts, or pluck out the eyes.
The humors of men, see how froward they be;
We know not to please them in any degree:
For if we go plain we are sluts they do say,
They doubt of our honesty if we go gay;
If we be honest and merry, for giglots they take us,
If modest and sober, then proud they do make us:
Be we housewifly quick, then a shrew he does keep,
If patient and mild, then he scorneth a sheep.
What can we devise to do or to say,
But men do wrest all things the contrary way.
It Is not so uncertain to follow the wind,
As to seek to please men of so humerous mind.
Their humors are giddy, and never long lasting,
We know not to please them, neither full nor yet fasting.
Either we do too little, or they do too much:
They strain our poor wits, their humors are such.
They say, women are proud wherein made they trial?
They moved some lewd suit, and had the denial:
To be crossed in such suites, men cannot abide,
And thereupon we are entitled with pride.
They say we are cursed and froward by kind,
Our mildness is changed, where raging we find,
A good Jack say; the proverb, does make a good Gill,
A cursed froward Husband does change woman's will.
They use us (they say) as necessary evils,
We have it from them, for they are our devils.
When they are in their rages and humerous fits,
They put us poor women half out of our wits.
Of all naughty women name one if you can,
If she proved bad, it came by a man.
Fair Helen forsook her Husband of Greece,
A man called Paris, betrayed that piece.
Medea did rage, and did shamefully murder,
A lason was cause, which her mischief did further.
A Cresside was false, and changed her love,
Diomedes her heart by constraint did remove.
In all like examples the world may see,
Where women prove bad, there men are not free.
But in those offenses they have the most share,
Women would be good, if Serpents would spare.
Let Women and Maids whatsoever they be,
Come follow my counsel, be warned by me.
Trust not men's suites, their love proves lust,
Both hearts, tongues, and pens, do all prove unjust.
How fair they will speak and write in their love,
But put them to trial how false do they prove?
They love hot at first, when the love is a stranger,
But they will not be tied to rack and to manger.
What love call you that when men are a wooing,
And seek nothing else but shame and undoing.
As women in their faults I do not commend,
So wish I all men their lewd suites they would end.
Let women alone, and seek not their shame,
You shall have no cause then women to blame.
It Is like that this Author against such does bawle.
Who by his temptations have gotten a fall.
For he who of women so wickedly deemeth,
Has made them dishonest, it probably seems.
He has been a Traveler, it may be well so,
By his tales and reports as much we do know.
He promises more poison against women to thrust,
He does it for physic, or else he would brust.
Thus I bid him farewell till next we do meet,
And then as cause moves, so shall we greet.
IOANE SHARP.

FINIS.
Faults escaped.
PAge 33. Line 1. for carry, read cutry. p. 36. l. 30 for sincerity, r.
scurility. p. 38. l. 28. for something, r any thing. Ibid. for country, r.
counter. p. 40. l. 5. for contempt, r. contention.


