A PAGEANT OF SPANISH Humors. Wherein are naturally described and lively
portrayed, the kinds and quallities of a Signior of Spain.

Translated out of Dutche, By H. w.

Haud curo Inuidiam.

I. W.



Imprinted at London by John Wolf, and are to be sold at his shop in
Pope's Head Alley, near to the Exchange. 1599.

The Preface.
TRuth intending to travel triumphantly, the worlds circumfere^ce, does by her
true recording trumpe, blazon the several and sundry natural humors of a
Spanish Signior, as the limitation of time will permit her. Now this fair
Princess (all telling verity) is landed on our English shore, wherein she is
pleased to make a further progress, building upon the sure foundation of
Englands gentle sufferance. If her arrival seem gracious, she will for ever
harbor in this Isle, explaining the contents (not only of Admirations records)
but of such effectual preside^ts as shall profit the hearers and perusers of
the same. Her welcome by this first summon, she may perceive, the issue hereof,
she hourly expects: If fortunate, then happy she, if adverse, contrary to
her expectation, she will instantly embarque her self, for some other
continent. Therefore as your favorable judgments shall award, yield up your
pleasing verdits.

The natural kinds of a Signor of Spain.
1 A Signor is an Angel in the Church. 2 A Devil in his lodging. 3 A Woolfe at
Table. 4 A Hog in his Chamber. 5 A Peacocke on the street. 6 A Fox to
deceive Women. 7 A Lion in a place of Garrison. 8 A Hare in a besieged place. 9
A Lamb under the Gallows. 10 Auaritious. 11 Ambitious. 12 Bloodthirstie and
tyrannous. 13 Greedy of revenge. 14 Faithless and periurous. 15 A miserable
estate to be under a Signors subjection. 16 A happy estate to be free from
Signor.
A Pageant of Spanish humors, wherein are naturally described, and lively
portrayed, the kinds and qualities of a Signior of Spain.
1 A Signior is an Angel in the Church.
IN the sacred Temple of the Almighty Iehoua, a place of residence of his
faithful servants, there is no person on earth, more devout then a Signor of
Spain, but in the midst of his Contemplations divine, or making show of
divine, tending to the true service of God, it is his assiduate use (if his
sight be guilty of any ladies alluring beauty) to gaze, and afterward to cast
amourous glaunces, yet Guarda los oios fuera fuera la temptatie, Bridle the
sight, Banish temptation
there is no such matter: for Sig. his vital powers are all occupied in
devotion. What with crowching, kneeling, and millions of crosses, he makes an
exceeding good outward show: After which, with a singular grace, kissing his
thumb he ends: although he have kneeled but on the one knee, be it no
scandal, for it is his fashion. Then for the last act of the Church matter to
confirm the peace, Signor bids Signor as buenas Dias. Bids the Gentlewomen
good morrow.


In fine, a Signor is a Saint, there want but works,
Under the greenest grass, the most venomous serpent lurks.
2 A Signior is a Devil in his Lodging.
AS Signior is an Angel in the Church, so to the contrary, in his lodging, he
is a raging Devil or Fury, seems rather the Hoaste then the guest, what his
Signory desires, must be the Hoastes liking the fairest Chamber, the best bed
and all else, is his to command, he thinks it but the duty of the Flemings
which he esteems as beggars, and the Wallons as Thieves, A la Horca ladromis.
To the gallows with these thieves,
But Signor is a Caualliero, he must be reverenced, Guarda su Signoria, Respect
his worship.
he must be soothed and flattered. You need not any way to mistrust him, for he
will neither filch nor steal, but you must indeed prevent him with giving.
Moreover, you ought to know he is a Hidalgo, A Gentleman.
although he have no patents thereof, even whose name and race, does terrify
the Moors, Honorada sta la Casa, The house is honored.
which alodgeth such persons. All mandado de su Signoria, At his worships
command.


Every one must be ready, if he will live at ease,
For he that lodges a Devil, must seek him to please.
3 A Signior is a Woolfe at Table.
SIgnior at his diet, is as a ravenous Woolfe, with the one elbow leaning on
the Table, opens his Mawe like a Judas purse. He lays his tallants on the
meat, like a Woolfe that gripeth a Lamb: he esteems it no shame to turn the
dish, and tumble the cates topsie turuie, to seek De buena gana with a good
heart.
los buenas boccades, The good morcels.
the which, Ell Ventro del Vno, To the belly of one.
he purposes to send: what a Signior does not eat, he sleaeth, or unseemly
mangleth. A more lickorish wretch earth does not produce, his fare must daily
be fresh, both roasted and sod, besides this, he is a wonderful deuourer of
Olia podridos, and Carbonadoes, together with an infinite quantity of fruits,
Comfites, and Succados, yet it is a hard matter, if a man has not one good
quality, No es barachono, you must not think so, except it were a chance.
This is a Signiors diet at another cost, but alas if you find him at his own
Table, you may see it stately furnished with a Sardinia, Or a crust of bread, a
pot of Aqua, and perhaps a bone, yet abroad, if there be a Woolfe at the Table,
Signior is one.

4 A Signior is a Hog in his Chamber.
SIgnior in his Chamber, is as a Hog in his stye: with filth and filthy
savor he pays his Hoaste, even the same which proceeds from his pockey
self, Las donas, 1 The Wenches.
use him so kindly, that he is wholly infected, De los boubes. 2 The pockes.
La mala canera, 3 The Chamber.
sticks in his buttocks. It is a Diauolos life, always to be troubled with
those clisters and pills, sirropes and conserues, how is it possible Signiors
dainty body can endure? but indeed the Apothecaries drugges are to ease the
belly, Signior being stopped like a bottomless barrel. Although he were
honored with the fairest and neatest Chamber in the house, he will without
respect, file it with his head or tushe. What matter is that, the Messima must
convey it fuera. The Maid must carry it out.


How then can the Hoaste in quiet sleep?
Who a Devil, a Woolfe, and a Hog does keep.
5 A Signior is a Peacocke in the street.
SIgnior being in the street, or any other public place, his first gestures,
are to bend the head, turn the eye, and Peacocke-like to behold himself if
nothing be amiss, his gate is like one who treades the measures, he scarce
takes three steps, but the fourth, he again contemplateth, Su Signoria, His
Signory.
sometime he will cast a leering eye a side, to epsy if the beholders admire
him not, his mind still gives him, that every speculator says, Ah mira ell
Canalioro, Os beheld the knight.
then he rowseth himself and expects a reverence of every one that passes,
he twisteth his moustachoes, and strokes his beard. His Trade in Spain perhaps
was to sow hand-baskets, or to blow glasses in the Furnaces, scarce trusted to
guard a flock of Cabritoes. And here we will bear the name of a Hidalgo or
don, yet the Ass is known, though he wear a Lions skin.

6 A Signior is a Fox to deceive Women.
SIgnior is stuffed with all manner of subtle devices to deceive women, which is
his continual study. As the Fox often (not by force, but by subtlety)
catches a pray, lo Sig. where he can espy one to his liking, presently his
head is filled with a common wealth of subtle stratagems, although he see no
likelihood, yet like a valiant Champion, he stands to his suit very
importunately, whereby he shows them what metal is in him, for he tries in
Loves scorching flames like a fiery Furnace. Si la Dona eschoucha: If she
listen,
he intices her further to come, Fuera bowing his knees, Conquingentos
suspiros, with 500. sighs
and other fained adulations, he protests to be a devoted Seruidor de las
Donas, Servant unto women.
and with a Besa los manos de vostra Signoria, los ciueros co^ Cortesia and
buena Compagnia, Kissing his hands, and presenting her with all dainties.
he intices her to his intent, if so be for all this she continue obstinate,
and will not pity this amourous Squire, he betaketh his farther suite to a
cunning Bawd, and does in such sort, that many a Lamb must void his Lodge.

7 A Signor is a Lion in a place of Garrison.
IN a Town where a Spanish Signior lies in Garrison, he rules like a Lion,
posing all under his subjection, a Signior alone is wise enough of himself to
do and leave what he list, any others (great or small) he makes no account of,
esteeming them all as Nada. Nothing.
Signior is the Cock, he will ouercrow all. If any one contrary his doings and
sayings, then one shall see him swear and swagger, Villain tradidor del Re,
Lutheriano, Villain, Traitor to the king. Heretic.
he stands so much on his own reputation, that none (besides himself and his)
are Seruidors del Re, The kings servants.
he supposes none may gainsay him, for he is master of the place: Guarda la
cabecca. Beware thy head. He swears by God.
If you abuse him, Boto a Dios, he will revenge it with his blood: at least he
will make you believe it. In fine, Signior will be Signior, as long while as
Signior is himself.

8 A Signior is a Hare in a besieged place.
IN a place of garrison, where nothing is to be don but bragging and
domineering, there turn a Signior loose, he will play his part, he esteems his
skill, far to surpass all others, but no sooner does he hear the thundering
rumor of Los Ennemigos, or see them plant their Tents and standards with any
advantage, before his residence, he is in a moment wholly metamorphosed, his
heart shrinkes like a piece of wet leather by the fire, all his Lion like
courage vanishes like smoke, for that from a Lion he becomes a Hare, yet he
will seem to cloak it, but never so well, but you shall see him making of vows
to Signior Iago and nostra dona de lorretto, S. James and our Lady of Loretta.
the one vows a pilgrimage a foot, and the other rich gifts, his brain and
senses are so affrighted with the noise of the Artillery, that like a Hare he
fears every crack and blast of wind.

9 A Signior is a Lamb under the Gallows.
Never was there any man more vnresolute to die, then a Spaniard, especially if
his fortune be to be hanged, no sooner does he fall into ye hand of a Justice,
but Signior loses his teethe, he is a forlorn man, vale me Dios, God defend
me.
from such a lot, for Signior stands more in awe of la Horca, The Gallows.
as also la Stropada, Mercy.
then the devil does of the Cross: insomuch that in that respect Signor no^ va
le nada, Is worth nothing.
he cries Misericordia, he vtters many grievous laments: but most, O dios de
materra, O mal, auenturado, O thou Spanish God.
in this sort to caper above ground, Signior had rather go to Rome
bare-foote, then to be hanged, it is such a hard morcell, and of so bad
disgesture, it is as good as Stibbium, to make him vomit up al his vilanie to
the Friar that confesses him, which done, he recommends his soul, (with a
thousand crosses) to some Saint, and then leapes at a Dasie, never was a Lamb
more meek then a Signior under a Gallows.

10 A Signior is auaritious.
Some faults in particular persons, are in some sort to be tolerated, and
other some not, in any wise, especially in case of government.
IN case that Signior had but these aforesaid vices, he were to be borne
withal, although to many a ones cost, but he is moreover so wrapped and
entangled in avarice, that for money he would almost fight with the devil, as
appears by the writing of their own Historiographers. The avarice of the late
Romans, Turks and Heathens, were but toys to his, not only for money, but
also to scrape to himself every thing else, and to tyrannize over all the
world, the which they also show in the Indies, where above the Spanish
Armies, at S. Domingo is written, Toth es nuestro toth es mio: The Bishops of
Chiapa Pedro de chief Francisco loper, and other their writers.
As also thereon stands a Horse, with his hinder feet in the world, and
seems with his fore feet, to leap out of the same, and out of his mouth
this Motto. The world does not suffice me, whereby they show their insatiable
covetousness. The Indians also say, that gold is Signiors God, but as he
thinks the worlds contains not pillage enough for him, so undoubtedly, one day
he shall be made pilladge to the world.

11 A Signior is ambitious.
Sign. of Spain is so blinded in ambition, that he enuies at another honor,
fretting exceedingly, to see that any one besides himself should bear any
sway, and scorns them for his servants, who^ himself is unworthy to serve.
The rejected Letters of an. 1589.
IN ambition, Signior also is not behind hand, he reputes himself such, as none
but he may be reverenced (he witless) thinks himself far to surmount
others manners, he unskillful, thinks his learning and doctrine greater then
any others, his clownish and base descent, he extols higher, then others do
their true Nobility: and his beastly and senseless opinion, before any
reasonable judgment: he is so lofty, that if any other will show his skill
and experience, in instructing him in any thing, he both scorns the Teacher,
and rejects his willing instruction, he will not stick (in his humor) to
revile and defame, with the name of Traitors, those which to serve him, have
left and abandoned God and their Country, as well appeared by the Letters of
the Spanish Commaundor Tepeda, who durst presume to miscall the states of ye
other side, Traitors, which notwithstanding were of their factions, In sum,
where Signor does rule, he shows his devilish actions.

12 A Signior is bloodthirstie and tyrannous.
This appears most manifestly to be true, by the report of their own Bishops
and other writers, which say that their bloodines and tyranny, surpasses all
nations of the world, as also that his descent is from the most barbarous and
cruellest people in Europe.
SIgnior has at sundry times through his cruelty, without mercy, tyranized
and suppressed whole Countries and Kingdoms, whereby many thousands have lost
their lives: his cruelty and inhumanitie is so extraordinary, that his mind
is always in suspense, devising and inuenting what new and greater torments he
may use unto them which he hates, cutting and hewing off, of arms and legs,
killing babes in their mothers arms, yea in the wombes, and such like are
common things. Moreover, he will take the dead bodies of the little Infants,
tearing them by peecemeale, throw them to the dogs, to be enterred in their
bowels. If he be victorious, all his valor he shows in surh like deeds:
insomuch, that he is never glutted with blood, he far surpasses Pharaoh in
cruelty, Herod in tyranny, and Antiochus in bloodthirstinesse. It is enough,
yea too too much known in our Netherlands, and not only in Europe, Asia and
Africa, but also in the farthest part of America, whereby he shows himself
to be sprung from the cruel Goths and blood-thirstie Wandals.

13 A Signior is greedy of revenge.
If a man be ambitious, it follows that he is greedy of revenge. This has
the Spaniard showed in many sorts and places, especially in his own Country,
and on his own Country men, viz. in the City of Saragossa, where he beheaded
a Duke, an Earl, the head Officer, and many of the chief Citizens, only because
they defended their privileges in the cause of an imprisoned man. To execute
his revenge, he must needs break his oath, for he has not the heart to do it
valiantly and really, for he had not only sworn unto those of Saragossa, as to
all the realm, to keep, protect and defend their privileges, but moreover
according to the formal words and articles which were pronounced at his
coronation, was to loose his right by default thereof, he then that in such
sort used his own country men, and those which in Idolatry are as superstitious
as himself, what would he, nay what ought he to do unto those which are
proclaimed heretics rebels, and were so long since, by the holy Inquisitio^
damned to the pit of hell.
ANy injury which Signor may have received or conceived, how small soever, he
will always remember it in mind, (though he show never so good semblance)
until he find some fit opportunity, which if he cannot effect to his will,
unless to his discredit, yet notwithstanding, he will neither respect honor
nor oath, and therefore will execute it after the most rigorous sort possible.
He will find occasions enough to accuse one, and those commonly such, whereof
ye Woolfe accused the lamb, saying that he troubled the water whereof he
drunk. The Indians to their cost knew it full well, as also the chiefest of
Arragon and our Netherlanders the Nobler sort whereof which he could not
convict nor accuse, amongst the number of malefactors, he has sought by all
subtle means (some at one time, some at another) to make them all away by
deceitful stratagems, under the color of pure love, shadowed with the robes
of true friendship, which he defiles.

14 A signior, is faithless and periurous.
TO effect and execute this his insatiable desire of revenge (in a periurous
sort) he abandoneth all faith, the which in any accord or agreement, he may
have sworn or promised, for although his perverse nature be of it self too much
that way inclined, yet he is strictly bound by the papal doctrine, and by the
decrees of the counsel of Constans, that to the hindrance and damage, not only
of the offenders of his Majesty, but also of Los Lutherianos, they need not
keep any oath or promise, but with all their might procure their utter ruin
and destruction. Such his deeds are not only exempt from sin, but are moreover
reputed holy works, in respect that they are done to the furtherance and in
the behalf of the Romish Church. And by Gods help when he most trusts thereon,
seeking to rock others a sleep, through his fraudulent adulations, his deceit
and faithless intent, shall be manifest, and he punished for the same: for
there is no conueyance of sin, from the knowledge of God. But he that puts
his trust in him, shall ever be blessed.

15 A miserable servitude to be under a Signiors subjection.
Those which know not the error wherein they live, have not only desired the
same above alworldly things: but also preferred the same above their lives,
they esteeming it such a felicity, that they still seek and procure al other to
be of the like religion, from the which God keep us all, Amen. In stead of a
tyrant, to be governed and ruled by a true and careful father, to serve God
according to his holy institutions, and to continue in his Countries liberty,
are the highest things which a Christian in this world may wish, which to
attain and defend: no worldly things nor life it self is to be spared,
beseeching God through his mercy, to aid and assist us always in the same,
to his honor and glory, the aid of the oppressed, and our soul a salvation.
Amen.
FInally, it is a most detestable slavery to be under a Spaniards subjection,
worse then death it self, being hurtful, not only to the body, but to the
soul. Although he sometimes dissemble his nature, yet is he therefore not to
be trusted: wherefore we beseech his divine majesty through his goodness, to
be merciful unto those which are yet stooping under Signior his cruel and
tyrannical yoke, giving them patience to endure it, until such time as thou O
Lord shall find good to give them a joyful deliverance, which unto thee is
easy, but above al, vouchsafe unto those (which by his false doctrine, live in
obscurity, from the divine light) more grace and discretion, with a better
conscience, then to entice those which are at liberty to the like error,
thereby both (to their repentance) to glut themselves with his tyrannical
superiority: for it is far better to be slaves unto Turks and Moors, then to
be molested with the gnawing worm of Conscience.

16 A happy estate to be free from Signior.
But to the contrary, to be free from his tirannie, and in steed of a Signior,
to have as cullars in our Country, our own kindred and Country men, is
(according to every ones censure) the happiest estate, and the greatest
felicity in this terestiall orb, yea a preparatiue and foundation of an
ensuing freedom, and a strong defense against all enemies. God through his
clemency and goodness, grant unto them a perpetual freedom, and bless them
with his celestial gifts, of wisdom, foresight and discretion, that they may
immovably as a sturdie rock, withstand the violent and raging assaults of the
Spaniards until the end, and for guerdon of their pains, remain in a free and
happy estate with continuation. To the honor of God, and their souls
salvation. Amen.

FINIS.

