A PACK OF SPANISH LIES, SENT ABROAD IN THE WORLD: FIRST printed in SPAIN in
the Spanish tongue, and translated out of the Original.

Now ripped up, unfolded, and by just examination condemned, as containing
false, corrupt, and detestable wares, worthy to be damned and burned.

PSALM. 5. VERSE. 6. Thou shall destroy them that speak lies, the Lord will
abhor the bloody and deceitful man.

Imprinted at London by the Deputies of Christopher Barker, Printer to the
Queens most excellent Majesty. 1588.

A Pack of SPANISH lies. From Spain.
1 THE true relation of the succes of the Catholic army against their
enemies, by letters of the Post master of Logrono of the iiii. of September,
and by letters from Roan of the one and thirtieth of August, (a) and by letters
from Paris of the Kings Ambassador there: wherein he declares the
imprisonment of Francis Drake, and other great Nobles of England, and how the
Queen is in the field with an army, (b) and of a certain mutiny which was
amongst the Queens army, with the success of the said Catholic army since
they entered in the Groyne, till they came on the coast of England, with two
ballets compounded by Christouer Brauo, a (c) blind man of Cordowa, Printed
with license by Gabriel Ramos Beiarano Printer.

A Pack of Spanish lies. From Spain. By a letter of Diego Peers, chief
Postmaster of Logrono, dated the second of September. 1588.
2 THe news of England is confirmed here, by a letter of the Governor of
Roan. He writes he has in his power the chief Pilot of captain Drake, and
that he knows that all the English army remained overthrown, having sunk
two and twenty ships, and taken forty, (d) and imprisoned Francis Drake,
having given them chase almost as hie as (e) Abspurge, and slain many by ye
sword, and likewise says that there was found in captain Drakes ship, a
piece of ordinance of five and twenty foot long, which discharged a shot of
a hundredth weight at once, made of purpose, with one only shot to sink our
Spanish Admiral, and it pleased God although she was somewhat battered, yet
was she repaired again, and ouerthrewe the English army.

A Pack of Spanish lies. From Spain. Copy of a letter that John Gamarra
wrote from Roan the xxxi. of August of the same year.
3 THe English have lost above xl. ships in one encounter, where they could
not fly, which was in (f) Luxaten a Haven in Scotland, to the which place,
since the departure of the Spanish armies from Calleis, the English army
followed, and supposing they went to take that Haven, they got before ours to
defend the entrance: we seeing them so near the English fleet, and that they
could not retire, as they always did, when they pleased, to ye English
Havens, they set upon them so valiantly, that they sunk xx. of their ships,
and they took xxvi. whole and sound, and the rest seeing their destruction,
fled away with great loss of men, and their ships very much battered, and with
this (they say) the Spanish army took the Haven, where they are very well
lodged, as every one affirms, and so the news is here: I pray God give them
good success: we understand by the Post come from Calleis, that in England
it is forbidden upon pain of death and loss of goods, that no body do write
news from thence to any place: which confirms the news above.

A Pack of Spanish lies. From Spain. Coppie of a Letter that Pedro de Alua
did write from Roan the first of September of the same year.
4 I Do not write news of the Spanish army, because they are diverse, and
would gladly write the very truth. Now by the news which runs from
diverse places, as Calleis, Deep, and Hollande, and presumptions from England,
and other places, it is holden for certain, that they have fought with the
English, and broken their heads, having sunk many of their ships, and taken
others, and the rest which they say were xxvii. ships, returned very much
battered to the River of London, which are all those that could escape: There
goes with this Post another Post of Iorge Seguin of Calls, which says that
certain Masters and Mariners of Zeland, did affirm to the Governors of
Calleis, Mounsier de Gorden, that our fleet is in a Haven or River in Scotland
called (e) Trifla, where they say there may ride two thousand Ships: this is
that which commonly is current here.

A Pack of Spanish lies. From Spain. Advise from London, which the
Ambassador of our sovereign Lord the King resident in Paris, had from thence.
5 BY news from London of the xxvi. of August, it is known for most certain
from persons of credit, yt the Queens Admiral general was arrived in the river
of London, with xxv. ships only without his Admiral ship, (h) which was taken
by our Admiral Saint John, and it is well known in Enga^ld, that to hide ye
loss of their Admiral ship, they say he put himself in a smaller ship ye
better to follow our army: and it is known for certainty yt he saved him self
in a boat when he lost his ship. That Drake for certainty is taken or slain.
The same is confirmed by ye way of Holland, by a Pinnasse of theirs. And from
Austerland, that the Queen commanded upon pain of death, that no body should
speak of her fleet, and that there was great sorrow in those parts of England,
and that the Queen had in ye field thirty thousand raw soldiers, betwixt
Dover and Margate, and that (i) ye Catholics understanding that al their fleet
was dispersed, moved a certain mutiny, which forced the Queen to go herself
into the field, and for certain it is known that there is not brought in to
England, neither ship nor boat of ours, more then the ship of Don Pedro
valdez, and that our fleet was gone in to Scotland, and arrived in a Haven
called (k) Trapena Euxaten.

A Pack of Spanish lies. From Spain. By a letter of the chief Post master of
Burdeux, written to the French Ambassador, the 2. of Sept. 1588.
6 AFter that I had written this, here is arrived a Scottishman, which says
that all ye Spanish fleet is arrived in Scotland, and that the Scottishmen
have taken arms against the English.

A Pack of Spanish lies. From Spain. Relation of that which has passed till
this day, the fifth of September 1588. till three of the clock in the after
noone, known by the relations and advise come to his Majesty from the happy
fleet, whereof is General the Duke of Medina, in the conquest of England.
7 THat upon the thirtieth of July, without seeing any sail of the enemies in
the sea, he came to the Channel, six leagues from Plimmouth: where
understanding the enemies were, he gathered together and set in order all the
fleet: and sailing the first of August, there was discovered some sails of
the enemies, the which the second day were nombred to be lx. sail, of which
the Duke took the wind, and passed without any fight, although he presented ye
same to them, howbeit they began to shoot at the Rereward: but the Duke in the
Galleon S. Martin, set ye Prow of his ship against the biggest of the enemies,
ye which being succored by twenty others, fled away: of this fight and first
encounter, there was sunk three Galeasses, and four mighty Galeons of the
Queens: there was burnt of ours by negligence of a Gunner, the Admiral of
Oquendo, and the enemies took the chief ship of Don Pedro Valdez, which being
entangled with others under his charge: was left without tackle, and so near
the enemies, that she could not be succored by others.

With this, our fleet seeing that the enemy in every point did fly from
giving battle, they sailed with some calm weather, and the enemies after
them, shooting always at the Rereward, until the seventh, yt our fleet ancored
in the Road of S. John, betwixt Calleis and Bollin, nine leagues from
Dunkerke, and the enemies did the like, the nearest they could to England.

The night being approached, the enemies got up their ankers, to get the wind,
and not to suffer our ships to go out of the Road to sea, because they had
trimmed viii. ships of fire, which with the corrent of the water, should have
put them selves amongst our ships, to have burnt them. But my Lord the Duke,
foreseeing ye danger, prevented them, with commandment that the ships that
were nearest, should cut their Cables, and to take up the others with a
readiness incredible: and with this the enemies pretense was hindered, and so
got the sea most bravely, and with such good fortune, that if he had not done
it, our army should have been in evil case, for in the very place which we
left, there was shot off by them, out of those fiery ships, such fires, and
other engines, that were sufficient to burn the Sea, much more, ships which are
made of wood and pitch.

In this departure, the Captain of the Galeasses had a great mischance: for
getting up her Anchor, a Cable fell foul of her Helm, that she could not follow
the rest, which caused one of her sides to lie so hie, that her ordinance could
not play, and so xxv. Pinases came and battered her, and withal this, if the
mariners, soldiers, and rowers that were in her, had not cast themselves into
the sea, it is holde^ for certain, that (m) Don Hugo de Mo^cada had defended
her, as he did until she came into Calleis, where at the entrance thereof, he
was killed of two Caliuer shot, the people on shore defended the Galeasse, and
all that was in her, and delivered the same to our Sovereign Lord the Kings
ministers.

At this time, ye Duke had a very frank wind, and the like had the Queens
Fleet: and so they both passed by the sight of Du^kerke, insomuch as they on
land knew the Gallion S. Martin, and others that went fighting with the English
army, and in this order they went till the twelfth.

Afterward they write, that there came into Calleis a ship, which says, that
the (n) xii. day they did see the two Fleetes together in fight: an other which
came afterward, said he had seen some ships spoiled and torn, and from
them they threw out (o) their baggage which they saved in boats, which argues,
they were ships of the enemies, for that our men had no place to save them
selves, nor there were none of them arrived into Fla^ders, which was their
place of return.

A Pack of Spanish lies. From Spain.
8 OVt of England was advise given, that on ye xiii. arrived fifteen of the
Queens ships, and they said that the Galleon Saint Martin, wherein my Lord the
Duke is, (whom God preserve) had encountered with Drake, and had grapled his
ship, and captiued his Person, and other Noble English me^, and taken other
fifteen ships, beside others yt were distressed, and the Duke with his fleet,
followed his way to Scotland, because the wind was not come about.

With these news, his Majesty rests very much contented, and caused them to
be sent to the Empress, by the hands of Francisco Ydiaquez, his Secretary of
estate.

IMPRINTED in SEVIL in the house of Cosmo de lara Printer of Books, by license
of the Count of Orgaz, Assistant in SEVIL.

JOAN. 8.44. Ye are of your father the Devil, and the lusts of your father ye
will do: he has been a murderer from the beginning, and aboade not in the
truth, because there is no truth in him. When he speaks a lie, then
speaks he of his own: for he is a liar and the father thereof.

A condemnation of the SPANISH lies. From England.
1 IT is well known to all the world, how false all this relation is, and
either falsely colored by the Letters remembered, or else both the post Master of
Logrono, and the writers from Roan ought to be waged as Intelligencers for the
devil the father of lies, whom they have herein truly served: and if they so
continue in mayntenance thereof against the known truth, their damnation is
certain, and hell is open for them.

(a) The Letters from the kings Ambassador, whose name is Mendoza, agreeable
to their Masters name, being the reporter of mendacia mendacissima, and
considering that he has written that Francis Drake is imprisoned, and many
Nobles of England, if Mendoza will stand to his Letters, so as he would gage,
and by his hand writing assure but his worst Iennet and his belles, he shall
be answered for the said Sir Francis Drakes person, or any Nobleman, gentleman,
or page so taken in the fight between the two Armies, for the ra^som of every
of the said prisoners 40000. Crowns in the Royal Eschange of London. But the
truth is, Sir Francis Drake was so far off to be a prisoner, that he was the
taker: for he took Pedro de Valdez, and 400. more Spanish prisoners at one
time. And to prove this to be true, Mendoza shall have if he will require it,
Pedro de Valdez own hand to show, that he is prisoner to Sir Francis Drake,
and 400. more taken with him, and not one English man taken in that service.

(b) It is so false that there was any mutiny in the Q. Army, that she her
self was there, with the greatest honor, love, and applause received, that
could be imagined for a Lady and a Queen. She rode round about her Army,
and passed through every part thereof, to their inestimable comfort: she
lodged and did eat in the Camp, as quietly as ever she did in her own
chamber. In the Army was never any fray or discord: exercise of Arms was
daily used and showed before her, to her great honor: yea, and with an
universal extolling of Gods Name every day Morning and Evening, in loud
prayers and psalms: and the like song in her own hearing against all tyranny
by invasion of Gods enemies: and this every man may judge to be far from any
color of mutiny.

(c) It was a meet occupation for a blind man, to put lies into songs: and if
he knew how false his verses were when he published them, it were to be wished
that he had his eyes restored to see his lies, and then his tongue cut out
that uttered them, and his eyes clean plucked out of his head, that he should
never see any more written lies. As for his ears, it were good to have them
open, to hear men call him justly, a notable blind liar.

A Condemnation of the Spanish lies. From England.
2 THe Governor of Roan is accounted a worthy noble man, and therefore he
shall do well to make this report of him to be known for a lie: for so surely
he knows it to be, that there was never either a chief Pilote or the value
of a boy of Captain Drakes taken and brought to him as a prisoner.

The Governors of Bollen and Calleis can inform the Governor of Roan, how
false a report it was, that the English Army remained overthrown before
Calleis: the English army fought with the Spanish, chased the Spanish as a
brace of Greyhounds would a herd of Dear: the Spaniards ships were beaten,
spoiled, burnt, sunk, some in the maine seas before Dunkirke, some before
Flushing, and the rest chased away, so as they fled continually before the
English Navy in their best order for strength, without daring to abide any
fight: yea, some one of the English ships fought with 3. of their Galleasses,
the Spaniards never atte^pting to board any English, but as many of them as
could sail away, fled with all their sails, and were followed by the
English, until they were chased out of all the English seas, and forced then to
run a violent course about Scotland, and so to Ireland, where a great number
of their ships are drowned, their men taken, and many killed by the savage
people for their spoil, and the English Navy upon good consideration left
them, when they saw them so hastily to fly desperately into the Northren
dangerous Seas, where the English Navy did very certainly know that there
would be no safety for them to follow the Spanish. Why durst any report that 22.
English ships were sunk, and 40. were taken, when in truth there was not
any one of the English ships sunk or taken? A strange disposition, to forge
such great lies, whereof there was no ground, nor color. If any one or two of
the English had been sunk, a liar might have put the number of 20. for 2. and
excused the lie by error of figuring: but of none in number, no number can be
made, but by falsehood. The Governor of Roan being a man of great honor and
virtue, ought to revenge this shameful lie made upon him: for Lucian never did
in all his lies use more impudency, then these Spanish liars do report of him.

(d) If Drakes ship were taken, if there was such a piece of ordinance of
such a length, in what Port is that ship? in whose possession is that piece?
Drake is returned with honor: his ship called the Revenge is in harborow,
ready for a revenge by a new service, no ship lost, no ordinance missing.

(e) The foolish liar makes mention of Abspurg in Scotland: in all Scotland is
no such place, in Germany is a country called Habspurg, but any wager may be
laid, that none of the Spanish came ever thither. Every line, or every
sentence, contains a lie.

The Duke him self is returned: let him confirm this untruth, that he
ouerthrewe the English army: it can not be imagined, that he, (being a person
of so great honor) will allow so notorious a lie to be taken for a truth: for
if he had such a victory, why did he not land to conquer England? why did he
never enter into any part of England? why did he never carry any Ensign of
England into Spain to show, as very many of the Spanish were brought into
England?

A condemnation of the Spanish lies. From England.
3 ALl this is likewise as full of lies, as lines. John Gamarra may be what he
is: but if there be such a man, and that he wrote as is mentioned, except he
be a professed member of the Devil to forge lies, he knows that he wrote
falsely.

(f) He notes also a Haven in Scotland called Luxaten: none such was ever
known there. In Vtopia there may be such a one: no Spaniard can say that
they took any Haue^ in Scotland: it is altogether vain otherwise to reprove
this: but all that is reported are lies, and so let Gamarra repent, or follow
the Devil his master, the father of malicious lies.

A condemnation of the Spanish lies. From England.
4 THis Pedro Alua could be content to send lies, but he is more wary in ye
auowing of them: he reports lies, as he says, that came from other places.
But of all other places, none could make a truer report then Calleis, where
the Governor, and all the inhabitants saw the Spanish army mightily beaten by
the English, and it was affirmed by men there of great judgment, that never
was seen by any man living such a battery, so great for number, so furious,
and of so long continuance, as the English made against the Spanish. Calleis
saw the Spanish army first driven from their ancres with fire: they saw the
greatest Galliasse of the Spanish, whereof was Commander that worthy noble man
Moncada, spoiled, and himself slain in the Galliasse by the English. Calleis
did see the next day, that the English Navy fought and did beat the Spanish
Armada from viii. of the clock in the Morning, until 4. in the afternone
without any ceasing.

Calleis saw the Spanish hoyse up al their sails, and fly as fast as wind
could drive, and the English to follow and pursue them, and yet Calleis saw a
sufficient Navy of England left before Dunkirke, able to master all the
Shipping that the Duke of Parma had provided. (g) The last part of this report
is a like lie to the other: there is no such Port in Scotland, called Trifla,
neither did any of the Spaniards take succor in any Haven, nor yet could have
done, by reason of the contrary winds.

A condemnation of the Spanish lies. From England.
5 HEre follows the Mountain of lies. It is reason that if there were liars
in London, they should send them to Mendoza: for so Mendacia are of more price
with him, then true reports, and so was he accustomed when he was Ambassador
in England, to buy more lies, because he liked them, better then truethes.

If one should make a Section, or anatomy of this Mountain and body of lies,
there is no piece, nor joint to be found sound. (h) The Admiral Ship, which
was called the ARC ROYAL, was safely brought home by the Lord Admiral of
England L. Howard: he never changed her, she is (thanked be GOD) safe with
other the Queens Royal Ships, she is able with the Lord Admiral, to match
in fight with the Duke of Medina, or any Prince of Christendom, in any ship
that the King of Spain has. This is not spoken for ostentation: but Gods
favor is assured to England in the Justice of the quarrel, against any
Inuadour.

(i) If there were a mutiny of Catholics, they should have been hanged or
punished: but it was not known that one Catholic did stir this Summer with
hand or tongue to move offense, neither was any one imprisoned, or otherwise
punished.

(k) The last line is a lie, with like error as the former: for there is no
Haven in Scotland called Trapena Exaten. This Mendoza was very curious to forge
a strange name, as it appears he had read of some such in Peru or in new
Spain.

A condemnation of the Spanish lies. From England.
6 THis Scottishman, (I think,) has no name: a manifest lie it was, that
Scottishmen had taken Arms against the English. Such a lie did Mendoza publish
some years past, that the king of Scots had besieged and won Barwicke. I
trust he remembers now, how false a lie it was: but yet he has no grace, as
it seems, to forbear from forging of lies, for his chollerike appetite. But
a manifest truth it is, that the King of Scots at the time meant, made a
general Proclamation, that no Scottishman should victual any Spaniard, for
that the King did know they came to have conquered both England and Scotland.
And on the other side, the King by Proclamation commanded, that all succors
should be given to the Army of England, as being the army of his Sister and
confederate, and the Prince whom he knew to be invaded most iniustly. Many
Scottishmen might at Bordeaux have reported this for a truth.

A condemnation of Spanish lies. From England.
7 AL these untrue news are said to have come from the spanish Fleet, to the
Kings Majesty. By this time is it sure, that the Duke of Medina can tell the
King his Master some other contrary matters: for else he had no cause to fly
about Scotland and Ireland. (l) He also will not say, that either three
Galiasses, and four Galleo^s of England were sunk, or that ever he could see
one ship or one boat of England sunk. He can tell the King with great grief,
that he never had fortunate day, from his coming from the Groine, till he
returned with the loss of as many ships, men, victuals, treasure, and
ordinance, as might have made a good army by sea: and great pity it is for
Christendom, that both that which is lost, and that which remains had not
been used by the King Catholic, against the Infidels, and not with ambition on
to employ such kind of forces, to invade Christian countries therewith, who if
he would live in peace with them, would be ready to join their forces with
his, to dilate the fines of Christendom, and forbear spending of Christian
blood amongst Christians.

(m) This Noble man was killed with a small shot in the Galleasse, where in very
truth he remained in defense of the Galleasse, and sought not to fly away,
as a great number did.

(n) If it be meant, the xii. of August, the untruth is apparent: for there was
never fight after that before Calleis, which was the xxix. of Iulie, Stilo
antiquo, and the 8. of their August.

(o) It is very true, that the Spaniards ships to make themselves light to
fly, did cast away their boats, they threw their Moiles and horses into the
seas.

A condemnation of the Spanish lies. From England.
8 THis that is said of the Dukes grapling with Drakes ship, and taking of him
captive, and many other Noble men of England, is like all the rest of the lies.

The Duke after he went from Calleis toward Scotland, never came near to
offer fight with any English ship, never turned back to the English that
followed him, but fled away as wind and sail could serve him.

If he had this fortune thus falsely reported, it is sure that he would have
brought both Drake and some of the Noble men home with him into Spain, to have
been presented to the king, and not to have gone home to his own house
without sight of the King. But in truth, there was not one Noble man, or
Gentleman of any Mark that went to the sea, that was either slain or taken:
all are living, and are as willing, by Gods favor, to adventure their lives,
as ever they were against any of the Queens enemies, when she shall command them.

And where these news did much content the King, it is likely that if he
thought them true, he was glad thereof, for so had his Majesty cause: but he
is thought too wise, to have thought, that after he understood that the Duke
and all his army had fled from the coast of Flanders and England, that ever
they were like to have any victory of the English, No, contrariwise the King
and all his wise Counselors had cause to lament the dangers, whereunto of
necessity his Armada should fall by passing the dangerous coasts, Islands,
and monstrous rocks of Scotland, and Ireland, of more danger for his Navy to
pass, then to have passed from Lisborne to the Moloccas, and home again.

It is to be thought, that if the Empress gave the secretary Ydiaques any
reward for the news, as it is likely she did: she may justly require it
again from him, and give him charge not to bring her Majesty, nor the King
his master any such notorious lies hereafter: for if he use it often, he is
unworthy to be Secretary to so great a King.

Jmprinted at London by the DEPVTIES of Christopher Barker, Printer to the
QVEENES most excellent Majesty. 1588.

ZACH. 8.26. These are the things that ye shall do: Speak ye every man the
truth unto his neighbor.

EPHESIANS. 4.25. Wherefore cast off lying, and speak every man truth unto his
neighbor: for we are members one of another.


