THE RANSOM OF TIME BEING CAPTIVE.

WHEREIN IS DECLARED how precious a thing is time, how much he loses that
loses it, and how it may be redeemed.

Written in Spanish, by the R. Father ANDREAS DE SOTO, Confessor to the most
excellent INFANTA CLARA EVGENIA.

Translated into Englich by I. H.

AT DOWAY, Printed by GERARD PINSONE at the sign of Coline, 1634.

TO THE HIGH, AND MIGHTY PRINCESS THE LADY KATHERINE DVTCHESSE MARCHIONESS,
AND COUNTESS OF BVCKINGHAM* COUNTESS OF COVENTRIE, VICE-COVNTESSE VILLIERS,
AND BARRONESSE OF WHADDON* etc.
MADAME
This piece in its native language was happy by the protection of that glorious
Princess, and mirror of virtuous Ladies, the Lady CLARA EVGENIA of happy
memory.

It Is now translated, and vested with an English hew: to whose protection, and
tuition, with more conuenience, or more confidence, may this stranger fly,
then to your most Gracious Highness? For if it be the books ambition to
scorn the public view, unless it may he graced with the sacred patronage
of a Duchess, of a Noble, and virtuous Lady; by ^^ying to the refuge of your
Highness vnparrelled virtues, it shall only change, not loose it is mistress.

MADAME, yet I most humbly bow; craving pardon of your Grace that I present my
homage so veiled as in a translation, not in a primary composition, best suting
with my duty, and your most eminent worth; since that your Excellencyes
splendour might well enlighten, make acute, give full vigor, yea and most
lively spirit to each vulgar capacity; to me especially whose devotion to your
Greatness and Goodness well weighed, would be found as verily, it is, truly
resigned.

Really I would have attempted the deliverye of some notions wherewith as well
my zeal, as also your Graces singular virtues have formerly prompted me.

But when I (let not this my Apology, MADAME, not find grace with your Grace)
perused this treatise (which I now dedicate to your Excellency) made English;
and found it consonant to what the height of my imagination could arrive, yea
and as well agreeing, aptly according with your Excellencyes example: Then was
I acquieted, made no farther search, for that I was even fully appayed, Alas!
yet MADAME as confiding in your indulgency, your conniuency.

The Author most learnedly has delivered his charitable mind, in whose work
reading and curious notions are sweetly couched, evidently to be seen in an
appropriate Method: yea and it is most assuredly embellished and practically
confirmed by him, as being fraught with many rare patterns, among which
MADAME were I not a translator I would herein record, register your Grace, as
one deservedly.

Farther what are the particular contents of this piece will clearly be shewe^
in the subseque^t preface, compiled by the Author himself; to which I refer
your Excellency wherein may be contemplated a discourse which may well and
likely prove a general benefitt to all Readers by your Grace.

MADAME Your Excellencies Most humbly devoted Servant JOHN HAWKINS.

THE AVTHORS PREFACE TO THE READER.
GOOD is not known, yea not even taken notice of (as a spanish Proverb
delivers) until that it be passed by; yea more, be utterly lost. Alas! the
truth hereof I most apparently perceive in my self, it aptly agrees with my
state, and my run course of life, for that I too late took notice thereof,
too late knew what time is, and of what value it is, and what a precious and
inestimable treasure it may be truly found to be. So far forth that I am
much aggreiued that I did not dis^erne it, and well might I, for that I have
lost so great a jewel: and earnestly I desire (if it were possible) that I
were master of my years already spent, to the end I might well and most
solicitously employ them, as I-ought, and my well being requires, and my duty
commands, and that I might redeem them from the Captivity and enthrallment
with which they have been miserably detained, yea and enchained. Rather might I
well say, that he who has not known, and prized time bath justly deserved,
that now he lament and earnestly vvish for it, and that yet notvvithstanding he
fail to possesie that which he disesteemed, that which he, alas! so slightly
regarded. But I take for a singular, a rare grace and mercy of notable value
that our Lord (although at the end of my days) has given me this capacity,
this understanding, and fervent desire of a better employing my time, which
from hence for ward his mercy will grant me, that I may exhort and give some
counsel to the remiss; careless and as it were altogether negligent.

And to give beginning to what is fore delivered, I have desired that he
please to make me his Attorney or Proctor that I may petitionarily plead for
the ransom, the redemption thereof: and that I may instruct them, who have
lost it, how they may regaine it, and that I may declare how much it
imports them, how far it concerns them, of what great consequence it is
to them, and likewise further I may earnestly, and with fulness of charity
crave of the^ and piously, yea even move them that they cast not away one
hour: what say I? no nor moment of time. I will be breife, though were it
I should spend never so much time in the account hereof, I should not judge it
lost time.

I shall not be able to bring to pass what Pythagoras does advise, which is
to contract many sentences in fevv words, as good Philosophers ought, and are
accustomed to do. Hence Diogenes to one who talking with him seemed to tax
some what the breuity of the Philosophers sentences, ansvvered, you say right
well truly they are in fevv words couched indeed, yet deserve not hence
reprehension, for were it possible, so likewise should be the syllables.

But I will do the fall extent of my power, contracting this whole subject
under ten Chapters only. Herein observe Gentle Reader that I cast not time
away neither in the definition or description of Time (where it might seem
that the Treatise should take his beginning) for that it is not necessary (as
said Saint Augnstine) for there is not ought more known, nor more familiar,
more frequently spoken of by humane tongue, then is that of time.

Let it graciously please God Almighty our good and glorious Lord through his
precious blood (which was the price of our redemption) that this treatise of
the redeeming of lost time may ansvverably profit the Reader.

The names of the Authors alleged and cited in this tractate.
SAint Ambrose. F. Alphonso de Castro. Andrew bishop of Cesarea. Aristotle. S.
Augustine.
B.
S. Basil. V. Bid. S. Bernard. S. Bernardino of Siens. S. Bonauenture.
C.
S. Cassianus. Cesario.
D.
Dionysius Carthusianus. Dionysius Cassius.
E.
Elianus. Euthymius.
G.
S. Gregory Pope. Gregorius Nissenus.
H.
Haimon. Horace.
I.
S. Jerome. S. John Damaseene. S. John Chrysostom. John Stobeus. Don John
Orozcory.
L.
Laertius. B. Laurentius Iustianus. Ludouicus Blosius.
M.
F. Maldonato Ies.
N.
S. Nicolas Diukespu.
O
Origin. Ovid.
P.
Plutarch.
S.
P. Salmeron Ies. Seneca. Simon de Caffia. P. Soarez. Ies.
T.
Thaulerus. Theodoret. S. Thomas of Aquine. Thomas de Kempis.
V.
P. Viegas. Ies. Virgil Po.
Z.
Zedrenus.
The Chapters in this treatise contained.
Cap. 1. WHAT a precious jewel Time is! page 1. Cap. 2. That we are Lords of
Time, and for what end God bestowed it on us, and in what manner it should be
employed. page 28. Cap. 3. How God abbre^iateth, shorteneth, yea takes away
time when there is great want thereof to him who took no care thereof when he
possessed it, nor sought he ough to make go^^ use thereof according to his
duty power. page 45. Cap. 4. That even now whilst we have time it concerns
us, to take pains with feruency, and speed, and that we ought to employ it
well. page 64. Cap. 5. How justly the sluggish deserve reprehension, and who so
called. page 91. Cap. 6. How the body does captivate that time which is
designed for the soul and thereby exalts it self. page 101. Cap. 7. That
lawfully secular people may use some entertainements of mirth, solace, and
pastime to recreate their spirits. page 131. Cap. 8. That it is lawful also
yea even necessary, that spiritual men use some convenient exercise which may
tend for an intermission; recreation and solace. page 148. Cap. 9. Of the
means to redeem time, where shall be given to understand more expressly who
are they, and of what condition they are who loose it. page 165. Cap. 10.
How it is to be understood, that the days are bad, and how since so it is,
that they are to be redeemed. page 181.
FINIS.
THE RANSOM OF TIME BEING CAPTIVE.
THE FIRST CHAPTER.
What a precious jewel Time is?
IT is the style and manner of holy scriptures delivery (that whenever it
teaches or admonishes (...) ought) which is very notable, (...) of great
importance, it prepare^^ us with the fore sending of some marvailous and
extraordinary vision or figure, which may invite and raise serious attention,
which may awaken and sprightly quicken our minds, and hold them in suspense
and admiration, as ordinarily is read in the kookes of the Prophets, and
especially in the Apocalypse of S. John the Evangelist; Apoc. 10.
where among other admirable visions and figures, that which he writes in the
10. Chapter is very remarkable, which (jointly with those words of the Apostle
in the epistle to the Ephesia^s Redeem thy time, Ephesians. 9
for thy days are evil) shall be the Theme and ground of this our treatise
and exhortation.

He then further says that he sawan Angel goodly, mighty, and powerful to
apprehe^sion, to come down from heaven, environed with a Cloud; who brought
with him on his head in lievv of a Diadem Heavens Rainebow; his face was
resplendant as is the Sun at full Noone, with his irradiations, his
glistering beams: his Feet were like Columns or great pillars of purely
bright-burning fire. In his hand he held a book opened, and treading on the
Sea with his right foot, and on the earth with his left foot, so loudly
strained he his voice, and in such a manner, that he seemed not unlike a Lion,
when he roareth: and pointing at Heaven with his forefinger swear, by him who
lives, and shall live for ever and ever; him who created heaven, earth, and
sea and whatsoever is in the^ contained, that after the days of the seave^th
Angel, time should cease for ever and ever, that time should have no being at
all.

To declare briefly the mysteries which herein are comprised.

This Angel according to the exposition of many Authors, is Christ our Lord,
the Angel of the great, high and, mighty Counsel, or is One of the most
blessed Angels, who represents his person who has from him the office of
his Legate or Ambassador; descended From heaven, for apparently, most visibly
he is to come down from thence in a resplendent, a cleerly-bright, and most
glorious Cloud, with great and mighty power to give Judgment on all the world.

Yet observe also that his being covered in a cloud does signify the
confusion, the strange conturbation which in those last days will appear, as
well in the time of the reign and fearful persecution of Antichrist, as also
when there shall appear, such terrible, such horrible, such dreadful signs
which are to fall out, and evidently to be shown before the universal
judgment, the day of doom; when as the fearful presence of the Judge is from
moment to moment looked for.

The Rainebow is the Emblem or sign of peace.

The Fire, of Anger, fury, and chastisment.

And in the two uttermost bounds of humane body, which are the Feet and head
(the beginning and ending thereof) are delineated the two several commings of
Christ to the world, whereof the first was of mercy to make peace between God
ad Man, and hence is it that for devise he bears on his head the Rainebow of
Heaven, for sign that the waters of the Deluge, the afflictions and
fore-passed chastisements were ceased. And in the other he shall come as a
judge; and hence is it that he is delineated with Feet of fire, which signify
inflexible, implacable rigor, and terrible anger. Ignis ante ipsum praecedet
said David, Psa. 49.
he shall come casting forth fire abu^dantly.

The Form and figure of Colum^es import the mighty power which he will
extend in the rigid execution of his judgment and justice.

The Open book in his hand does give us to understand the eternal sapience,
eternal wisdom which he hathas God, by virtue whereof the office of a judge
is his proper attribute and the fulness of science, of knowledge, of wisdom,
which he has as man to discern and discuss the real grounds of things, the
demeanor and desert of all the sons of Adam, and the decreed rate of the
Divine law according to the which they are to be adjudged.

The placing one foot on the Sea, and the other on the Land is as much as to
say that he surroundeth, that he comprehends the Sea and land, the land and
Sea: and that there is not ought which can be exempt from his hands, Psalm. 13.
nor hide it self from his presence.

The roaring not unlike to that of a Lion, does declare the strange anger, and
inexpressible irefull countenance of the judge, when he shall pronounce the
heavy, and most doleful, direful sentence of the condemned.

And the so Solemn oath does express the infallible certainty, which shall be
in the full accomplishme^t, and co^pleat execution of that, which he
declares, he pronou^ceth, he preaches to ma^kinde: that in the days of the
seventh Angel when as that dreadful trumpet shall be heard, and horridly
resound, which shall summon to judgment all the offspring of Adam, time for
ever and ever shall cease, shall be consumed, shall have its full and uttermost
bound and last end, and that eternally, that everlastingly it shall be wanting
to them, who oportunely did not benefit themselves by it, but deferred their
well doing when as they possessed this Time, unto the last period, the
uttermost day of their lives.

And that the Angel published the Edict with so many and such like
circumstances and ceremonies, that time should have its end once for ever and
ever and when this is to take effect, it is for that we be informed, and
begiven fully to understand of what price, value, and great esteem it is, and
what great benefit God imparteth to us, bestows on us, to make us Lords
thereof, the whole course of our days, of our life, and contrary wise what a
great punishment it is that he subtract it from any one, as being altogether
unworthy of it, it being ill employed: And to know how precious time is it
would suffice to conte^plate that in an instant the infinite eternity of Glory
may therein be acquired, since that man may gain it in so little a space. And
hence is it that the Holy Ghost advises us to conserve time, Eccles. 4.
as gold carefully wrapped up, as the apple of our eye, and that we carefully
eschew vice, yea and with perseverance, successively, continually: which is,
as if he should say that we spend it in good works, and that thereof we loose
not ought, no not one sole moment. Again by the self same Ecclesiasticus he
counsaileth us, Eccles. 14.
saying; Consume not, cast not away a good day, not without profit let pass
the one only particle of a good gift. One text reads Particula bonae diei,
and the other which is the vulgar translation, Bonidoni: whether the one or
other be h^s words, his true meaning is, his realle scope is to advertise us,
to give us counsel, and to exhort us earnestly to account of time, to use
time well; oh! yea carefully, solicitously, and most tenderly, not only of a
day, but also of each day; for he who well understands and well disposes of
one day, may take pattern there by to square, proportion, and well dispose of,
well order his whole life; and he co^pleatly is master thereof, as also makes
thereof right use, who works his own proper good and that of his
Neighbors to his full power, employing himself, and his time in works of
piety and mercy. King David feared a little parcel of time of much, and so much
desired he to spend it all well, that he was even agonized in contention, in
struggling with the Sun who should rise soonest to give lauds to God, to
honor and praise God; and at length the King overcame, got the victory,
according to those words, Psalm. 118.
by which it is testified, praeueneru^t oculi mei ad te diluculo vtmeditarer
eloquia tua: My eyes got ground of the sun, fore ra^ne it to co^t^eplate, to
meditate on thy words; for before it at all appeared, I was all e^tertained
seriously atte^tive and earnestly busied thereon, which according to the
exposition of S. Ambrose is, as if he should speak more plainly, and more at
large: oh, thou who art a Christian rise before the Sun is up, before the
Sun appears at all. For I cannot but hold it for a great lazines, and a
merely most indefensible and most strangely careless negligence, marvailously
blamable, and above all discretion, that the beams of the Sun rising should
find thee idle, thee I say sluggish, and drowsing in thy soft couch. Art thou
peradventure so ignorant, so stupid as that thou apprehendest not, that thou
ought to offer, and freely give to God each day the first fruits of thy
tongue, and heart?

Behold, observe well the gifts bestowed on thee; thou possessest daily
harvest, and hence each day is fruit. And in an other Psalm Prophet says
Anticipauerunt vigilias oculi mei. My eyes have anticipated, Psa. 79.
prevented, and raised themselfes up, before the sentinells and City watch;
which imports (according to S. Hierome) before any was awake, any had opened
their eyes, even then I was with watchful eyes at Midnight, when each one
sweetly slept, and profoundly, then risse I, not only then, but in the
morning, and at midday, also at evening, in a word; seven times a day I give
laud and praise to God, and his praise was always in my mouth, and at all
hours. It was he who knew well to conserve time, he exactly and most prude^tly
observed and understood what it was, and of what value it was and how to avail
himself, to make true use of so precious a gemme without the loss of any one
the least either of the good day, or good gift. A precious hazard is time
Theophrastus said; and Seneca in his first Epistle (which he wrote to Lucilius
his friend) delivers his mind in this follovving manner; Theophras. Seneca.
Epist. 1.
what man will you bring forth, can you produce, who can rightly value time,
who knovveth the price of one only day? and well considering that we daily
incline to our end, our death, and that we ever dye? Herein we extremely
deceive our selves that our fantasy, and our eyes make not death our object.
Much of time tending to our end, is already passed: the rest of our a^e, and
life that thou can expect afterward is what death does chal^enge to it
self; for one foot is then accounted to be in the grave Therefore my good
friend ( Lucilius) be thou even answerably to that which thou writest in thy
letter to me thou art, as one who well knows the price of time. Entertain,
make account, value all hours, and each te^derly, so shall less depend on the
hours of to morrow, of the next day, taking strict account and careful
esteem of the present day, not slightly and caresly letting it pass of, for
life though never so much prolonged, yet in this his course passes not
withstandnig although at length, yea and swiftly flies. And we cannot account
ought our proper own but time; for that all other things are strangers to us,
diverse, not agreeing with us;alas! not in our jurisdiction, under our power,
our co^ma^d; nature has impatronized us here with, we are possessed, though of
what is nimble, vvhic runs, flies, and passes beyond expressio^ swiftly
from us. And is huma^ kind so unwise, so indiscreete that it is appassionated
and looks after means, things, almost matters of nothing, and likewise
recoverable, which lost they miserably lament for? There is not any body to be
found who will acknowledge that he is indebted ought for being made Lord of
time, although undoubtedly true it is, that time is of a nature so precious,
that be one never so thankful, yet is he never able to pay answerably to the
greatness of the due debt; the price thereof has so large extent; no, not the
debt of one days time. And in his book of the brevity, Idem lib. de breuitate
vitae.
the little extent of life he pursues further: There is not any body living
who desires to consume and cast away his patrimony, his means, his goods of
fortune, nor to utterly despoile himself, far rather to conserve it
carefully, yea and more to make increase thereof; time and life is easily
rendered, given over, and consumed in many and diverse ways. Worldlings are
covetous, are marvailous greedy of wealth, and strangely solicitous thereon,
and oftentimes immeasurably profuse, wonderfully prodigal, although such is
the condition of things that coueteousnes, the earnest desire of having,
possessing, and completely enjoying of time, is that which is truly just and
really laudable, worthy to be esteemed, and honored with praise for truly,
as immediately after in the same book he delivers, time is the most precious
jewel of all others, to be far preferred before any, what soever is or
can be conceived, yet notvvithstanding it of all other things is least valued,
yea and indeed to say more, despised, for it (...) reckoned as a thing of
nothing, of no vvorth at all. There is not any who esteems it when he has
it, if so it occur that any one be sick, nay their ^ingers but even ache, you
shall see them croutch, cringe, yea even bovv their knees before the Physician;
and be it that he fear the prognostic; the sentence, the doom of death, he
will give the physician his weight in gold for his recovery, for ransom of
his life. The blessed S. Laurence Justinian considering what time is, Laure^s.
Just. de vita solitaria. cap. 10.
and of what value, breaks forth into these words: Ah! who is there, who
is capable? who is he, who can with full extent of spirit and understanding
apprehend of what price, of what vvorth is time? Oh! what grace of delivery,
what eloquence, what sweetly-spun, or flowing speech of man can declare it,
lively and sprightly express it? they who want time, and have it not at all
know it. Then would they trucke all the possessions of the world, honors,
dignities, prelacyes, pompes of the age, corporal delights, and all that is
under the Sun, wherewith they are taken, entertained, and marvailously
pleased with, for one, one-sole houres-time, if possibly they might regaine it,
acquire it, possess it. For in this breife time, in this most short space,
they might appease the divine Justice, they might rejoice the Angels, they
might escape the terrible, dreadful, most direful doom of eternal loss,
everlasting damnation, and hence might they merit, and (without all doubt)
might win euerliving life, eternal bliss. The careless, unhappy, ah!
unfortunate are those to whom the sun of mercy is set. And they are passed
of, without hope of any recovery, they are descended to the Lake of misery,
where is nothing but confusion and ever lasting horror. And not without all
reason pardon is denied them, for that they misseprised it, Job 10.
when it was offered unto them, nay they did not once desire either to
meditate, to consider, or know what time its worth was, nor the much necessity
thereof, and the great want that they were to suffer thereby, so living to
please their palates, and their appetites, as if they were never to die. Oh! if
they to ke^t into consideration, they should well apprehend (they I sav who
employ their time ill, and live car^lesly) how they without once reflecting
thereon miserably loose it; for what is there more precious then time? what
is more excellent? what more dear? what of greater benefit? oh! what is
there more beautiful, more to be beloved then time? More is the pity, greater
is the grief, that there is not any thing so vilified, so despised, so the
least of leasts esteemed of, nor so vnvvorthily possessed, it being that,
through which may be heaped treasures, and eternal rewards vvonne in any one
part thereof. Hence is that they, who well observe; well know that, which
is vvorth let not the least time pass, be it never so short without fruit,
without return of profit; and why? for that they have to render to God an
exact and strict account. And glorious S. Bernard says that there is not any
thing, Bern. sermon. ad Schol:
which is more of value, more precious then is time; but now a days is there
found ought more despicable, more contemptible? The day of safety, of well
being does like shadows pass, and there is not any body who according to
reason does lament the loss of that, which has no regresse, no return. But
let men understand that even as no hair of the head shall perish, Luc. 1^.
eve^ so neither more nor less (...) any least moment of time, unless there
be thereof an account, and reason. None of you brethren esteem ought the time
you cast away in idle and most vain words; Words irrecouerable fly, yea
and time flies irremediably, not to be repaired, alas! not to be helped, and
the sottish fool takes no notice of what he loses. It is not amiss, nay
rather I may well say that it is even lavvfull, will some one urge to chatt,
to talk a while, and to continue familiar discourse betvveene man and man,
until one hour be runn out; what! that hour that God almighty freely and
mercifully gave thee to do penna^ce, that hence thou might obtain pardon,
hence to win grace, and merit glory? oh! until time glide away, fully make
his flight until the hour completely be run? Time, oh! that time thou had
to labor, to procure to win divine mercyes, propiriousnes, favor,
indulgency, and when thou ought to have made all have, with fulness of
diligence to come unto the society of Angels, to sigh, and breath for the
eternal inheritance, to suscitate, to avvake^ thy luke-vvarme, thy sluggish
will, and to weep bitterly on thy forepassed life, the iniquities thou have
transgressed in. All these are S. Bernards words. Oh! if this mercha^dise
(says the blessed S. Bernardin of Siena) of time could be saleable in hell, S.
Bernardin. ^o. vlt. sermon. 13 art. 3. and 4. and tom. vl. sermon. 1^ page 1
princip.
there for one half hour what would they proffer, nay what would they give?
ah! alas yes! they would part with a thousand worlds, if they were possessed
of them, their state considered, they there knovving how it is with such
miserably distressed, although they were in being again. Time is of more
value then is what soever the world has, for of such nature is it, that
thereby may be acquired, gained merits, through which one may arrive to the
possession and enjoying eternal be atitude God himself the infinite good and
^^easure. And if the devil were but master of a little time, in which he
might do acts of repentance, he would save himself, and gain, that, which
without all redemption he has utterly lost. The self same Saint further
delivers: That thing is of great value, very precious of which asmall
quantity is as much vvorth as is a greater weight and quantity of an other.
And so it is with gold, for that with little there of is bought great weight of
any other thing or metal what soever. Then contemplate time, weigh it
well, for that there with in an instant, if you were practiced in trading, you
shall be enabled to get heaven, and life everlasting, as did the good Theife.
Well knevv Arsenius the Abbo^, the price of time, Dionys. ciuit. in opuscul.
for when as he was in the hermitage of custom so well busied, Dionys.
Carthus. in opusc.
and was so earnestly coveteous of time, that is was his wonted saying: An
hour of sleep is enough for a Monk. And when once he found himself much
incited, marvailously surprised, yea altogether overcome, calling on sleep
uttered these words to him: Come, oh! come now thou forcibly oppressing
enemy, and even then setting himself down, gave himself over to repose,
slumbred, took a nappe. And if so that it may be granted unto me as lavvfull
to the confusion of bad Christians to recite the Gentiles, Plut^rch.
the Heathens, Pl^tarch writes of Marcus Cato Censorius that three things he
declined, yea exceedingly abhorred; The first to deliver to the discretion of
vvomankinde, what he would not each one should know. The second to make any
journey by water, when commodiously he might go by Land. And the third was
that negligently and through his own fault any day should pass without
having well employed the time thereof. Plinius the elder on a day seeing one
of his nephevves to walk up and down, although seeming by him done for his
recreation, chidd him and sharply reprehended him saying: you might well have
aright known the price of time; you need not have lost these hours. Sertorius
the Proconsull, Plutarc. in Sertorio.
and Captain general of the Romans when he had bought ad redeemed by money of
the Barbarians a passage, and that hence some murmured, and took it in ill
part, it seeming to them that this act of his was to enslaue the Romans, as
that they should give unto others tribute, answered: Alas! what urge you, what
may be called your true meanings herein? I have not done ought else but
redeemed and bought time, which is the treasure more precious then is any thing
object to the eyes of men, though never so covetous, though never so greedy of
great matters. Then well may I say, if the Heathens valued time at so high a
rate, with what greater reason should the Christian esteem of it, completely
prise it? since that through it he may acquire, gain, and win eternal
beatitude, and infinite glory.

The end of the first Capter.
THE SECOND CHAPTER.
That we are Lords of time, and for what end God bestowed it on us, and in what
manner it should be employed.
ALL other things (says the blessed Laurentius Justinian and Seneca before
delivered the self same, are alienes, strangers, not appertaining to us as our
own, they are not ours, time is that which we challenge as ours, time is that
which is our proper own and we Lords thereof; for that it lies in us to
employ it as we desire, and will our selves. And it is not a small grace,
favor, and benefit where with we are endowed, that he gives us freely for our
own so precious a jewel, and especially giving us so much, that though the
greatest extent of time is very short, says Seneca, it is not a little which we
retain, possess; and without all reason does human kind complain of life's
brevity, its shortness, its soonerun race; they should rather reflect on time
lost, what time is carelessly cast away, lamentably consumed; let here be the
^eate of their vvhisperings, their murmures, their indiscreetly placed
Complaints. Ah! life is long enough to operate, to vvo^ke atchieument,
prais-vvorthy, and of singular note, if it so be that it be well distributed,
well dispensed. God almighty yea even with the Angels themselves was so
reserved herein, that he gave them for their bounds Instants of time, and
prefixed times of well or ill deserving. He gave them short spaces, and
moments which some say were two, or three, and those, who go farthest do
assign but four (true it is that it sufficed in respect of their guiftes and
perfection of their nature) but to man who is slow, inconstant, and most
variable, God gives time of life and many years, and ages. But he was not
endowed, and enlarged there with to live sluggishly, not to runn over it, not
to consume it in sports, delights, jests, laughters, pastimes, and corporal
entertainments, and much less in sins; but it was to be seriously employed
in goodworkes, in well-doeing, and just and lawful exercises, and in taking
pain, laboring in his vyneyard, gaining by labor, and sweat of thy brows
thy daily pay, Matthew. 10.
which is the wages of the paines-taker and the reward of happiness. To the like
end the Apostle delivers: doing good works, Gala. 6
in the^ employing our time: for to such end he gave it us; let us not fail,
let us not be discouraged, ought dismayed, or weary, for the time will come
that we shall reap and get in our harvest, and our fruit. Since so it is
whilst we are impatronized of time, let us do the uttermost of our power. And
Seneca, Seneca.
though a Heathen delivers thus, time was not bestowed on us so liberally, so
benignely; that we might lawfully loose ought thereof. This is the time that
is acceptable, 2. Cor. 6.
the time which will be received, and well accounted of, this is the even day
of happiness, of health, of safety (my brethren) therefore in this work your
salvations by meritorious works acceptable, and such as may please God. The
time of this life is likewise by him called, the time of a fair; for even as
in them there are found, bought commodities at small rates, at little price;
even so in this life merchandises, and jewels of inestimable and infinite value
are bought with small cost; and yet with a momentary and easy, light
tribulation, and small trouble is obtained an eternal weight of glory (as
says the same Saint Paul) which shall be possessed, shall be completely
enjoyed in heaven. And by the way it is worth our observation to note how he
gives it the name of weight, for that with its weight and greatness it eases
and makes light all the difficulties, greifes, and anxieties of this world,
and that which in this world makes us waighe most, to suffer, bear, and
endure, compared with it, is of no more weight then a straw, is as light as a
fly. And even so the weight of reward put in one balance makes light, lifts
up to the very height the other scale of tribulations; even as a great weight
put into a scale ouerturneth the other, in which there was one only straw.
Answereable to which the same Apostle has delivered in another place, Romans 8.
the passions and tribulations of this life, its anxieties are not condign,
not of a like worth, altogether improportionable to the glory to come, which
shall be revealed and manifested in us, rather (if you compare them) they are
truly very little, and of no weight. And to this our purpose which we intend to
follow Christ our Lord makes a like Comparison to that of faires, Luc. 19.
when he compared the Kingdom of heaven to a man buying and selling, Matthew. 13.
to a Merchant. And when (as to men of employment) he spoke to all the
faithful; Be busy, make your mercha^dize, and loose no time therein until I
come, for then all traffic cease, has it is end, there shall be no more
Fair in being. Hence further more the time of this life is called, a time of
leisure, a vacation (free from all other things, free from all other
entertainements, other emploiments) for man to busy and seriously attend the
service of our Lord: It is likewise called a time of labor, according to those
words of our Savior, by S. John Evangelist his words, John. 9.
Now is the time of pains taking whilst day is yet in being, for night will
come, in which no body can work. There is a time enstyled a time of sowing,
and a time of reaping, and of carrying in the Corn, the grain, the harvest:
for it is the time that one may deserve well, and gather in the fruits of
merit, whereby the reward of heaven is to be gained. Hence it is that the Holy
Ghost sends the idle, careless and sluggish for his shame and confusion, to
the careful and fully solicitous Ante: go thou to the Ante (says he in the
Proverbs of Solomon) and observe well how that in the summer season, he makes
his provision, for the fall of the leaf, for that time of the year, and how
he labors and gathers his grain, and how he hoordeth and keeps it in
such places, not unlike granaries, corn lofts; and he makes his provision,
for that in winter there is no time to gather grain, but to eat, and live by
what is before gotten and conserved. Our Lord bestowed time on us (said the
blessed Laurentius Iustinianus) that we should lament, Laur^t. lustinian.
and sigh, and bitterly be wail our trespasses, it was given us for to do
penance, to acquire virtue, to multiply merits, to obtain grace, to excuse,
hence to defend, and to vindicate our selves from the torments of hell, and to
acquire the glory of heaven. And such is this truth that time has been given
unto us to employ in good works that that only which we spend on them, and
practices of virtue is ours properly, and that only time is registered in the
account of our life, and of our days, and of whatsoever else is no reckoning
made, nor memory in heaven, nor in the book of life. Although the world
numbreth them, and records the^, our Lord knows not those days; at the
least, to understand him aright, he says he knovveth them not, as that which
neither pleases him, nor is ou^ht agreeable to him, but rather offends him.
And in like manner Origenes expounding these words of David, our Lord knows
the days of men who are without blott or stain, who are the just thus
delivers. It is written in sacred scriptures that God knows nothing else
but what is good, and that he knows not evil, he forgette^h it, not for
that his science, his unspeakable fulness of all knowledge does not reach,
apprehends not, all what good, or evil is; the meaning hereof is, for that
they are unworthy of his sight, his taking notice of, his knowledge. I know you
not said he to the foolish virgins; Matthew. 25.
and as much to the workmen of mischeife, of iniquity. Our Lord knows the way
of the just, said the kingly Prophet David. And Solomon delivers that our
Lord understands the right hand way. Prouer. 4.
And likewise says David that our Lord knows the hours and the days, and
their time who live without stain of sin, and knows not the days of
transgressors. Sacred Scripture registreth no more then only two years of
Saul his Reign, 1. Reg. 13.
although he bore the scepter forty years, Act. 20.
for that he lived well but two years, and without blemish of sin, all the
rest of his days were inquinated with foul and shameful blotts. Dionysius
Cassius vvriteth that in a City of Italy was found an ancient sepulcher,
Dionisius Cassius.
on the tombestone whereof were insculp't were these words written. Here
lies Similus a Roman Captain, whose life although long it was, yet he lived
not in all this time, but seven years only, for during that time, he being
retired from Court, and freed from the solicitude, the care, the charges
which he had held, dedicated, and fully devoted himself to virtue, and to
it is school, it is exercise, Damas. Hist. Barla cap. 18.
it is practice. The glorious Damas. in the history of S. Barlaa^ and Iosaphat
recounteth, that Iosaphat demanding of Barlaam what where his years, of
what age he was, had delivered to him this answer; I am (if I deceive not my
self) forty and five years old, to many there are run, since I was borne:
What is your answer, I understand you not (said Iosaphat) for to my eye, to
my conjecture you are above seventy? if so that you account strictly from the
time of my nativity, you say right well, and you err not ought, for I am
above seventy; but I can no ways admit, they be reckoned more, for they seem
not to me at all years of life, nor ca^ the rest which I have misspent in the
vanities of the world be accounted of For as at that time being slave to sin,
I living at pleasure, at full swinge of sensuality of my body, and outward man,
I was then undoubtedly a dead man without life according to the inward man, so
far forth that I cannot call them, enstile them under the title of years of
life, which were of death, I lived not then: But after that by the grace of our
Lord I was crucified and dead to the world, likewise the world to me, and that
I have despoiled my self of the old man, and quite cast him of, now I live no
more sensually nor to please the body the spirits enemy, but only for Jesus
Christ, and such my years lived in I call years of life, of health, safety
and salvation. And believe it most assuredly that all they who are in sin,
and obey the devil, and pass away, I say consume their lives in delights, and
vain concupiscences, are dead and buried, utterly lost; for that sin is
death of the soul as Saint Paul affirms. Romans 6.
Divine S. Jerome in his exposition on the third chapter of the Prophet Aggaeus
delivers. Hiero. in Aggaeum. cap. 3.
That all the time in which we serve vice, perishes, becomes utterly lost,
and so is it reputed, as if it had not been at all, it is reckoned for a thing
of nothing. It is recorded of Titus Vespasian, that being at supper one day,
when he called to mind, that he had done no good office for any one, that he
had not been to any beneficial, to all the standers by, to each one present,
with resentment, with sensiblenes, and not without grief he breathed forth
these words. O my friends how much I am perplexed, and afflicted that I have
passed of this day vnproffitably, that I have lost this day. Let the Christian
observe well, let him know that the day which he has ill passed, has ill
spent let him account it not his, that in it he has no propriety at all. And
that this is evident Seneca witnesses in these words; that many there are
who leave to live, before they begin to live. Time was benignely bestovved on
us, says that famous Doctor Thomas de Kempis, to spend it well, Thomde Ke^pis.
^. p. Ser. ad Nonit cap. 7.
to employ it well in good works; not to let it pass idely nor to hear, nor
to tell Fables, and recount vain entertainements of time. ah! since so it is,
let not pass away from you my sons (he delivers this to the Nouices of
his order) neither hour, nor any instant of time without some fruit, and if
so that now and then there shall be liberty of enterchanging words of
discourse, of speaking among your selves or others be given, it is not granted
unto you, it is not allowed to you, that any word should be uttered by you,
which may not be of good use, and profit; for even as you have to give God
Almighty an account of each idle world, so likewise you must do of all the
time you have lost, and ill employed. Ludouicus Blosius among other
aduertisements, Ludou. Blosius.
other counsels which he delivers to him, who newly begins to practice
a spiritual life, says, that he ought to value, waighe to a grain times
worth, and account the loss thereof, be it never so little. And the mystical
Thaulerus Thauler.
among other lesso^s, and counsels which he gives to religious says: Carry
your selves in such manner that you have great care, as of the eschewing of the
most pestiferous, most mortal poison, of the loss of any time. And likewise
one of the officers of the exchequer, and of the accusers that the day of
Judgment has against us is to be that of time, according to which the words
of the Prophet Ieremias. are inculcated, Ierem.
gi^^ing us to understand, in his Lamentations Vocauit aduersum me tempus. My
Lord against me called Time for witness. The which place the glorious Doctor
S. Thomas shows to be at the day of doom, Thom. de Aquin. Sap. ^.
for that among other things that there are to accuse us, one will be found to
be that of time. And in that place it is it is office to contest with sinners,
who are insensible, dull, blockish; and with all the universe, all the world,
applying it self, addicting it self wholy and zealously for God his honor,
and it is own, accusing them, and against them requiring justice for the heavy
offense which they against their Lord, and his creatures have trespassed in,
with abuse of them, with injury done to them, and disgrace, and for drawing
these creatures by force, and whether they would or not, to the end they might
serve them in their ill courses, misled ways, and monstrous vices.

The end of the second Chapter.
THE THIRD CHAPTER.
How God abbr^uiateth, shortneth, yea takes away time when there is great want
thereof to him whosoever, who took no care thereof when be possessed it, nor
sought he ought to make good use thereof according to his duty and power.
ALthough that solemn oath of the Angel, (of which we have spoken of in the
first Chapter) that a day will come when as time shall have his end, that the
day of universal judgment for all in general shall be accomplished, shall
have it is co^clusio^, after which there is no time to deserve well or ill, nor
to do penance which may be of any profit, and for any each man in particular
in the last day, last period of his life, in which he will hope, and there
will be his particular judgment: Not withstanding it is much to be feared,
and to be seriously considered that customarily God Almighty uses, for
chastisement, and deserved punishment to bereave a negligent and altogether
careless sinner of time, to shorten his life, because he does not avail
himself of time, as he ought seeing that it is spent ill. So teaches the
glorious S. Bernardine of Siena, Bern. art. 3. cap. 4.
and he to prove it cites that place of the Apocalypse; Sinon vigilau^ris,
V^ian ad te tanquam fur, If thou watch not I will come to thee unawares like a
Theife. Hence is it that God Almighty threatens a careless sinner, whose manner
was to post of his conversion and penance from day to day, it seeming to him
that he had time, I and even time more then was sufficient, very abundant, and
he thus delivers himself: Be not too negligent, be not careless, play not
with time, mock it not, nor value it for thine own surely, and certainly,
nor at thy extent, nor so much at thy command, as thou imaginest, as thou
dreamest; awake, sleep not I say, stand on thy guard, least death come on thee
as a theife is wont to do when he entendeth to rob, and that by a sudden
assault it reduce thee into a miserable exigent, and all this without that thou
know the hour of its approach. A theife comes to do mischeife, and takes
the goods which are not well looked unto, not carefully preserved, and with
such diligence which is required, which they deserve, and such like is time in
the house of a sinner. And hence justly our Lord abridgeth him thereof, for
that he does not spend it in such sort that thereby he may gain, and exchange,
and make himself very rich and happy. And answerable to this our Lord says by
his Evangelist S. Matthew: To him that has, more shall be given; from him who
has not, shall be taken away, what he had or seemed to possess. The just man
esteems time his own, and is thereof Lord, and Master, for that he well
knows the use thereof; and to this he who is master of time, more time shall
be afforded him at the period of his life, more space to recollect himself, to
examine, discuss, and purify his conscience; and he shall have abundance, he
shall be supplied with fulness, all plenty will be bestowed on him as complete
indulgency, plentiful grace, and infinite glory, and he is not Lord of time,
who whilst he lives does not use it carefully and tenderly; hence when as thus
deceived by the devil, with his dilation, with his deferring this amendment,
he thinks that yet he has time, he shall be found by God his just judgment
to be deprived thereof, space of repentance will be wanting unto him, either by
sudden death, or by some unhappy chance, or other: all hitherto are the
words of the glorious S. Bernardine. And hence is it that so often our Lord
does admonish us to watch, Matthew. 25.
to be vigilant, for that we know not the day, the hour in which our time
shall have it is end. And the holy Church, as a solicitous, careful and most
tender mother does counsel us in a responsory, in answer delivered in the
office of Lent, the self-same saying Let us amend that wherein hitherto
ignorantly we hane trespassed in, Oh! let it not come to that exigent that
hereafter we seek for time of penance, when it is not to be had. And to
this purpose that God, cutteth of his thread of life immaturely, who auailed
not himself thereof to serve him: the glorious S. Bernardine of Siena
recounteth a most fearful and maruailous accident which happened in his time
amongst the Catalonians next neighbors to the Kingdom of Valencia. A youth
arrived to eighteen years old had bee^ most disobedient to his parents, and
altogether disordered, who oftentimes bare no reguard of the^, tendered no
duty; for punishment of such his misdemeanour God Almighty subtracting his
assistance from him, he became a great robber, for which he was hanged in the
same Town where he was bred, and being their hung on a gibet, and dead, and
in the presence of all the people there assembled vvas^^eene his beard to
grow, and that in like manner the hair of his head grevv, that there he was
seen to have a vvrinckled face; also his head was all over gray, and in
semblance, in countenance, he was not unlike to be of the age of fourscore
and te^ne years, which made them all admire, yea and affrighted them; the
Bishop of the Diocese being informed hereof, commanded that all the people
should pour forth their fervent prayers, he in like manner doing the same,
desiring of God Almighty if it were his divine will and pleasure to reveal
this mystery. A while after he craving silence and audience, and speaking
with a loud voice delivered thus much: Now ye see (my sons) that this
youth died at eighitene years old, and here he seems in his countenance to
be fourscore and ten years old, Hence understand that which God Almighty is
pleased to teach us, which is, that really according to the course of nature
he had to live to the years of fourscore and te^ne, and so many had he run,
had he been obedient to his parents, but in regard of his sins, and
disobedience God Almighty has permitted him to dye a violent death, cutting of
so much time of his life, as is betvveene eighteen years and fourescoure and
ten; and that all the world might hereof take express notice, it was his
divine will to work this miracle. Saint Hierome, S. Hieronym. Epist. 21.
that rare divine, uses these words, that the shortness of life is a
chastiseme^t and judgment of sins, and hence is it that our Lord has
abreuiated, and cut of short the life, and years of men from the beginning of
the world to this day. Isai^s 38.
God decreed that the life of king Ezechias should be lessened fifeteene years
of what he was to have lived according to the course of nature, and yet
again he graciously granted him them, through his tears, and hearts sorrow.
And to this purport says Haimon, expounding the words of the Prophet Isaias,
Haimon in Isai.
our Lord has heard thy prayers, and thy tears observed indulge^tly, is
pleased fo add fifeteene years to thy life, that even as he spoke to Adam
conditionally that he should be immortal if so that he obeyed his divine
commands, even so in God his predestination were given these years to king
Ezechias so that living without sin he were not svvollen, and puffed up with
pride, and even those who were foretaken with pride, were mercifully
restored through their humility. Viri sanguinum and dolo^i non dimidiabunt dies
suos, Psalm. 34.
says the Prophet David: Bloody men, and men who deceive shall not run out
their race, shall not live half their days, which is as much as to say more
clearly, they shall not live the moity, the half of their age, which they
should run out, if so that they had spent their time well. Sinners thall not
obtain and enjoy as they design and think, for even as o^r Lord said to the
Jews. Auferetur a vobis regnum Dei, etc. Matthew. 21.
The Kingdom of heaven is to be transferred from ye, and it will be bestowed
on an other people, who may make use thereof, and yield fruit, and may better
know, and value it. Even so God will abridge sinners of time, for that they
produce no fruit therein, they do no good, and he will bestow it on them, to
whom it may deservedly be given, and who know to make right good use thereof.
Those words of David the Prophet in his hundred and one Psalm, Psalm. 101.
Ne reuoces me in dimidio dierum meorum, in which he petitioned our Lord, that
he might not be taken of, that he might not dye in the midst of his days,
rather according to the exposition of some, it is as if he should say: My God
cut not the thread of my life, let not me dye in the midst of my days, for
this time and age is the dangerousest time, even the gulf of life, full of
idle cares, fantasies, and many vain and misunderstood courses, and far
more dangerous is it to dye in these years, then in an age completely run,
in it is not the same security nor in it the same confidence, alas! the same
trust.

Other deliver the self-same according to what we discourse in other words:
I fear my Lord: I fear my Lord that for my demerits, my sins, and for that
I have so ill spent my time, that thou vvilst shorten my life, which
punishment thou did therefore inflict on some; and hence is it that I humbly
crave of thee that thou take me not away inseasonably, in the midst of my
years and days, but that I may run them out, accomplish them which thou
determinedst of, had I been correspondent to my duty. The holy and most
patient Job says in like manner of a sinner: Job. 15.
Antequam dies impleatur peribit, etc. Before that his time shall be run, he
shall dye, and his hand is to become arid, dry; to fade, to perish even as a
branch of a vine in his first blooming shallbe withered; which is as much as to
say, that in green years before a full age run he shall dye, and that his
life shall be shortened and shall be cut of in the midst of his days, as the
days of an unworthy and unjust possessor. And besides that it is a great
punishment here in the world, to come it willbe greiueous and of great torment
to the condemned the remembrance of the time they had, and let slip without
making use thereof, and to see that they failed thereof which was to be well
employed, as for a better time. It is read in the book of the seven gifts,
that a Monk of Claraual devout, and of a good and tender conscience on a time
persisting a longer time in his prayers then was his custom, heard a dolorous
sad yea and most lamentable voice, as even of one who miserably plained,
sighed, and breathed forth groans, and the religious earnestly beseeching God
Almighty with fervent tears, that the meaning thereof might be declared unto
him, the voice which he heard answered him: I am the soul of such an one a
sinner (calling himself by his own name) and I lament my misfortune and
condemnation, and among all the torments I poor wretch in this my miserable
estate suffer, which does not torment me alone but also the rest of my company
most extremely, and moves bitter greifes, woeful weeping and lamentations,
is the remembrance of the grace and mercy, which our Lord the Savior of the
world has offered, of which we have made no account, no reckoning at all; as
also the memory of time which we have lost, yea and to too ill employed alas!
being made capable to gain in so short a space so much mercy, S. Nicol de Kesp
and such like rich and innumerable treasures; and this worm and remorse will
always be gnawing their hearts and entrails. Bern. sermon. de falaci^
praesentis vitae
And the glorious S. Bernard in one of his sermons entitled, of the Fallacyes
and wyles of this present life, shows, how it ensnareth, entrappeth and
deceives sinners, one while under the persuasion that it is long, that they
may a great space run on and defer their penance; in such manner does it
win them, so overcome are they by this means that they never make use
thereof, that they never do penance; and otherwhile making the same short,
very breife, Sap. 2.
that they may say, life is short alas! a breath, a blast, hence let us hasten
to enjoy all the flowers, delights, and pastimes of the world, least that we be
deprived of them, before we take notice of the^: He farther among many other
remarkable things delivers that God Almighty does shorten their paces,
their walks, their course in the midst of their pleasures, their delights,
seeing their shamlesnes in offending him, and he cutteth of both their time and
life, for that they who will not leave to sin willingly giving themselves
over to their disordinate affections, trespasses, and vices he abridgeth them
of time, takes away their longer life, and makes them to leave their further
practice therein necessarily through death.

And hence do many sinners dye whether they will or not, for that the world
conceiueth, that it is for accidents or in dispositions occulte, hidden, or for
manifest occasions, notwithstanding that those days which they passed in
sin, were not (as we have already said) truly good, were not well spent, nor
the life candide and sincere, but shadowed, and alas! painted, I wis. Hence is
it that in holy scripture sinners are valued as dead. Tim. 5.
The widow (says the Apostle.) who lives in pleasures, is dead: And our
Lord says in the Apocalypse to a Bishop who lived not answerable to his
calling, Apoc. 3.
who lived not according to his duty: Thou art thought to live; the opinion of
the world is no otherwise, but notwithstanding I know, Thou live not, I say
thou art dead, and so do I value thee, when thy soul is dead in thy living
body; hence say I, that a sinner is said not to live but retains only the
name of a living creature. And if the time which he passes in vice, he lives
not, to speak properly, and that God Almighty customarily takes away the
half, he lives much less time then the world apprehends, he shall prove
short and scanted of time, of days. But what? the just far otherwise lives
a fairer, yea and a longer age then the world imagines, and full of days; and
timely and in his good season his master will cut him of from the tree.

The end of the third Chapter.
THE FOVRTH CHAPTER.
That even now whilst we have time it concerns us to take pains with
feruency, and speed, and that we ought to employ it well.
IF time be so precious, and that it was given us to operate well, and to
labor in the vineyard of our Lord all the day to the setting of the Sun, and
that if so that we avail not our selves thereof, it will be taken from us, that
we shall be utterly deprived thereof, and that it so fall out that it will
fail us when we most desire it and have most need thereof, it will stand with
good reason that we employ it well and that we be very solicitous thereof, and
that we make all have to labor and to traffic therein to make right and
ready use thereof: And even so does Ecclesiasticus advise us, Eccles. 9.
saying: let thy hands labor in their uttermost abilityes, earnestly,
diligently, fervently, and speedily. all he delivers is as much as to say:
let not there be in thee any good thought, which thou can remember, which
thou keep not, and which thou procurest not to conserve; nor good word which
thou may come to the hearing of, which thou harken not to, or what in duty
and charity thou should say, that thou speak not, nor good work that thou
can do, that thou do not; without loosing occasion or time. And further he
delivers, that what thine own can do, seek not a strangers assistance, for
thou must by no means trust thy salvation on others, nor must thou think or
imagine ought that thy servant, or thy friend, or any whosoever in the world
is, are to win heaven for thee thou iocundizing in fulness of delights: I tell
thee plainly and indeed that thy hand, thine arm, thy strength, thy virtue are
to work and bring this to pass, and thou must labor with great desir, much
earnestnes, and maruailous solicitude, and most vigilant care, yea and with
viuacity, eue^ to all speed, for that life passes and suddenly flies away,
and when so that thou least think on it, the sun vv^ll set, and even then
indeed shall thou be heartily glad, that thou have taken much pains, for that
proportionably so much more vvil^ bethy revvard, and thy rest. And the reason
which is delivered by Ecclesiasticus of all which is foresayed is, for that
after this life (which so svviftly runs his stage, his course) no work
either of reason, or understanding, or the act of will, or any such faculty or
power under what title soever it be, shall be of any validity, any force, of
any fruit, any commodity, or benefit whatsoever hence to deserve grace or
glory.

The seven fruitful, and most plentiful years (figured, Genes. 41.
designed, noted by the seven fatt kine which Pharaoh saw in a dream)
signified the time of this life, which by weeks (each week co^prising seven
days) go on successively, making their returns and running their course; but
after are to succeed other seven years (which will be all that other space of
time, wherein the other life, which is without end, and so shall endure, shall
last, have being and continuance) figured, designed by the seven lean, and
even hungerstarued, kine barre^ and without any (...) of deserte. Therefore in
imitation of the discreet and prudent Joseph fill thy Granaries (my Son) thy
corn lofts, and make thou provision for time of want, for time of dearth; for
if so that thou deferrest thy gathering of Manna until the Sabbath of the
other life, Exodus 16.
the other world, it will not avail thee ought, rather it will prove unto thee
worms, for that there will be in thy soul (as we before said) a perpetual
worm, and stinge of conscience. Fair beyond what tongue can express was
Rachael the most beautiful, Genes 30.
but she was barren, and on the other part Lya was far from being
beautiful, far otherwise she was very homely, oh! far inferior to such an
excellent co^elines with gracious beauty, yet was this Lya fertile, she was
fruitful. The life to come is beyond all account most fair, most sweet, most
amiable, but it is barren, for alas! yea even alas! there meritorious works
have no place, have no being at all; such like are only and solely proper to
this time, to this present life; which although in comparison thereof it is
duskish, foul, and full of trouble, full of anguish, yet is it notwithstanding
fruitful and has in it this good, that prepares and brings forth good
works, and meritorious, with which grace is increased, and glory is acquired,
and who so will not regard it and entertain it is tribulations and it is pains,
and will not endure it is mole^^ations, it is unquietness, and will not mortify
himself in the customary ways thereof, shall not here-after enjoy the most
comely, yea and most beautiful Rachel. Give thy earnest attention oh Christian,
Matthew. 20.
make all the speed thou any ways artable to undergo, for hereafter thou will be bereaved of all power, for it will be found impossible for thee to
avail thy self of ought to thy well being We are all of us work men,
hirelings, and iourney-men, we work from day to day, so it clearly appears
to be void of all reason that we pass over our time^ of life in idleness,
either in delights, or nicenes, as if we were great Masters, great Lords,
great Potentates. Genesis 3.
Before Adam sinned God Almighty placed him in a place of delights, it was
Paradise, which he wrought and finished with his own hands, to the end that in
this garden, a place of pleasure, he might entertain himself, might enjoy his
time with content, with great delight and singular recreation; but after his
delict, his sin, expulsing him, yea and banishing him from thence, made him a
labourer, a paines-taking man, and a workman on his own vine, alas!
contemplate here his estate: Well since so it is, labor, take pains, and be
very solicitous, and make all the have possible (my good friend) if so that
thou have a mind to live without want, and to dye rich in spiritual goods, in
heavenly treasures. And for so much as that me^ vnderste^d not thus much, (to
speak more plainly) for that they will not, desire not to apprehend, to weigh
and thereon consider, they convert the vine that is so fruitful into gardens
and places of pleasure, and of ouerweaning curious and nice solace, alas! and
many are so vainly gilien over that their sense must be entertaind with
odoriferous smells and curious perfumes; and many of such appear to be like to
King Achaz of whom it is written, 4. Reg. 16.
that when as he had veiwed attentively the Altar of Damascus, he sent the the
model thereof from that City, and draught to Vrias the Priest, who erected an
Altar according to to the King's design, and appointment; but the Altar of
brass, and of other metal which was to that very time before our Lord, he
caused to be past of, sent away, and that it should be no more seen in his
temple, nor in his presence. My meaning, my application is, that now a days
are many Christians who believe, and adore a God; but how? On the Altar of
the Gentiles, for their lives are correspondent, answereable to theirs, they
live even as they were heathens, giving themselves over to as many sumptuous
entertaineme^ts, pleasures, voluptuousnes, and height of delights as they can
invent, any way find out, and are able to compass, without taking notice
diligently from time to time what are those things which the appetite
requires of them, nor do they make any resistance, far otherwise they give
themselves over to sensuality, to that which utterly destroys them. Oh
Christian! I say oh Christian! tame thou this thy body, bring it under, bring
it in to true subjection, set it a work with the pains of a Christian
labourer solicitously, most carefully and most serious to make thy vine
fruitful, prune it, break up the ground about it, open it at the root, then
trench it, and manure right well thy souls inheritance, and hence will
plainly appear to thee how thy sensuality declineth, yea abandoneth his
willfulnes, his folly; ye^ franticknes, and in it there will not be so many
briars, brambles, and thistles of sin; even so to the end that the children
of Israel should not increase, nor become wilful and ^^ubborne, but that they
should live in subjection and slavery, Ph^roah made them work hard, and
assigned them their daily taskes, Exodus 1.
which were not small ones, but heavy and very toilesome Oh! Christian take
notice of this good and happy time, herein take care of thine own house; set
it in order, that it may not be said to thee as to the Jews: Iorem. 87.
The Kite, the Storke, and the Swallow know their time, and they well
understand how to advantage themselves, to work their ends, to win their
benefit, but Israel takes no notice, enquireth not, hearkneth not after the
time of it is visitation, help, and redress, not takes it hold, no norknoweth
to make his goodvse, opportunity; and hence he will lament hereafter most
bitterly, and will dearly wish for that which now he esteems not, he
valeweth not, nor indeed knows. The people of Israel, the river Jordan, d^y
and that hence they were well assertained of free and safe passage, Iosue 4.
least that they might let pass so good an opportunity made all the have
possible to go over it, which they did most securely; and had they never so
little delayed likely they would unhappily have found the passage barred,
stopped, by no means to be past. To morrow is never secure, alas! it is not in
our hands, under our command and will, and if so that what you can do to
day, you practice not, you put not in prosecution, apply your self wholy to
God; it may so fall out that to morrow you cannot, that to morrow you be
abridged of all means thereunto tending. If to day, Psalm. 95.
says the Prophet David you hear the voice of our Lord, who inviteth you,
and calls on you to repentance, and amendme^t of life, defer it not to the
next day, in such manner hardening your hearts. Look on thy self, behold thy
felfe, poor vvr^tch that thou art, alas! thou art an ignorant sinner and
dimmely sighted, yea blind, that the devil to deceive thee, says, allow me
this day to my self, and that thou give to God, offer up to God the next
day, the self same will he deliver the day follovving, in such sort as that
he will dravv thee on perverted and lost alas! to utter ruin. There has been
observed ( Saint Basilius reaccounteth) a marvailous craft of a small bird
(which according to the refere^ce of Elianus is the Partridge) who seeing a
fovvler approach nigh the places where his young one's were in their nest, S.
Basilius ho^. 13. exhort. ad Bapt.
fearing least he should approach nigher he would discover, and take them (for
they knew not yet their wing, they were unready in flight) sprung up from her
nest, and boldly shevved her self before the fowler, hence gathered that he
would speedily follow (as thus invited) her with all attention, and that by
this means would forget the nest, and her young birds, her little ones, taking
so tender care of them; and when as the fowler sought after and prosecuted this
partridg, and that he took himself most certain of the taking of her, yea
even so sure, as if so that she were in his hands, she made a flight with a
small turning about, and hence got advantage, and in this manner flitting and
fluttering hence and thence, and attending to such various motions, at length
got the upper hand; and in a word by these vvayes deceived the fowler of his
expectation, and in such manner perplexed him and kept him busy, until that
the young partridges by little, and little, by short skipps and turnings
vvearied, and like ground pines betook themselves into a lovv and safe place,
there hiding themselves very well: then their notably subtle damme made a
great flight, and deceived the fowler, yea put him into a great rage, that he
could neither catch the damme, nor her young ones This even self same practice
is that of the devil, to deceive thee, alas! to cheat thee (blind and
sottishly-ignorant sinner) and in like manner he detaineth thee, yea and
entertaineth thee with shadowed, and false pleasures, false delights, yea
eue^ from day to day, and year to year, yea and alas! too many, and many,
with a false glosed hope, sophisticated all over that time will be
sufficiently afforded and supplied for repentance, yea and undoubtedly, which
if it happen not to day, either it will fall out to morrow, or next day, or
some other day, Act. 10.
at one time or other (as if so that days and time were at thy command which
God Almighty has reserved to himself only) to the end that thou casting away
thy time in such manner, and the present opportunity thereof, that time fail
thee altogether, and that thou become in such state that thou have that for
which thou may bewail for ever. Grant it good to convert one's self to God
(delivers the glorious Austine) yet thou say, Aug ad fra^res in eremo.
and boldly, I will change my life to morrow, I will be another manner of
man to morrow, I will serve God to morrow. Ah! poor wretch if to morrow,
why not to day? for there is no trust, alas no certainty of to morrow,
therein is no security at all; pray speak plain and understandingly, like a
wise man who knovveth the world; are we not subject, and daily exposed to
sudden death? tell me farther, do not many dye without confession, without
giving account penitently of their trespasses? but you will not prosecute your
way, and urge that as God shall help you, you take notice of no ill in that
you say, that to morrow shall be the day, wherein I will be an humble
penitent, and that I will turn a new leaf, and not unlikely it may be, yea
even this very day? but as God Almighty shall help me, what have you to say to
me (answers Saint Austine) wherein speak I ill, that there be no
dilatio^ herein, that this even now day, be the day? this being the safest,
the most secure, hence the best? so that observe thy will I speak with more
reason then do you, for you are not master of any time but of this present
day, what say I? no, alas no, you are not Lord of all the day, you command
only presents moments, or rather instants of time, and well so. As nigh as
thou can, let all thy life be good; wherefore desire thou that it be
amended, and become good by peice-meales, and as little at once as thou can
possible? Thou desire that thy fare be all good, that thy wife be good, thy
house likewise, thy garments decent, thy stockins yea ^uen thy shoes; do thou
make more esteem of thy shoes, then of thy soul? art thou so void of
consideration and iudg^ment? hitherto are the words of glorious Saint
Austine. S^neca.
Seneca does distribute the course of our life into three sections, three
parts; into time past, present, and yet to come; and of these the present is as
breife as can be imagined, the time to come is not ours, is doubtful; of all
these the time passed is certain and nature has lost her power thereof, nor
is it in any human power, to make it return, to repossesse it. Since so it is,
that we let pass, let glide away that which is present to abide for ever and
a day without it, and to be stated in everlasting damnation, and utter loss,
utter ruin, by so much the rather (open thine eyes, and be of my opinion, yea
my sentence) that throughout the whole course of time, even from the time of
use of reason, there is all reason, all discretion that thou bring forth
fruit, that thou carefully look about thee, that thou be prepared, that thou
be not unready for that time in which thy Lord and Master is to come, and to
call upon thee, since that there is not a moment; far less an hour, in
which any one can say he may not come, and cite us to particular doom, wherein
revvard is given to the workmen of the vineyard, answereable to their labor,
and great pains. This is saint Jerome his sentence, and to confirm what he
has delivered the parable of the figg tree is opposite, Matthew. ^9.
and well alludeth, to which the planter thereof came nigh being hungry, and
entending to satisfy his hunger, and earnest appetite to eat figgs, and found
none on the tree, he laid his curse on the tree; Marc. 13.
and the sacred Evangelist says that he gave his malediction on the tree,
when as it was not it is season to bear fruit, the scope of this was not
much appertaining to the punishment of the tree, but under it is meant that men
void of works are hereby denoted, designed, so much is signified by the figg
tree: for that human kind is seriously to attend, is strictly bound at all
time to yield fruit, and hence is it that our Lord when he comes with
express intention to seek and finds not, gives his sentence of eternal
malediction, of eternal damnation.

All things (says Solomon) have their determinate and precise time, Eccles. 3.
in such like manner, that each time is not time, and season for all things,
but that only which is proper and so appointed for a particular, not for any
other whatsoever to well being, far rather for it proves to it assured hurt,
as for example sake would it be convenient to sow, when it is harvest, to
grubbe up roots, when the fittest time is to plant, to speak, when it is
best to be silent, to laugh when it is proper to weep? There is no time
lim^ted, there is no precise time to labor in good works, to toil on the
well ordering, well cultiuating the vine of our Lord, each time is opportune,
it will be evermore seasonable, in whatsoever hour it fall, and in whatsoever
age, forevndersta^d, and well know that it is not lawful to sin at any time,
and that there is not allotted, nor set out any time to sin in. According to
those words of Ecclesi^sti^^s, Eccles 15.
to none give God command to do ill, nor afforded he space of t^me wherein to
sin, Eccles 4.
but he counsaileth all the world, and admonishes each one that they conserve,
that they be tender of time, and that they leave to sin, that they forsake
evil, for that this jewel of time was not benignely bestowed on them to the
end they should do ill, but they should do well. Matthew. 10.
And the state of an idle man in the person of a work man and day-labourer is
also reprehended by the master of a family; much more reprehension might be
and justly laid of him who' is more aged, who has run a longer course of
life, alas! a longer time. And if so that the Kingly Prophet David in the
beginning of his Psalms, compares the truly just man, with the tree which
is planted hard by a current of waters which yeildeth his fruit seasonably,
yet does not he at all imply, he means not that even ^s the tree yeildeth no
fruit but in his proper month and destined time of year, and not otherwise;
so has the just man to tender his one days, months, and precise times,
strictly determined of, and not in any other, but understand aright that even
as that the owner of a tree, which gives fruit in it is due season, would
cut it up, and grubbe it by the root were it not so: even so man ought to do
his duty, according to his vocation, his being and his profession timely, now
man's time runs the full end, and whole course of his life. And so it is
advised, Luc. 18.
and cou^sailed in the name of God, that it is expedient for a man to pray
evermore, yea and without ceasing, Luc. 12.
and to be alvvaies vvatchfull, and awake with a burning candle in hand, for
that it is not known at what time his Lord and Master will come to reckon
with him; and that he be a good accountant of what is laid out, and received of
those things which were committed to his charge and of the profit of the
vineyard which they let and set, and of his traffic and commerce, all which
are manifest tokens, that at all times our Lord requires of us that we bring
fruit and he that so does is valued to be a true servant, a true, a prudent,
and a most discreet servant. And the time which man is master of is the whole
time of his life; wherefore after it (as the Angel has solemnly sworn)
time has to have no more being. Apoc. 1.
The tree which the Evangelist S. John in his Apocalypse did see (which ever
more and at all times bare fruit, Apoc^^. 22.
and each month gave it mature, ripe, all which was very wholesome, yea and
even to the very leaves of the tree) is an emblem or figure of the just man,
who always, and in all times bears fruit, as well in each month, as also
in the whole course of his age, and whatsoever he attends to is of great
benefit and singular profit, as well his thoughts, as also his works, and
words.

The end of the fourth Chapter.
THE FIFTH CHAPTER.
How justly the sluggish deserve reprehension, and who are so called.
AMong all men (says Seneca) those cheifely yea and only are to be accounted
idle, S^neca de breuitate vitae.
least busy, though most serious, who employ themselves, gives themselves over
quite to the practice of piety and wisdom, and these solely and only live,
for that hence they do not alone conserve, and well keep their own time, but
likewise they annexe to their own days, other ages, and other times, for that
which they have gathered and are made Lords of turns to their use, their
profit, their well being and hereof they avail themselves, hereof they make
singular benefit. This vacancy, this idleness so well employed is laudable, is
worthy of all praise indeed, set this apart thus understood, Job. 15.
all other vacancy, all other idleness which is really such, and so esteemed of,
so truly valewed, is right worthy of reprehension even as the bird was
ordained to fly, so is man to labor, to take pains. And of this vacancy, this
idleness speaks the fame Seneca, Seneca.
that it was the sepulcher of a living man; in such sort that an idle man, not
employed, and one who addicteth himself to nothing but idleness is buried
therein, and in extreme danger to fall into many sins and greiuous trespasses
against God. Hence is that Ecclesiasticus delivers that idleness has
occasioned match malice, Eccles. 33.
much sin; our Seraphick Father S. Francis in one of his rules calls it the
enemy of the soul: and the glorious Augustine says, Augustine. ad fratres in
e^^mo. ser. 19.
that it will never come to pass, nor can it be that a Citizen of heaven be
friend of idleness, of sluggishenes. And S. Chrysostom professes that idleness
is a part of vice, Chrysostom. hom. 1^. in ca. 4. ad Ephesios.
or to say more oppositely is no part, but is the occasion, and perverse root,
for that it is the teacher of all sins and director to them. The great
Anthony spoke earnestly yea and cried out with a loud voice in the heremitage,
which voice was heard in heaven, and these were his words.

O my God, and my Lord, true Samaritan, and true wat^h, and protector of
souls, and bodies, resuscitate in me, raise a new in me thy grace newly enable
me herewith, and grant unto thy servant, so much mercy, that indulgently thou
permit not, that I ever be in the desert idle; to these his fervent
acclamations is answered from one of heaven from some one or other appointed
messenger of God: Anthony desire thou indeed, in earnest, really to please
God? then do thou pray, and when so that thy spirits in prayer are enfeebled
are become weak, then labor, let thy hands work and evermore entertain thy
self in some what or other, do but thy endeavor, so will the divine favor
never be vvanting unto thee. It was the sentence, the judgment of the Fathers,
who lived in Egypt, Cassianus lib. 10. collat. c. 3.
that one Devil waited to do mischeife through his temptations to one only
monk employed, but on him who is idle, many attend; yet for that of this
idleness, of this sluggishnes, of this remissenes much has been written, and
that hereof has been various disputes on one and the other part, and that my
principal aims at the spiritual, against that sluggishnes I will arm my
self, I will moore process against it by making apparent to many (who in their
opinions are well employed) the deceit hereof, declaring and sufficiently
proouing, that they are no otherwise to be v^^ewed then idle persons, and that
they loose their time, and that so it is, and no otherwise with them, alas! For
necessarily you must grant that he is an idle and sluggish man, who makes not
the same use of time which is conformable to it is use, to it is end, for which
God Almighty bestowed it, yea far other wise employeth it unlawfully and
unjustly, where appears that nothing in such his course goes, or can any
ways tend to God his service or to the benefit of his neighbor, nor can they
be made good as to any upright, laudable, and praise worthy end. And even so as
many handy crafts men there are, and laborers, and Merchants, and tradsmen,
workmen, and iour neymen; Kings, Princes, Counsailors, Aduocats, and
Officers, and all and each person under the Sun loose time, when so that they
employ it in works, practices, actions, and offices unlawful and prohibited
by the laws, and divine decrees, and not with the end and intention for which
they ought to be made use of; or live so careless that they do not ought
which is good and meritorious, for (as we have said a while since) that God
neither gave man time to do ill, no nor be sluggish, and he that employeth his
time ill, he in the presence of God is idle. In vain has he been endowed with
a soul, Psalm. 14
who with it has always trespassed against God, and alas! in vain has any
sinner what soever retained it, all that time in which he has been in mortal
sin, yea and in vain I further say have they it now who are in such state;
and their souls (ah!) have been idle all this time, for albeit they have made
use and daily do thereof and of its powers for other works, actions,
practices, and service, but for this as a principal end were they herewith
informed, and hence was it that God gave it, that they should serve him (which
eue^ Seneca himsef came to the knowledge of: Seneca.
when he said, God Almighty created all exterior things of lesser rank and
quality in the world, to serve human body, and the same body he created for the
senses, and the senses for the soul; and the soul, that it might contemplate,
and fervently love the divine beauty) all the time which man passes in sin,
or employeth not in the service of God he is therein idle, yea and most vain.
And although you call your self a busied King entertained by your grave and
weighty affairs, or a Counselor, or handy-craftsman, or servant etc. I will
enstile you herein a lazy and lither christian, and a sluggish and idle
workman in the house of God, in what appertains to the service of God, and
for idle and for naught vvorth in this kind of fluggishnes millio^s of people
shall be in hell, who according to their hallucination, their misdeeming,
their alas! misseco^ceit, thought that they were not idle, far other wise
that they were always atte^tiue on affairs. All the hours spent in unlawful
games, murmurings, grumblings, detractio^s, and in writing and reading vain
letters and lascivious books, and profane books, which often have corrupted
formerly chaste souls, to change their such purity to dishonesty; and they and
those hours which are spent in ripping up and giving sentence, giueing verdict
on the lives of others without giving reference to the party, and with his
being heard, yea without that he has any the least notice thereof, and even
without that the Judges be well and plainly instructed in the truth never
informing them as they ought, and as justice, and charity exacteth at their
hands, who is there, who will spare to condemn them as idle, as sluggish, as
il employed, and hence convince them of their assured loss of time? And all
those hours which thou have ill spent (which are not few, too many alas!) Oyee
vain women in the dressings, in your deckings to ensnare, to entrap, to
captiuate souls yea and to enthrall them, to subiugate them alas! to enslaue,
occasion free wills to yield, pray let me know from you, can you except
against those that range ye under the same judgment, the same censure? And
the time, the hours, that the ambitious who feed themselves (as like to
Efraim, and satisfy themselves with wind, with vanity, spend and consume in
designing their towers, their airy fabrics, and in the writing in the air
their dreams, chimeraes and crotchets of their idle brains, talking to
themselus and speaking with themselves what the haughty King Cyrus (figure of
proud Lucifer) said thou shall see me in the mountain of the testament, in
the same place of the North side by side with it! I will so seat my self, and
so place my throne, I say so high, so eminent, that I may set my feet on the
stars, that I may make themselves my footstool, who is he who will say that
herein is time ill employed, cast away, yea miserably lost? The time, the
hours which the covetous man passes of, consumes in his brains, working,
and reckoning, how and with what attention, diligence, and intelligence he may
advantage himself, that he may gain more by exchange, and return herein, by
use, or otherwise rum^nating and variously disposing his spirit, solicitous,
and again solicitously serious hereon, hereon making the seat of all his
care, and as one resolved, as one decreeing to get by lawful or vnlawfu^l
means, by hook or by crook, by any ways, who is so void of judgment who
will ascertaine them that they so running over their time, when as the
moderatest account thereof be made, these things shall pass for good? my
desire is not to go farther, as to memorate particularly more ran^ks of
people, or their natures, qualities, or whatsoever their conditions are, for
to take particular notice to call them to my memory would appassionate me,
would really afflict me, I should herein so doing notably suffer, and for
that the world is not so lost, so dull, so sottish (alas! yet well may it be
said it is far gonne herein) that any Christian may not hence understand,
collect and gather all whatsoever may be farther specified, and condemned, if
he please by what has been delivered by the books which he has read, and by
the inspirations which God has benignely given him, and by that which his
conscience (witness and loyal friend, so it be beleft) herein cannot but have,
oftentimes counseled him and accused him. And that there may be more credit to
confirm it with holy scripture, David in one of his Psalms speaks of the
good and just: Dies pleni inuenientur in eis. That there shall be found in them
full days, Psalm. 72.
entire, and co^pleate days, not empty, and it is a manner of speech
freque^tly used, in the old testament, to say, that they died full of years,
that they died when they were aged, as it is related of Abraham, Genes. 25.
and 35.
and of other Saints, friends, and beloved of God, Iobvlt.
if this be delivered of the just let us say on the contrary patt that neither
days, nor years of sinners are full, rather they are false, vain and their
hours, hours of deceit, consequently they shall not dye aged, but empty of
days. And Dionysius Carthusianus, declaring those words of Saint Job, Jobs.
Mens^s vacuos enumerau^ mihi, Months, and empty days I have recounted with
my self, says he, so much may the penitent sinner utter who has spent, and
consumed without fruit, without benefit his time, and his days, hence were
they empty of good works and idle, yea and full of vanities, and indeed of
vice, which is nothing. To this purpose says Saint Ambrose, Ambrose.
the life of a just man is completely full and empty are the days of those
who are wicked, and really vain, and they retain nothing, but appearance,
s^doth the green reed without pith, or substance. Of the same indgement is
the glorious Gregory in his Moralls, Greg. in Moral. sup. ca. vlt. Job
in his Exposition on the l^st Chapter of Job. That all those who have so
lived, and spent their times in such manner, are worthy of blame, now it
appears clearly by the fore delivered Chapters, that time being so precious a
thing, as has been said in the first Chapter, and it being bestowed upon us
that we may gain heaven by our endeauours, our pains, our good works, (as
is likewise shown in the second) and in seeing (which you may find written in
the third) that who so employeth not time well, God abridgeth him of it, and
altogether bereaueth him of it, takes it' out of his command, when he thereof
least thincketh, not with standing all this they will not take the advice and
counsel which we have given in the fourth Chapter in the name of the Holy
Ghost, but forgetting all, all fear postposed, ^et by, by their depraved
tastes, deceived by outwardly seeming dainties though ugly be they and bitter
mo^sells, wast their time ill, and misprise it, value it at naught, yea and
vvrong it beyond all measure, and in liew of tendering it good treaty, and of
making profitable use thereof they molest it, they pervert the use thereof in
so much as they are found to have utterly lost it, nor observe they what they
have neglected, what they have passed from, and what they might have acquired
are found therein, nor of their duty to God who at so great a price redeemed
them, and vvho^ for so many great and innumerable respects and obligations they
should serve both day and night alvvayes, incestantly, they should love and
adore with all their hearts, and with all their souls. These such like may
be aptly compared to men who in the time of traffic, of commerce, of buying
and selling of faires making no reckoning of the great gain that there (well
knowing how to trade) they might hence acquire to themselves are busied, and
entertained, all taken up with m^mick toys, and jests, and in hearing blind
men sing, and seeing of stage players, and afterward their purse becomes
empty, and opportunity of traffic, and hence gaining by the fair, passed.
They may be accounted alike to those who coming a shore from a shipp or
galley, to land, to make provision of what they want to accomplish and bring
the^r journey to a happy end, and the long wished for haven, keep themse^ues
busied in the gazing on curiosities which occur in the streets, or
passages, or in vvalking in places of pleasures, as in pleasant gardens, and so
time ouerrunneth them without time being observed in so much as that they
forget that principal and chiefest end for which they came, and that the
shipp, or vessel was to hoyse sails, and to depart, and even so they stay
behind, for that they came to late, in a strange country, poor disconsolate,
and miserable. It seems to them who without any conturbation loose time
that they are possessed of so much as will serve for all, and that there is
more then time enough to do penance, and to amend their lives, and it clearly
appears that their understandings and wisdom are faulty, for that Zenon
Cl^ticus a fair conditioned, Lae^t. in vit^ Philosoph^.
grave and wise man (as Laertiu^ reports) said, that men failed not so much
in any thing, as in that of time, nor that they have more need of ought, then
of it, and all this he delivers upon good grounds truly: for that we
possess not what is passed, nor what is to come, and for the present it
follows so at hand, and so breife, that it runs it is course in a moment.

The Saint Prier Gill brother of our holy order falling into admiration, and
compassionating with himself upon contemplation of these idle persons, who so
much and beyond measure pass their time without fruit and heartsgreife thus
delivers himself. The idle, the sluggish man loses this, yea and the other
world, happy is that man who employeth his time, and passes his life, and
his forces, his full strength, his uttermost ability in the service of God;
Tell me if there were given unto thee a fountain which were to run oil
or wine one entire day in thy house would thou consume thy time being a
poor man in play, in loitering, or in seeking of barrells, or other neat
vessels whatsoever wherein to keep it, thy end, thy scope being to be rich?
undoubtedly if thou were not simple yea and sottishly such, thou would make
use of such like afterward so did the wise vvidow (of whom is made mention
in the fourth book of the Kings) in carefully taking and reserving the oil
which the Prophet Elizeus, 4. Reg. 4.
gave unto her miraculously therewith to satisfy for her husbands death, that
the creditors might not have power to lead avv^y and detain her two sons
for slaves, until that she should discharge what was due, but true it is
(says the Saint) that so far forth has our folly taken hold of us, and we
entertain, we admit of so little discretion and wisdom, that whereas God
Almighty giving us time, and present life, that in it is course through his
grace, his benignity, and favor, and the maine, the principal, the stock
which he does enrich us with we may make our selves hence rich, and that
we may satisfy we may acquit, and pay what we owe, so far forth as that
we fall not into the misery of being made slaves of the fiend, the devil
without all peradventure, without all remedy, and end; we consume our time in
vanities, and toys, and buffoneries, and in mere jest as Job the most patient
said in those words, Job 24.
Dedit ei^lo um poenitentiae, etc. God gave unto man place of penance, and
time to that end, and he has changed the good use thereof into abuse, and into
sins of pride.

The end of the fifth Chapter.
THE SIXTH CHAPTER.
How the body does captiuat that time which is designed for the soul, and
thereby exalts it self.
AFter the sin of our Ancestors did the body rebel against the soul, so
much prevailed it as that the body (as the servant or slave Agar did to her
Lady and Mistress) laid aside all respect and duty, in so much as it might
seem that the body was the m^stris, the soul slave alas! and that all the
course of this life was and is only for the body, and for it is daintines, it is
nicenes, and it is recreation and to accomplish it is appetits and ouerweaning
desires* in so much as that the poor soul takes it as a great favor, that
the body gra^ts it that time which is required and by her challenged. That to
such her miserable state she has drawn on her self by sin, disgrace and
abasement, in so much as she may call out to God repeating her tribulations,
her miseries in those words vvhieh Jerusalem in the Lamentations used, Vide
Domine and considera, etc. Behold Lord and consider how I have been come to be
abject, since that my servant, yea my slave does so vilify me, and more
offers outrages against me. And in such manner does the body draw on great
burden on the soul which it does extremely wrong, and does raise and exalt it
self with what is not agreeable, rather contrary to all reason, and justice,
and it is bound to return to the soul what properly belongs unto it, under
pain, under amerce, that when the soul has as also the body each of them,
both of them may be lost without any redemption or any safety. And to give
life to what has been delivered, as also what is to follow what better
doctrine can be set down then that which the glorious Bernard, has in a
sermon of the coming of our Lord, Bern. 6 de Aduen ^u^ Domini.
of Aduent, whereof I will here recite a great part. The time of this life
(says he) appertains not to the body, it belongs properly to the soul
and for it was it appointed, for of much more value is the soul, then the
body, and it has first to repair and procure remedy which first fell, for
it is fall, it is transgression the body underwent, incurred punishment. And if
we desire to live, and be true members of our head, vho is JESUS CHRIST our
Lord, our duty is to imitate him, and to conform our selves to him; the way
we must walk, the principal care and solicitude must be of our souls, for
which he chiefly came into the world and suffered the torment of the Cross,
and let us reserve the care of the body for that day and time when our Lord
shall come to reform them, to change them into a better state, as said the
Apostle Saluatorem expectamus nostrum, etc. Philip. 3.
We look for our Savior (who is JESUS CHRIST our Lord) and his coming to
Judge, who will reform, (or according to the Greek text, will transform)
our body mean, abject, and full of imperfections and miseries, and it shall be
according to his similitude, who is replenished with clearnes and splendor.
Hence strive not no attempt not (oh! thou body ill to be regarded, ill to be
esteemed of) to impatronise thy self of time by force, and with violence,
before time, for albeit thou may occasion yea hinder safety to thy soul, yet
can thou not without it procure it for they self alas! no.

All things have their time, permit, Eccles. 3.
suffer and consent, that the soul may work freely, nor be thou any
impediment unto it, rather help it and labor jointly with it; 2. Tim 2.
for if you travail together, if you shall suffer with it, you shall reign
with it; and so much as thou troublest and hinderest it is safety, thou
troublest and hinderest thine own, for thou can not be reformed, until that
our Lord see in thy soul his image reformed. Oh! body observe well that thou
have under thy roof a most noble guest, a guest of grand rank and quality,
which is the soul, and that thy well being and safety depends on it; Be
therefore some what like a Courtier, well mannered, and discreet, and give
way, respect, and free entertainment unto so honorable a guest. Thou thy
self art in thine own house, and in thine own proper soil, for thou art
earthly, and of earth, but the soul is but a guest in thy house, even as a
stranger, a trauailer and exiled alas! banished from his proper place of
residence. Let me freely enterchange a word with thee (oh! body) what
rusticall and rude lowne, very block head, and course conditioned fellow should
be be valiewed, to whose house might happen a Prince or Earl to come to
allodge, who would not willingly and most readily give way, and betake
himself to the worst room of his house, to present him with the best room
and best lodging of his house, yea if it were necessary, would sleep on hay,
and straw, or by the chimnyes harth and cinders. Let this be thy way, forsake
thy meat, sleep little if so it be expedient and necessary for the good of thy
soul, and for the love of it let pass thy pleasures, thy entertainements, and
passetimes, fast and be regular, sober and temperate in thy diet, to the end
that it may be in good time and perfect health, and so persevere; correct thy
self sharply, bleed, and mortify thy self that it may live; this time is not
the time of laughter, but of tears, not of repose, but of labor; not of
dantinesse, niceness, but of penance: not of delight, not pleasure, but of
anguish, of sharp tribulation; the time will come about, there will come a
time of mirth, of joye, and of laughter together with it, so be it that with
it thou lament, thou suffer, thou at the present pour forth thy tears, and if
together thou so west in tears, together thou shall reap gladness and
hearts-comfort, hearts joy: and vilify not, nay esteem not at an ordinary
value thy guest; for that he seems to come unto thee from foreign countries
as a stranger, but contemplate, observe well the many, and singular benefits
which accrue to thee through his society, his conversation, and presence. This
guest, this soul, is it which gives life, spirit, and vigor to thy sight,
and to thy ears faculty of hearing, speech to thy tongue, to thy palate it is
taste, and sense of feeling, and motion to all thy entire body, beauty and
graceful comlines. And if so that thou vvilt well observe and ponder what I
now deliver, let it be your serious attention, what is it that you would be
found to be if so that it should fail you, and that it should depart from
you, that it should at any time leave you, abandon you, and utterly forsake
you, and your house: in this even point, and instant of time, thy tongue will
not be able to do his office, thou will be utterly bereaud of speech; thine
eyes will become blind, thou will be deprived of thy gift of hearing; thy
countenance will appear pale, all thy beauty will fade and fully perish, and
thou shall prove to be terrible foul, ugly, stark cold, irksome, and horrible,
and thou shall be an unsavory carcass, and altogether rotten, and a dunghill
for worms. Since Since that which I here deliver is true, from whence is it,
that for a small momentary delight that thou dispensest, and thou notably
offendest, so great a guest, one of such quality, and so profitable as of whom
so inexpressible use might have been well made? and that thou take away it is
time, does injure it, and stealest from it, and employest it so ill? but thou
can not have even this thy shadowed delight, if it were not with thee. And
if so great gifts depend and accrue to thee through it is presence and society
not withstanding it be in a foreign Country, and banished for sin from the
high and mighty Court of heaven, and from the sight of it is Lord, think
maturely what it will be when so that it is fully reconciled with him, and in
his grace, when so it shall by him be beloved and one of his favorites? And
great cause, yea and great inducement and conuincible reasons are there, that
thou apply thy self with all the patience possible, and with all good
liking, and that thou deuote thy self to all things that may be whatsoever
they be, and of what condition soever to benefit and laboriously attend to this
reconciliation, and return to Freindshippe. Give unto thy guest, Genes. 40.
unto thy soul that which Joseph spoke of to a gentleman Cupp-bearer to King
Pharaoh, assure thy self that happly a day will come, that the King will take
sensible notice of thee, and will restore thee into thy lost estate, let me
impetrate so much favor of thee that thou remember me from hence forward, and
help me when so that thou well may, alas! have pity on me: And without all
peradventure it will have an especial care, and regard of thee to thy
well-being if so that now thou tenderest thy service as becomes thee, and
spendest the time according as is convenient and expedient to the soul, and
not to thy ease to that which thou valuest thy proper interest to it is cost,
loss and utter onerthovv: when as so it shall be in favor of it is Lord, and
face to face, it will implore, and impetrate for thee, and will show it
self a true and faithful friend, intercessor, and advocate, such like will
be it is speech, its treatye. Most merciful and Lord of all power when I was
for my trespasses, for my greiueous sins banished, and exiled to the vvide
world, and wandered up and down as a pilgrim, and mere stranger a poor and
merciful man received me under his roof, and did all the pious and
co^miserating respects that can be expressed; hence am I a supplia^t to thine
infinite Majesty with all the fervor, with all the earnestnes I can, that thou
be merciful unto him, pity him, who for my sake gave all he was possessed of
and freely dispoiled himself of them, yea and further offered up his own
person to assist in whatsoever was good for me loosing for my cause his own
pleasures, and whatsoever delights, sweating, hardly laboring even to
weariso^nes, yea to fainting it self, for me; suffering hunger and thirst,
and tyrings, watchings, toils, and what tribulations not? for whatsoever he
counted, he took no time of enquiry or supply therefore, or so little as may
well be accounted no time, to the end that he might deuote himself to my
service, and what best appertained to me. Nor is there any the least
imaginable doubt, but that the Scripture will be fulfilled, which delivers. Our
Lord will correspo^d to the will of those who truly fear him, Psalm. 144.
and will hear their prayers; and when that the great King, I say that King
of infinite and incomprehensible Majesty environed with splendor and glory
attended on by a thousand millions, nay an innumerable troop of Angels, to
reform, and bring our body to perfection to change them into a better state,
and being, and to make them alike unto his own; raising and (at that terrible
and dreadful voice of the trumpet) awakening them from the sleep, in which
they now deeply drouse, then thou having been, what thou ought to have been
toward the soul, our Lord will well pay thee, for he will reward thee with
glory for thy good entertainment and allodging of that guest; and he will
glorify thee, and enrich thee with those precious gifts and endowments of
immortality, agility, impassibility, and splendor, which all thou shall enjoy
in the company of thy soul for ever and ever. Be thou then althogether
unwilling (I earnestly besseech thee) to loose so glorious a glory, such
delight, such treasures and crowns of honor for small, little, weak, fading
and perishing goods, and for certain kinds of pleasures fraught with so many
discontents, and so many hazards, to suffer for such like toys, besides what
is spoken of, eternal affliction, pains and torments. All the forewritten are
the words of Saint Bernard: And those who usurp the time belonging unto the
soul for the use of the body, and well like of this, please themselves
herewith, neglect that; yea tread it vndet their foot, our Lord threatens to
punish sharply by the words of holy Job in his four and twentieth Chapter, Job
24.
saying: Their delights shall quickly have an end, and all what was so
pleasant unto them, shall prove to them no other then worms and remorse of
conscience, his mercy will forget them, will not acknowledge them, will take
no Notice of them for ever, they shall be buried in perpetual oblivion, there
shall be no remembrance of them to any their vvellbeing.

They shall from cool snowy water pass to an excessive heat, to the end that
their pains, their suffera^ces may be the more dolourous and sharp, far the
more intensiue and the reason hereof shall be, Pauit enim sterilem, etc. for
that they fed, and with many curiosities and dainties entertained the barren,
and they did take no care, no respect of the vvidow. By barren is meant the
body, for the more they nicelyvse it, and cherish it, and deck it, it will
return and bring forth no meritorious fruit for the acquisition of eternal
life, of everlasting salvation; it is to use with much curiosity and niceness
a block, a dry stick. The Widow is here an Emblem of the soul, for that
there is not a widow so distressed, nor so solitary and comfortles, as is it
under the roof of a sinner. Sinners attend, and well observe (for hereo^ I
treat no further) for the love of JESUS CHRIST mark seriously and maturely and
all ye whosoever do abridge yr souls of time for your bodies, and undo the
soul by the molestation it brings to it, and daily afflicts it, with all
the loss possible, for that on the souls good, and safety depends all
whatsoever happiness the body can be capeable of, and from the glory of the
soul does redou^d that in them which they hope for, who are to enjoy i^ for
ever and ever.

The end of the sixth Chapter.
THE SEVENTH CHAPTER.
That lawfully secular people may use some entertainements of mirth, solace,
and pastime to recreate their spirits.
FOr so much as (as says S. Job) our body is not composed of brass or steel,
Job 5.
nor is it is hardness like unto that of a flint, but it is friable, weak,
sensible of each offense, feeble alas! nice, delicate and tender, which is
vvearied, tired and yeildeth under the burden of it is labors, its affairs
and businesses, and also for that the soul is so united and affixed to the
lumpish body, it is as it were necessatily constrained sometimes to condescend
to the body, as to comply with its desires: no otherwise the^ an aged married
man, wise and discreet, how vvitty soever he be, gives way to the childish
desires of his wife since that she is very young. Some breathing while, some
relaxation from cares, and affairs, labors, and bodily toils is certainly
expedient; for if a man should alvvaies labor and toil his understanding and
memory incessantly, he would destroy his forces, and his health, and he would
quickly consume and end his days. And for so much as the universal labor of
men should have limit, and ease, and rest, yea and that of brute beasts, nature
provided then with sleep, and with successiue variety and change of time,
ordaining, that the day should succeed the night: in which as is written in
the book of vvisdome, Sap. 18.
All things, all creatures are silent, and hushed are (as says Virgil) all the
vvide feilds and wilderness and as well the birds as beasts; and for so much
as yet this rest, this repose was not sufficient, there were appointed holy
days, which we call Festival days, which are celebrated among all people,
and all Nations and in all ages. It was expedient then that we should by rest
repair our weary selves, that we might hold out, through the benefit thereof,
for that hence strength and vigor is reassumed, and as well desire as also
will is hence recovered to return to take pains a new; with which repose
were we not endowed, any toil, yea any whatsoever labor, affair, or
exercise would be extremely burthen-some, nor could our feeblenes or
imbecility sustain long such continuance of toil and wearisomnes. Ovid.
For (as says Ovid,) that whatsoever it be, cannot long continue which has
not sometimes rest, which incessantly toileth; this repose according to
Plutarch Plutarch.
is the restore of labors burden, as also of minds agitation, and ears. It
is written of king Amasis, that when so he had dispatched his grave and
serious affairs, he would a while be pleasant and recreate himself among
his familiar friends and favorites: and it is rehearsed of Sceuola that in part
of his leisure and out of hours from his charge, he would pass time in
playing at hand ball: and although it is delivered of CHRIST our Lord (to leave
the examples of the Gentiles) it is noe where read that he laughed, Joan. 11.
but that he has wept, as namely in the raising of Lazarus, Lu^. 19.
and upon the ungrateful city of Jerusalem, and upon the sacred vvood of the
Cross; Heb. 3.
Not-vvithstanding he some times took out his disciples into the feildes, when
so he thought it expedient for recreation sake and spoke to them in this
manner: Vnweary your selves, repose a while, take breath again, recover your
spirits, and enjoy the fresh air (ye are indeed men, hence vveake, subjects
of sufferances (ye are in a word mortal men) that ye may be hence enabled to
reassume your vocations and duties with a more lively and rigourous spirit.
So that by the former Chapters delivered we condemn not altogether time spent
in sports, pastimes, recreations, and entertainements, solaces, and glorious
shows, fights, which have in them such scope, such end, such motives and
reasons; but we, willingly counsel and vvarne, that necessary it is to
keep order, and temperance, and moderation in these things which are real and
serious, much more in frivolous toys, in which some times very grave men do
forget themselves some what, such is the danger of excess. Therefore that
(according to the Apostle) a Christian ought to do all things in good order,
1. Cor. 14.
he should set down a task, S. Tho. 2. 2. qu. 168.
and measure on his recreations, and on that time which is passed in them, and
hence is there a known virtue called Eutrapelia, or like a true understanding
courtly and vvell-bred gentleman, answereable to which God Almighty would
that men do so recreate themselves (as wrote Saint Ambrose,) that they loose
not their gravity altogether whilst they are in their pastimes, S. Ambrose.
for the harmony of age^tile life and living well, is not to be dissolved, is
not to be disordered. And Aristotle asseuereth that little recreation is enough
to sustain life with, Aristotle.
as does a small portion of salt serve to give season to meat in its right
preparation, and for the palate, and that recreation should be used to its end
as is salt to the other: And in like manner pastime and entertainements ought
to be lawful, then of no long continuance, seldom, fair conditioned, and
without the prejudice of any body, and acco^modated to the time, place, and
persons, and so tempered with a fit moderation, that it prove not a hinderance
which is ordained, is appointed for a help, and furtherance and for a solace,
nor let that be an impediment of virtuous exercises, and your express duetyes
which is destined to repair, and recover your forces, and full vigor, and be
the better able in accomplishments by their means without want; Wherefore now
that it is adjudged good that we repair the weakness of our nature, and
reinforce it, and give it animosity and spirit, so on the other part the self
same is so great an enemy of labor, pains taking, and penance, and so
vnbridledly without all rule and order does affect and does appetit and covet
pleasures; if so that there be not much care taken and that mean be not
observed in which the virtues are placed, idleness takes place easily and vice
is entertained for labor, and wearisomnes is no way admitted of, so falls it
out, and to such pass is it come when the inward man is out of frame, and so
desisteth from labor and due entertainements, exercises, and practizes, there
cannot be beheld a person more heartlesse, sluggish, lither, and less apt, one
altogether indisposed. Hence the Philosophers, and the Civil laws have
ordained and prescribed and assigned certain bounds: And who will not
profess, and with all reason maintain that the recreations of Christians
ought to surpass them in moderation, and gravity and sobriety, and that they
ought to be according to the squares and rules of Justice far beyond those of
the Philosophers, or Civil Laws have either permitted or granted.

The Lacedaemonians took great care that none breathing should loose their
time, Aelianus de varia Hist. li. 2.
norliue idly, nor pass it of in jestings, and fopperyes, and in such like as
are called witty sayings, but in works and in right worthy and virtuous
exercises and practices: Hence when as the Governor of many people among whom
were those of De^aleya was informed that they who lived there carelessly and
without regard walked up and down, vvrote them a letter to this purpose: Walk
not up and down so much to satisfy your selves, and for recreation, but so
far forth as may concern the exercise of your bodies, for expedient it is
that the Lacedaemonians acquire and conserve their health not with walking, but
with exercising themselves in those things which are lawful, and whence may
be derived profit. There are many allowable conditions, S. Tho. 2. 2. q. 168.
and occasions, and times in which to play and pass of some time vould prove
virtuous, as when it were necessary that a man might be hence made the better
able to do his offices, and charges on him laid, and by them to satisfy, they
being virtuous and answereable to the service of our Lord that he may not fail
in his wayand that according to the Proverb, he fling not his burden in the
mire. But by degrees by little, and little as it were insensibly Custom has
crept in, and pastimes are so differently used from the end and intent for
which they were fir^ invented, especially after that in certain
entertainements coueteousnes, and interest of gain has crossed and
ouerthwarted, these such gamings I understand with the rest to be hurtful,
and that so far is it that they are helps, assistances to accomplish the
better their offices, and their express and precise duetyes that they owe to
God, and their conscience, as that they are directly found to be impediments,
lets, hindera^ces, and evident cause that there arise many imperfections and
what worse is many foul offenses against the Majesty of God as are lies,
false oaths, impatience, furious ire; and quarrels, which customarily beget
disgusts, distasts, ill language, enmityes, and malicious rancours, hence do I
account that which is passed in such gamings and wagers to be ill employed, and
utterly lost; To visit one another and interchangeably, to communicate
charity, is a very lawful recreation, and is necessary to the co^seruation of
freindshipp among them; ansvverably to this a Philosopher said, that silence
has broken of, has cut of many freindshipps. The discourses of comforts and
crosses one to another, do ease one another; and hence they continue
freindshipp. But I will ingeniously and freely deliver my mind, many visits
in these days are so tedious, and without any benefit, or good to be hence
acquired, and to so much prejudice of thy neighbor, and of those who are
absent, or are such, as that all which is treated of is mere vanity, vvorldly,
and of the world, and of it is language, as that I esteem them for dangerous,
and for time ill employed, and time merely lost, being past of in such like
visits; and I believe that the tongue is that which has consumed most time and
unthriftily scattered it for this worm never cease or is weary, and his fire
is that which dilateth it self most at large, and his spotts are such as are
most spread although by little and little, and this moth is that which destroys
more clothes, nor spares it those which are of the finer sort* Feasts and
banquetts to the end of conservation of peace, freindship, and concord, and for
other just reason, are lawful, being temperate and moderate as they ought to
be, and with their due circumstances, and what is requisite. But as now it is
for the most part they are so disordinately used, and with so great excess
yea so long, and so tedious, protracted to so many hours that I will not
engage my self to make them good, nor to take their justification on my
conscience, for that rather my judgment is convinced, that their time is ill
employed, and the most part thereof so utterly lost. Of these called feasts,
balls, or great meetings to dau^ce I know not what to say, but that I esteem
them to many of the Company for dangerous and wanton, and sometime awaken him
who sleeps, and change quiet souls and heart, and disquiet them, move
sedition in them and are the occasion of unlawful thoughts, and disordinate
desire, I hold much of the time so spent, for ill employed and lost. And to the
end it may appear with what discretion, and moderation, pleasures, recreatio^s
and pastimes are to be used Lodouicus Blosius relates that the sister of S.
Cosme and Damian was fififteene days in purgatory, Ludo^icus Blo^^us App^^^.
for no other cause but that once she attentively observed out of a window
with some small content and delight certain persons, who in the street were
sporting, and merrily jesting, playing the buffons. And he writes of a devout
maid, that she suffered there a longer time, for that in her last sickness
she had eaten with delight those meats which were prepared for her, and
took them as solaces and entertainements with some root of earthly pleasure.
And it would not be out of purpose to loppe and cut of the superfluities of
the worlds pleasures, to aptly dispose here in this place what the divine
Chrysostom delivers reprehending the speeches, which usurp the name of
jests or witty sayings, Chrysostom. in expos^^. (...) ad Ephesians sermon 17.
merry conceits, fond and ridiculous gibings, and such kind of carriages,
especially being from nipping and biting tongues, and who season them with
malices, which declare themselves so by inco^uenien^ies which hence arise. This
life (says he) brethren, and its course is a time of war, of watch, and
for all to go harnessed with corslets on their shoulders and eyes quick,
sprightly, and attentive against the ambushes of the enemy and ponder it well,
here is noe place nor time of laughter, that belongs to those of the world
and to it is oftsprings who profess and practice their laws and customs and
abuses. Hear thou Christian the words of our Lord, Joan. 16.
who speaks to his faithful: The world shall rejoice and laugh; but ye
shall run the course in gravity, soberly and sadly: Christ was crucified for
thy sins, and buffeted, sharply stricken, and thou desire to pass thy time
in jests, scoffs, and profuse laughters, and pastimes.

The end of the seventh Chapter.
THE EIGHTH CHAPTER.
That it is lawful also yea even necessary, that spiritual men use some
convenient exercise, which may tend for an intermission, recreation and solace.
THere were certain Heretics who moved by the words of the Evangelist. Saint
Luck, Castro aduers. here is. lib. ^1. verb. oration Luc. 18
it is expe; dient to pray always, and incessantly- these words being ill
apprehended by them, they brought into the Church a false and new doctrine,
teaching that daily and nightly, one was never to cease from praying, and
therein they should pass their time so continually as that they were to do
nothing else, without any intermission, and that a man should not employ
himself at all to any thing whatsoever else. But with express grounds of
reason these heretics were condemned, and excommunicated, cut of from the
Church, for it is insupportable and impossible, to our weak nature to pray
always, as they delivered, nor is that the judgment and sense of holy Church,
nor has the high and profound Truth taught any such doctrine. And what in
those words are taught us it is expedient ye pray always: and in those of the
Apostle, Pray without intermission, 2. These. 5.
is this. That when a great exigent occurreth to petition God ought, almer^n.
or so when as we are fallen into some unwonted distress, tribulation or
adversity and are even then in such manner afflicted, we are then to be
suppliants with great instance, with great earnestnes and perseverance once,
and twice, and the third time that he will be merciful unto us, and that he
will help us and be propitious, and gracious to us without discouragement,
without ceasing, or being dismayed, and although at present that which we
impetrate for, be not granted us; that we call out for it at the gate of his
mercy, until it be opened unto us, and alms be given us: Then it will be
bestovved on us for our earnestnes our importunity, Luc. 18.
as our Lord has taught us in the Parable of the Widdovv and the unjust Judge
(which he the^ to that purporse after he had said it is Expedient to pray
evermore, propounded) who by her simple importunity and perseverance therein
came to obtain of the Judge, that which she so earnestly petitioned for, and
this is confirmed by the example of the Church, which prayed without
intermission for the Apostle S. Peter, Act. 12.
when so that he was in prison until that he was freed, and was in safety.
And likewise he is said to pray continually who observes time and hours of
prayers in convenient time in them, hence is it that Dionysins Carthusianus,
Dionysius Carthusianus.
he prays without intermission, who prays in due seasons, in fit times,
and he likewise prays alvvaies, who prays when so that he can, and that
occasion and opportunity be had for prayer. Simon of Cassia does declare it
thus: Simon de Cassia. Job. 7.
All human life is a continual warefare and temptation, and through the whole
course of our lives, our enemies make assaults against us without ceasing by
night or day, nor can we by means of our proper gifts overcome them, or
withstand their strengths, hence it is expedient for us to pray evermore, and
to implore help and succor of our Lord who only can confer it on us,
wherefore by all manner of means importunate and earnest prayer is opportune.
And this such like is not so to be mistaken, that there may not be a pause or
intermission of time in prayer, for sleep requires it is due, feeding it is, yea
and clothing and some time is to be allowed for repose, and men are to employ
themselves in arts, vocatio^s and diverse services, and to attend the works of
corporal and spiritual mercy; What is required of us is that in fitting,
convenient, and opportune time for prayer, we lift up our hearts and minds to
him with prayer and humble petition for what we stand in need of, what we
extremely want: in such sort that through the whole course of our life it
concerns us to pray without ceasing, for that therein is not found one day or
hour wherein a man may say, that he has no express need thereof, and that
he may decline so important and necessary a custom and practice. But to be
always praying vocally or mentally and evermore without any ceasing, or
intermission, there is not a head, a spirit that can bear it, nor body that
can endure it, nor does the laws of God command it, nor oblige us so far
(for his yoke is sweet, and his burden light) and there is some what else to
attend to, which charity chalengeth and necessity, wherein there is much of
our time to be spent, and to fully accomplish this, be a man never so
contemplative, never so spiritual, it is necessary that he employ himself in
some entertainment and lawful exercise which may be his recreation, and
solace, for that variety (as says Theodoretus) acquitteth vvearisomnes; and
procures a new mind, Theodoret l. de provid.
and new desire in so much as afterward a man returns with more ease and
ability and fervor to spiritual practices, and a new acquired liuelynes. 3.
Reg. 3
Wherefore even as Solomon the most vvisest in that his most discrreete
judgment and sentence which he pronounced to satisfy the two women, who
required one and the self-same child, each of them pretending that it was hers,
gave order that it should be divided into equal parts, and each of them should
take their assigned portions Even so a spiritual man and prudent must divide
his time between the body, and his soul allotting to each of them their part
which is due, Genes. 29.
and as Jacob the upright married two vviues Rachel and Lya, he has to
practice at vvhiles each manner of life, as well the active, as the
contemplative, giving the most he can, to what is most perfect and excellent.
And for that in this miserable and vvreched life the soul cannot alvvaies
attend to that which appertains to the spirit, hence is it that all they who
write spiritual treatises, of spiritual life, deliver that it is necessary
that there unto be allotted a time of interposition, wherein the spiritual
man may exercise himself In some well be seeming, just and lawful exercise,
which may not distract and put the soul out of order, and enfeeble the
spirits, rather that hereby they be reinforted and comforted, and do the
office of help and refectio^. Hence the anncient Fathers who lived in
heremitages and in those solitary places, deserts and vvildernesses of Egypt
used bodily exercises, and allotted times for the^, to the end that the devil
might find them always busied either in corporal or spiritual exercise, and
the corporal should serve for recreation and pastime, and to recover spirit
and strength for the spiritual. And in like manner says S. Jerome in his
rule, give no way, no entrance to idle, and vvandring thoughts, for if once
they begin to be Masters of thee, thou shall evidently find a change to very
great prejudice. And that the fiend find thee not idle, take this course. when
thou do not contemplate, entertain thy self in some little handy work or
other, as namely make a little basket of rushes, or of curious fine Osiers, one
while digg in a garden, make the earth fine, set it in comely order, and by
line make all your bancks and garden quadrats even; sow therein diuets sorts of
pulse, plants and flowers, look to them, and take care that by watering them
in their due times they be succored, and whilst the little seeds sprout up, and
appear as grown, pull up by the roots the weeds, and you may if you like
well plant some trees, from which you may in their due season gather sauory
and looked for fruit; make bee-hiues to which the labourious bees may make
their recourse, and there live, and make their honycombes: make netts to catch
fish, dravv pictures, paint, or limme, for he who attends to nothing, is a
Sea of thoughts, is full of imaginations, and hence is it that the Monks of
Egypt receive not any one, who knows not at all any workmansipp, not that
thereby they may get their meat, drink and cloth, but for their souls sake,
and that hence they acquit themselves of idleness, and that through the variety
of such like entertainements he may become more fervent, and as it were greedy
in fervor of spiritual exercise of prayer, and contemplation, which practice
as we are weak cannot be continual, cannot alas! be incessant. And writing
to Demetrius he thus delivered himself: idem epistola ad Deme^riu^.
It concerns you much, and is of great importance, that you loose no time,
and that you employ yr self always, yea and even having said thy Primes,
Terses, Sexts, nones, Vespers, Co^plines, and Mattins which thou art to daily
practice, yet shall thou have hours assigned thee for thy study, and to
serious readinge of holy Scriptures, and to the informing and enabling thee
therewith* and when so that thou have passed some time, and the care of thy
soul shall have a-wakened thee and moved thee to kneel humbly and often on
the ground, thou shall if thou will be advised by me use some corporal labor
or some manufacture in thy cut of hours, in the hours thou have to spare, as
the work made of wool or Cotton, spinne flax, or wind up yarne, work with
the needle a while or some such like work or entertainment of time: for if so
that you employ your time, the days will never seem long but even very short.
And divine Bernard in the treatise of a solitary life advises the same, D.
Bernard. tract. de vita. solitaria.
saying: After the daily sacrifice of prayers, after study, after examination
and discussion of conscience, thou shall give thy self to some entertainment,
or corporal exercise where with the soul may solace and recreate it self a
while, and breathing time, without that it be distracted, or remiss, out of
which when thou will and shall find it expedient, thou can not deliver thy
self, and freely part from without some difficulty. Genes. 2.
For even as man was not ereated for a woman, but a woman for a man; even so
corporal exercise is for spiritual and for to assist it, and not to be a
hinderance to it. And even as the companion which God gave to Adam, was very
like to him and made of his ribbe asvvell bone as flesh, even so the help and
exercise which has to accompany spiritual life, ought to have a proportion
and solicitude to the spiritual state, and to symbolize and correspond with
it, even as it is to meditate any thing one writ, or write ought one has
read, for were it so that they were works of great labor and wearisomnes,
oppressing the spirits and senses much and vvearing the body, the spirits
viuacity and devotion would hence prove lessened, grovve weak and alas! feeble
and cold. Yet let the religious and spiritual person be advertised that long
time be not consumed in corporal exercises but breife, and in such manner
that easily he from them call himself to those of the spirit, and the
condition thereof ought not go alone, and even solely such, but it ought to be
accompanied and to be associated with that of the spirit. Corporal exercises
are those which are under the denominatio^ of manufactures, handy-vvorkes; for
others wherein necessary it is that the body take pains, and suffer watches,
fastings, austerityes, and such like penances, and sharpes and mortifications
do not only not hinder, nor dravv on any prejudice to the spirit, nor are they
works adverse to it; but far otherwise they are favorers and friends, be
it so that they be used with discretion, wit, and ansvvereable to true
judgment. And the same Bernard writing to a certain sister of his (a Nun)
delivers himself in this: Idem tract. formae benevidendi ad sororemc. 51.
the servant of GOD must always either read, pray, or work, left that the
luxurious spirit get advantage and possess it self of an idle spirit; carnal
pleasures are overcome with business, paines-taking, and employments. Divide thy
day (Sister) into three parts, in the first, pray; in the second, read; in the
third, do some or other labor, and handy-worke. Prayer, does purify us;
reading, does teach us; and labor gains us happiness, according to what
David said. Thou shall be blessed, Psalm. 127.
and thy affairs all will have good success, because thou shall eat of the
labors and works of thy hands: And he who shall dispose and pass his time
over, shall have no account to give to God for time ill employed and lost, nor
shall he have time to lament of, to complain of, nor to accuse himself at
the day of Judgment that he neglected time, cast away time, lost time.

The end of the Eighth Chapter.
THE NINTH CHAPTER.
Of the means to redeem time, where shall be given to understand more expressly
who are they, and of what condition they are who lose it.
The Apostle Saint Paul among other doctrines, exhortations and counsels that
he gives to the Ephesians, and under them to all Christian people, after that
he had admonished them that they should beware of Luxury and covetousness, and
of all other works of darkness, and that they converse not, Ephesians. 5.
communicate not with heretics the enemies of light, these are his words
Videte quomodo caute ambuletis, etc. You have well seen already how many
dangers there are and traps, snares, impediments and ambushes in the way to
heaven, and how many thieves, pirates and enemies; hence well observe, and take
tender and most solicitous care how you travail, stand on your guard
prudently, and that with very great solicitude and cautelousnes, with watch
and circumspection that you miserably fall not into their hands; Run not the
course of fools, but entertain the discretion of the wise, discreet,
prudent, subtle, and sound solid men, that well know what to do; and he
following his intent and continuing his discourse says: Redimentes tempus,
etc. Redeeming time, for the days are ill, Viegas in Apoc. c. 10. citat
Hiero^ymum
and the first exposition of the first words is Saint Ierom's (the later
shall be explaned in the following Chapter) time unto men that they might therein
serve him, and that they might employ themselves in good works and meritorious
(which is at large read in the second Chapter) hence appears it, that they
loose time, when so they employ it ill, and vnvvorthily, as in bad works
(which is the true loss most culpable, most to be blamed and most to be
deplored) and even so has, time to be redeemed, to be ransomed by the doing of
good works; and then a man buyeth and redeemeth it and makes it his own
proper, which was formerly detained, impawned, engaged, nay sold. The second
declaration is this: Many times God Almighty does shorten, and cut of sinners
from days and time, which according to the course of nature they were to
run, had they been good (as the third Chapter shows) so that the just, the
virtuous, and who so employeth his time well, redeemeth it, ransometh it, for
he does recover and reassume that part of time, and space of life, that though
he were a sinner, God Almighty as a just judge will acquitt him, and it so
happily falls out, that he lives to his full years destined him, and dies
enjoying a long course of life and many years. The third exposition is, that he
ransometh time, who parts with parcel thereof from worldly affairs to
offer it up to God, and in serious applying himself to God, and to enjoying of
inward comfort of his soul, and that seeming to do nothing he employeth it in
an holy vacancy from worldly addictions, according to the example of S. Mary
Magdalene. Luc. 10
And also he who carefully and strictly boundeth his time, in so much as he
abridgeth it is addiction to te^porall affairs, and makes as little consuming
thereof as he can, as it were some what purloyneth or only steals some time
for necessary affairs and requisite for the body, and yet herein saves some
thing for the soul, and for it is good and profit; and this is as it were a
redeeming of time, and to allow for it that which one would spare from other
occasions, and decline them. And although this ede^ptio^ and ransom (from the
delights and pleasures wherewith mankind is taken) is sensible, as is it for
one very hungry to be abridged of food, not with standing a man must
necessarily use all his strength and power, yea vt-most forces and procure with
all earnestnes to difengage a thing so valuable and of so great vvorth as is
that of time, since pastimes and unlawful entertainements and superfluous
were the moneys and price, for which he sold it to the devil, being notably
deceived in the sale, to his great affliction, asvvell for the loss of time,
as also for its great val^evv and vvorth. And answerable to what is here
delivered is said by the glorious Doctor of the Church Saint Austine, August
sermon. 24 de verbis Apost^li.
to redeem time, is this: Whenever any one moves a suite in Law, a plea
against thy estate, loose some what to win time to serve God, and cut of
the time which thou were to loose in thy suites and that which thou think
that thou loosest, thou winnest, and it is the price and valievv with which
thou art made Master of time, who has any thing to be deprived of for gain,
in which he says that God gave and to buy: for if so thou go into the
market, and buy-est bread or wine or oil, or other mercha^dise; thou partest
from one thing, receiuest another, leauest thy money, partest from it, and
make good thy commerce and traffic, for this is the manner of buyng and
selling, of traffic; Then if thou shall give nothing, nor have less then
thou had before, and yet should possess more, either it must be that thou
have found it, or that thou art heir of it, or that it was given unto thee in
curtesy; but when so that thou give and partest with one thing for an other,
and do give out from thy house in barter for some what that is necessary for
thee, then do thou traffic; and that which thou possessest, is what thou
boughtest, and what thou partedst with, and have not, is the price where with
thou boughtest it. The divine Chrysostom declares it in this following
manner: Chryso. in epiad Ephesians. sermon. 17.
To redeem time (brother) is the self same as is the taking hold of
opportunity and occasion offered, and in being time is not thine own to
neglect it, or more to despise it, and that without sin thou may play it
away, and cast it of to ill purpose (eue^ as another says that he may
dispose, of his money at will, so that he may eue^ play it away, and throw it
in the river if such be his humor for that he is Lord thereof) although it be
thine own, for that it is in thy power and frewill to employ it well, or no;
Ye are strangers here and passingers, and since such is your state, seek not
after honors, nor hunt after vain glory nor riches, dignities and authorities,
revenges, nor points of honor. Patiently suffer every thing which happens to
the contrary of thy expectation, as also to thy content, and be amidst them
patient and meek, in so doing thou redeemest time, and does ransom it:
Moreover be good and charitable to thy enemies and adversaries, and give unto
them all the riches thou have if they require it, and that it be necessary to
make a change between thy vvorldly wealth and sin. Imagine, feign a man
who has a house of valiew, and sumptuous, and very magnificently furnished,
and that certain thieves moved by the report and fame thereof break into this
palace with firm resolution to deprive him of his life, that they might
easily rob him, and that he call out to them with a pitiful and
commiserable voice and say thus much: Oh! alas! for the passion of our savior,
for the love of God (friends) kill me not for pity sake, for I will not
vvithstand you, save my life, and take my goods, I will give you all treasure
in my house; and even he parts from all whatsoever they demand; even then of
such an one we will speak and decypher, who does ransom his life; In like
manner have thou (brother) a goodly palace and rich jewels, and of great
valiew, thou have a soul, which is the lively temple of God and his house and
dwelling place, thou art endowed with faith, hope and charity, and other
virtues, and gifts of his infinite goodness give them their demands, give I
say whatsoever they ask and part with all thy estate, when so it be requisite
and necessary, in exchange, not to loose the life of the soul: and this is the
manner and true course to ransom it, and thou redeemest time which shoulest
thou not do, thine enemies would take thee captive, thy time would be lost.
Sinners ransom time which they lost, be it that they follow the counsel of
the Prophet Baruch, Baruch 4.
when he says: Sicut fuit sensus vester, etc. Convert your selves to God,
and after thon art converted to him through thy penance, serve him tenfold
more, with far greater solicitude, care, feruor, diligence, and earnest
attention, then was that thou employedst in parting from him in falling of
from thy duty, and in offending him, and in ill casting away thy time. They
shall redeem their time likewise who do answereably to what Saint Paul the
Apostle advises, Rom 6
giving counsel to the same purpose. Sicut exhibuistis membra vestra etc.
Even as to this very instant you employed and yielded up your bodies, senses,
and the parts of your body to serve uncleanness and iniquity on iniquity, make
even now a turn about, yea and turn a new leaf and spend all your time on
the service of justice and virtue to sanctification. Before these words the
Apostle delivered. Humanum dico propter vestram infirmitatem, etc. I desire to
persuade you, and to propose unto you what is in it self nothing estranged
from man and his nature, a thing feasible yea and easy to be done and
sufferable, notwithstanding thy frailty and weakness, and it is, that for so
much you serve not justice and truth as your duty is, and you ought according
to reason, at the least I require it at your hands, that with as much affect,
attention, efficacy, and fulness of vigor you employ your selves in the service
of God and in true observance of his commandments, and to make as much use of
time and hours (of which the fruit, practice, and entertainment is
sanctification, for by such works a man is sanctified, and is truly dedicated
and delivered over to God) with as much care, attention and solicitude as you
spent in your addictions, yea and giving your selves over to serve iniquities
and sin, for from hence the sinner contracteth nothing on himself, but to be
in the state of sin, and to be alas! a sinner and wicked, and to be so
enstyled, to bear such domination, such name. And although true it is, that
sanctification does notably exceed, far surmount iniquity, unrighteousness,
yet should I be some what acquieted that they would employ so much earnestnes,
so most vigilant solicitude in vvelldoeing after conversion; as they have
rendered, and formerly fully placed to sin, and to displease the Majesty of
God. But, o pity! although bold, and ill placed courageous many were to
sin, how luck warm, and even cold, slack, and hee^^es are they to undergo
repentance, and to exercise themselves in practice of virtue? A sinner makes
no difficulty of ought to give himself his intended delights, and pleasures,
to obtain his contents, and fulness of his appetits: nothing is by him
accounted hard to acquire: and if so be that you question him, can you suffer
and endure such like? or such other? be it never so difficult, he will answer
to all, yea, he can; time is very short of too quick speed for sinners to enjoy
the fulness of their delights, but to employ themselves in good-workes, they
account the time long; mass is long; a sermon long, and tedious, prayer, as
also meditation burdensome, and fasting very painful; cold makes them
heartles, quelleth their spirits; and heat does even enfeeble them, and each
thing whatsoever seems a great torment, or heavy burden; even so as (to
conclude this Chapter) it is a very good remedy, to redeem time, to employ it
well, yea and with a like agony, earnestnes, covetousnes, with such vvatch,
diligence, and expeditenes, and mindfullnes, which might equalize that which
was applied, to loose time, and to have it taken prisoner.

The end of the Ninth Chapter.
THE TENTH CHAPTER.
How it is to be understood, that the days are bad, and how since so it is,
that they are to be redeemed.
ALL things which God created are good, Genes. 1.
considered in themselves, and comfortable to their nature, for from his good
hands there could nothing come, work nor whatsoever else, which was not
good: and even the same all-Godnes after he had created the^, he valued them
good, and gave them for good to all. And that we continue our discourse to our
the self same purpose, the days and years pondered in themselves by the same
grounds cannot be bad, cannot be evil, nor can they bear in the^ moral
malice, which may be accounted a fault in the^, for and in-so much as that they
are not capeable thereof, as little are they subjects or objects of sufferance
and punishment, for as improper are they to receive such inflictions, nor
whatsoever other miseryes, which men sustain for their trespasses, their
grievous transgressions: but evil days are called by such name, and go under
such like title, respect had to men, who then live, for the ills of sins
which they commit in those days, or for the ills of punishements which are
inflicted on them, and for, and by they suffer as Saint Chrysostom, and Saint
Jerome declare. Chrysostom. and Hieron. super Psa. 26.
And customarily sick, sad, and afflicted men use to say: Oh! what a day has
this been to me, alas! how ill, oh! how bitter, ah! poor wretch as I am, was
ever known the like? There are two things (says the glorious S. Austine)
which are cause that the days are evil, Augu. sermon. 24. de verb. Apost.
are bad, and that they are so called, though in themselves they be good;
which are malice, and the misery of men; misery is common, but in no sort is
malice. From the time that Adam sinned, and was banished from Paradise, the
days have been evermore evil, bad and the crying of children in their being
even newly borne is to foretell, to presage, to prophetize miseries,
calamities, and heavy labors, and to say that in that day they make their
entrance, and beginning in this valley of tears, and at least (although it
fare well with them, and that they be happy in their lot, that they prove good)
they shall not be free from temptations, and wherefore to fear, nor why not.
Euthymius expounding the words of the Psalmist: who is the man who desires
life, Euthymius in Psalm. 33.
and to see good days? delivers that these good days are those of the other
world, the other life, for that those of this time are evil, according to
what Jacob said to Pharaoh, Gen 4^
and the Apostle Saint Paul, Ephesians 5
when he spoke to the people of Ephesus, redeem time, for the days are bad.
And to the same purpose delivers S. Basil: Basil. ibid.
The days of my pilgrimage (said S. Jacob, answering to Pharaoh, who
questioned of him how old he was) are one hundred and thirty, fevv, and those
bad. The King asked of him, how many are the years thou have lived? and he
replied etc. and although he seemed at first sight that he answered not to the
purpose, yet he returned an admirable answer, and like himself, a Saint, and
discreet, and as a wise and prudent man he cut of in a tacit and silent way,
the question which was asked of him: as the Master does with his scholar,
when he demands an impertinent question, his meaning to Pharaoh was that the
years of this life, are not years, but days: and the days, not days, but
hours, and the hours, not hours, but moments: and the life of the servants
of God is not a place of settling in this world, but a journeying, a traveling
from place to place; a pilgrimage to the celestial Jerusalem. They are
passengers, and even as such like, they make use of the goods and commodities
of the world; and he spoke further that his years were fevv, although he
were an hundred and thirty; for that those his, yea and many more are few,
Genes. 29. and 32.
for that the longest life is short, yea even as a shadow.

And finally he enstyleth his days bad for the many dangers and corporal and
spiritual crosses, Job 7.
labors and afflictions, which in it are found, and which it suffers, for
temptation is man's life, are the time of his life. Hence is it that for the
evils, for the labors, crosses, misfortunes which often occur to man in his
days, the days are said to be evil, and in the holy scripture they are
called evil. Hence is the day of Doom called bad, Psalm. 29.
respect had to the evil, and it goes under the title of sharp, and bitter,
and from hence we shall understand the meaning of those words which our Lord
and Savior delivered by S. Matthew: Be not too much sollicitous of to morrow,
Matthew. 6.
for each days ill, each days malice is enough: which is, Simon de Cassia.
as if he should speak more at large: You have enough to do to day, take
great care of this present day, and of it is labors, it is business, it is
entertainements, it is necessityes, without that thou seek to redouble thy
charge, and to take to thee to day the anxiety, and care of mind, and burden
that belongs to the following day, thinking what thou have to do therein, or
what may happen unto thee, and I assure thee that, let it take sufficient care
for it self. And even to this same purpose, was that which the Apo^^le
delivered to the Ephesians, when he said: Redeem the time, for the days are
ewill. Observe well that the days are laborious, full of miseries,
difficulties, and hindrances, employments, occasions, temptations, and
impediments to thy salvation, and to thy safety; for which, for many other
respects and affairs to which our vveake body draws on us, as necessity for
conservation of it and life, and our ill inclined nature after the sin, much
time is frequently lost without any fruit of good works, and is impawned,
sold and captivated, imprisoned; hence do I crave of thee with all tenderness,
I exhort thee with all sincerity, and recommend unto thee with all fervor,
that thou beware of employing thy time ill, and to let it be imprisonned,
alas! and lost, and that thou endeavor tooth and nail, with all thine
endeavor, to the utter most of thy power, to make use thereof, to reedeeme it,
and to value it, and so to co^merce and carry thy business, that when our Lord
shall come, and shall call for account, thou may give him up a good, an exact
and perfect one. And even so we must each of us do, for moreover and above
what is delivered, the days are as short as possibly may be, uncertain, yea
and irreuocable, not to be called back, not to be returned unto us; and we
must be of time very sparing, even to coveteousnes thereof, painefully, and
most sollicitously endeavoring to recover that we lost, those days which
we cast away, with making all have to make use of that time which is lent
us, and left unto us, to the service of God, and repair our omissions and
neglige^ces with diligence and present care, multiplying penance, sorrovv for
our sins, mortificatio^s, meritorious works, and of charity, as does he, who
has a long journey to make, the time proving short for him, almost passed, and
through his negligence and carelesnes and sloth is ca^ very much behind hand,
endeavors afterward to run in such a manner, so speedily, that he
dispatcheth in two hours that journey, for the performance of which he had
six hours and therefore seeks out' the shortest way, sweats, trauaileth
pain fully, and forces himself to run a mile together, without giving over,
or wearisomnes, although necessarily it be required to eat, and that he take
unto him some food, a morcell, ot two, yea, and even this does he eat running
and as first as he can. Even so did the same Apostle to redeem the time he had
fore gone, Philip. 3. and 1. Cor. 9.
and lost: Sequer si quomodo comprehendam. As if he should say; Since so it is
that I had so much time, and went so far astray, and got so little ground in
the service of God, and was so negligent in endeavoring to gain the reward of
heaven, and had so many days lost my time, I now earnestly desire to make a
double have, insomuch as I run speedily, yea and without looking behind me
at all, for that I make noe esteem of all my former walks, rather absolute
forgetfulness thereof has taken me up, even as if I had not gonne astepp going
forward, and boldly adua^cing my pace through thick and thin, mine eyes
attentive on my way I am to run, and my journey I have to expedite, and
finish, and not on that I have already passed. Psalm. 118.
The self same did king David put in practice after that God dilated, extended,
and enlarged his heart with the love of him, and charity, and released him of
those fetters, thoses gyues which were on his feet, as he testifies, in these
words: Viam mandatorum tuorum cucurri etc. When as through thy great mercy (my
Lord, my God) thou pleasedst to attract me, and release me from sin, and
misery, in which I was plunged, surprised and fast-held so long, and in the
breaking the chains vvherevvith I was fast tied, refreshing my heart with the
water, the liquor more precious then that of Angels, from the bounty of thy
all Sovereign benignity and grace comforting it, consoling it therewith; I
began (that I might redeem time) to hasten and run, and I made all possible
speed, all diligence imaginable, without getting unto me, or purchasing so
much as one breathing, or other, n^thy way for the way of thy commandments.
The devout and mystical Thaulerus (and then with him will we conclude this
treatise) moves a question in this manner how a man may redeem, Thaulerus.
and recover time passed by, and lost; how he may ransom it, since that there
is not, no not one moment of time, which is not due to God, which we are not
to give account of to God; and (as Gregory Nissenus said) if so that we
should pass all our time in prayer, Gregor. Nissenin orat. Pater noster.
and in rendering of thanks to God, hardly shall we accomplish, fulfill the
obligation, and duty which we even at this present instant owe, and for it,
how much more for the time passed, and to come; and thus he answers; turn
another way, retire your selves each one of you with all your power, and
greatest height of your strength and abilityes, the highest yea and the lowest,
from all time, and place, and let it all be recollected and drawn unto that
present instant of eternity, where God is essentially and remaneth in one
being, and in a most firm stability, without that there be any thing passed,
or to come, but that all is present, and in an everlasting state, uniform,
durable fixed, permanent, constant, inuariable, without change, and
immovable, without time it is passing in so much as has relation to him,
there being and being found in him, all what is present, passed, and to come,
and all beginning, and ending of time, without beginning and ending. And there
with he shall find all those treasures, which he set at light, and despised,
and infinitely more; and they who oftentimes accustom themselves, make it
their practice, and raise themselves above themselves, and all creatures, and
even to hide themselves, cover themselves, and to make their nest, and place of
abiding in God, who is present in the hearts of all people, they undoubtedly
acquire riches, procure unto themselves treasures, and find therein much more
the^, alas! they can have lost. And in this their entrance and conversion to
God each one ought fully, entirely, and perfectly to transform himself into
him, and even from the very bottom of his heart say: o my eternal God I
would, that all the time which has been from the beginning of the world, and
has to continue until the end thereof, that I had lived for thee, and thy
service, and that I may hence forward live such as I may bepraise-worthy, and
clean with obedience, and all kind of virtues, as those men whosoever have
been borne at any time who have runn the course of their lives in afflictions,
poverty, tribulations, and anxious toiles. Oh! could I distill, power forth,
yea gush out from mine eyes all the water in the sea, and supply the
necessities of those who want, and are poor, and confer comfort to the
heavy, afflicted, and sad, and for thee (my God) that I might love thee, praise
thee, and exalt thee, and glorify thee, even as much as do all the Saints and
Angels of thy sovereign, high, and mighty Court? For undoubtedly all these
things would I do most willingly: And let him be most assured, who so has
taken into his heart this will, and lively desires, that even accordingly that
most just, and most upright judge will accept them, as if they were put in
execution; for to desire with sincere and efficacious will to do any work, is
as much as if it were done before God in his sight; so it is accounted of him,
it being (as we formerly said) a perfect will, and it so being that the work
surmou^t the possibility, Chrysostom. homil. 19. in Math. S. Tho. 1. 2. q. 20. art.
4,
and faculty of our forces, and hence I refer the Reader to the 4. Chapter,
where mention is made of the good theife which doctrine there delivered agrees
well to that of this.

The end of the tenth and last Chapter.
LAVS DEO TRINO-VN^.
Hic liher cui titulus est, The Ransom of time being Captive, id est,
Rede^ptio temporis captiui ex Hispanica lingua in Anglicanam, fideliter
translatus, nihil habet fidei aut moribus bonis aduersum, Actum Duaci 27.
Nouembris 1634.

Georgius Coluenerius S. Theol. Doctor and Professor, Collegiatae Ecclesiae S.
Petri praepositus, Academiae Duacensis Caneellarius, and Librorum Censor.

ERRATA.
P. 1. l. 3. dele (). p. 2. l. (...) for kookes, read books. p. 15. l. 21.
for (...) which. p. 26. for as, read and p. 75. l. 19. after Isra^^ (...) p.
84. l. 13. for opposite, read apposite. (...) appositely. read appositely. p.
95. l. 7. for (...) ^oue. p. 97. l. 1. after nor, add to. p. 101. l. 13. (...)
not. p. 103. l. 12. for beleft, read believed. p. 122. (...). for dispensest,
read despisest. p. 135. l. 19. for rigorous, read vigorous, the page 142. is
putt twice, the latter should be 144. p. 15^. li. 4. for reinfortid, read
reinforced. p. 171. l. 1. the first line of this, page 171. should have been
putt the first line of the page 167. page 171. The second line of this page is
(...) follow after the last line of the page 170. page 193. line 2. for the
lettre n, read in.

Some other faults in orthographie, the numbers of the pages, etc. the Readers
courtesy may pardon, and the printers want of an English tongue excuse.


