A TRVE RELATION OF THAT WHICH LATELY HAPPENED TO the great Spanish Fleet, and
Galeons of Terra Firma in America.

WITH Many strange Deliueries of Captains, and Soldiers in the tempest, and
other remarkable Accidents, worthy the Observation.

ALSO, A Catalogue of those persons of account, which cytner perished in this
Tempest, or were miraculously preserved.

Faithfully translated out of the Spanish Original, as it is printed and
published in Madrid, Sevil, Lishbone, and other places.

LONDON Printed for Nathaniel Butter, Nicholas Bourne, and William Sheffard,
1623.

The Printer to the Reader.
THis Spanish Original coming to my hands most opportunely, took the
advantage of my liking it, and sudden apprehension, that it would please the
Reader, whosoever: not so much because thereby is proposed a kind of variety
of News, as in that the glory of God is made apparent in his works, and
wonderful providence, that can preserve men out of raging seas, and afford his
mercy when we think that it is quite denied us: And although I may incur an
imputation by leaning more to the true sense, then to the words, as they lie in
order: yet I will be bold to say, that the sentences here extended, shall
neither receive exoticke interpretation, nor be carried with any wanton hand
from the true meaning: Be therefore thus favorable I pray, to read it without
a strict comparison of the original. and accept of an honest intent, that
aymeth as much at the satisfaction of worthy deseruers, as any profit can arise
out of so mean a work.

A RELATION OF THE SVCCESSE of the Galeons, and the whole Fleet of Terra Firma.
THe 22. of August, 1622, the whole Fleet of Terra Firma, (that is to say, such
Ships of Spain and Galeons belonging to his Majesty, (...) dispersed, or
imploy^ in the several Harbors or Ports of America, or, if you had rather, the
West Indies) assembled themselves and came together into the Port of Hauana, a
place belike appointed, as a Rendezvous, whither the Navy might repair to make
their return home. Whereupon the General, or, as you please, the Admiral, on
the 23 of August, by public Proclamation commanded that every ship should
register the gold, silver, bullion, merchandise, and other moueables, into
their books of account, or office of the Admiralty, because they had a purpose
to put to Sea and set Sail the 28 day.

But considering the small dispatch was made, and the multitude of business
wherewith they were encumbred, they cast many doubts of loosing at all, or
putting from the harbor until the conjunction of the Moon was past, whose
effects they expected the 5. of September: Whereupon the Marquess Governor of
Hauana and the Country, called a Council, summoning the officers, and proposing
to the assembly, what was most necessary and befitting to be done for the
conueniency and security of the whole Navy: so there came accordingly the
land-Gouernor or General over the Soldiers, the Admiral of the Armado, the
Captain General of the Fleet, and his Admiral; the Superuisor or Treasurer,
the Captains of the Soldiers, and the Pilots, who with one consent
determined, that in regard this Conjunction in September did commonly in those
parts bring clouds and obfuscation of air, which would not vanish without
tempests, and turbulent winds, it was a seasonable providence, and befitting
the security of the Armado, to remain quietly in harbor, until the foresaid
Conjunction were elapsed, which no question the same night would manifest her
operation to some purpose.

Upon this resolution they prepared themselves, and settled their affairs to
tarry the times appointment, and then to set forward their pretended voyage.
But that evening promised such fair weather, and a serene Element, with a
pleasant and sociable gale of wind continuing two or three days together,
made them all repent, and wish they had taken hold of opportunity, and set
forward their journey, which caused the General to consent to their
importunities, and associate them as I may say, in their hopes: insomuch, that
after general musters, on Sunday the 4 of September, by break of day they
weighed anchors, and hoysed their sails, accommodating the ships out of
harbor to the best purpose. There were 28. ships with their Admiral; 8.
Galeons; 3. Pinaces; and other attendants, upon the Fleet, with their consorts.
They sailed forward very prosperously, and had a time of fair expectation. But
Monday approaching, which was the day of the Conjunction, the weather according
to former conjecture seemed to change, and the wind coming to North-east
raised both a care and a fear in the Admiral: Besides, the Galeons
forecasting all the ways to prevent subsequent mischief, woond up their maine
sails, and tied them fast to their yards, and advanced only their Missens,
making use of their Bosprels, and in a word put in practice all the means
which art and industry could afford to escape the danger.

But it should seem, that tempests will have their courses, and are
inexorable: For the wind increased and so whistled, that it would not hearken
to the whistling of the Mariners, the clouds thickened and over mantled the
Horizon, and the air was so dark and formidable, that they could not discern
one ship from another; by which chance, or rather disasterous mischance, ere it
was full noone, the winds continuing, and as it were couenan^ing to perpetrate
some outragiousnesse, all the Galeons were dissipated and disseuered, and the
most part of the Fleet for their better passage went before the wind, and took
a course to save themselves as well as they could: In which violence they were
driven from one another, and the wind continued so impetuous, that it not only
unloosed their tacklings and sails, but brake asunder their fore-masts, and
rent their maine yards in shiuers, so they had no shift but to bear no sail
at all, or cross the wind as they could.

But as waves roll after waves, one mischief follows another: for presently
the wind turned to the South, which although it gave them leave the better to
accommodate themselves, and endure the tempest, yet it brought rain, and the
Sea wrought as high as it did before: then they seared another misfortune, to
be thrust or hurried into some creek or bay of the coast of Florida, which
they much susspected by the great and wonderful haste they had made (for they
commonly ran five or six leagues every glass) and then there was no hope
but either splitting on the sands, or perishing on the shore.

This storm and fearful tempest continued with all outragiousnesse until
Tuesday following, then by break of day they assumed comfort that all was not
lost and cast away: for they discried some ships afar off, who as it seemed
determined to return to the Port of Hauana, in which course such as had masts
and sails prepared themselves, and the rest that were bruised and broken, as
far as they could discern one another, labored to do the like, and
prosecute the same course.

They began to enter the harbor the 10. of September. and continued till the 14.
The Galeons which were saved were the first, and so other ships followed, after
they had knowledge of one another. The same day arrived the Galeon S. Ann de
Real, having lost her maine Maste: with her came Captain or Admiral Esteuan
Delgado, whose ship was laden with the merchandise of the said Port of Hauana,
she entered in safety without any impeachment, or wrecke of the tempest.

The 11. entered the Admiral of Terra firma, or the Continent, with the loss
of her maine Maste: in her company was a ship of Cadiz, who sustained no
detriment, but had all her masts and tacklings in order.

The 13. arrived the Admiral of Manana, with all her Masts. The same day came
the Admiral Real, though somewhat late, having recovered 11 ships of of the
Fleet, and certain Pinaces, wherein were 50. persons of the bay of Tortuga,
who live under 25 degrees. This Admiral likewise escaped without loss of a
tackling.

Other ships which were not of the Fleet, came also from the Islands into the
same harbor without impeachment, observing the time of happy and seasonable
departure from the North of S. Domingo.

What Galeons and Ships were lost, and perished in this tempest.
1 THe Admiral of the whole Fleet following the storm, and driven by the
wind with the fore-saile of the middlemost Maste, ran Northward all night and
the next day; whereupon she proposed to rest in some harbor, or place of
security on those shores: but suddenly she came to shallow water, and in
short space ran her self on ground at two fathom water and a little more,
where her beak brake a pieces, with the loss of her people, except three men
and two boys: this was on the Coast of Maracumbe in Florida.

2 The Galcon Margerita followed the same course, and participated with the
same fortune: For she was lost the 8. day, coming to three fathom water, but
she was violently thrust on a flat or sand: so that the keele sticking fast
with the gusts ouer-great, and the billows extremely raging, the body
shiuered all to pieces, and the passengers when it was apparent they could not
escape, saw as little mercy in the Sea, as they had endured in the Wind.

3. and 4. In the same hour, with the same tempest, and almost at the same
place, two Ships of the Fleet were swallowed in the Sea, and perished before
they could approach the shore: but yet Captain don Bernardine de Lugo was
miraculously saved on a piece of timber, though some say a broken hatch, which
the Sea wasted toward the shore, and 60. persons or soldiers of his company
escaped upon diverse things, to the broken carcass of the former Admiral, and
so by degrees, made shift to save their lives.

5 A Frigot, which came from Cartagena with Portugals was lost at Tortuga, in
one of those dangerous Creekes, and unknown Promontories: there were in her
56. persons, who all escaped upon several chests and plankes.

6 The Admiral Th: de Luspam saved himself in a little shallop, which the
Galeon drew after him: For when he saw no remedy, he cut off the rope, and
with a convenient number rowed above three leagues in the Sea, till at last
they drove themselves into a straight, and so come ashore.

7 The Galeon of our Lady del Rosario, wherein Captain Chacurretta was
Commander, likewise perished, not without great suspicion before hand: she rann
aground, as the Admiral did, so that none of the Ships that came into the
Harbor could give an account of her, until a certain Bark arrived the 22.
of September at the Port of Hauana with Letters from the said Captain, which
advertised them, that the said Galeon perished in Tortuga, all the company
escaping miraculously, who had the fortune to save themselves with convenient
victual and necessary suppliments, keeping firm stations on their chests,
masts, and such other things.

8. and 9. Moreover two other ships were thought and adjudged lost, because
they were not heard of after the storm. But if you will be acquainted with a
wonder indeed. The Pilot of the Margarita was miraculously saved upon the rib
of a ship, on which he was carried five days together in the Sea, and sustained
his life by a bird, or reasonable big foul which came to his hand, until a
Pinace passing by him in a most seasonable time, took him in and brought him
to safe Harbor.

A Catalogue of those persons of account, which either perished in this
tempest, or were miraculously preserved.
IN the Galeon: N. S. our Lady Nostra Segniora of H. Hocha, the Admiral of the
Fleet, there went these persons following, who all were drowned, except such as
shall be afterward named to be saved.

The Admiral himself, Don Pedro Pasquies de Esparza: Knight of the Order of
Calatraua.

Of the company of Captain Bartholmew Garcia de Nodal.
Captain Bartholmew Garcia de Nodal, with his Ancient, and Sargeant.

He that bare his Colors in the absence of the Ensign, James de Aranda.

The Drummer John de Carmona.

The Drummer Diego Hermandez.

Of Soldiers.
Ieronimo de Mencos the son of John Taffulla.

Peter Baxelagayoso the son of Ferdinand of Orense.

Francis Corren de Meneses son of Anthony of Malaga.

M. Iacinto Rumiera the son of Michael of Valladolid.

John de Flores son of Esteuan of Antequara.

M. Gregory of Filguyera son of Antonio Gomes, a dweller, or natural of
Talaucra.

M. John de Prado son of Antonio Gomes of Tataucra.

M. James Ruyz son of the same, of the port of S. Mary.

Don Anthony of Francosa son of Alonso of Tuy.

M. Aluaro de Medeos son of the same, of Cartagena.

M. Lewis de la Coba son of Alonso of Baesa.

M. Sebastian Guytan son of Andrew Hernandes of Cadiz.

M. Iacinto Ferrer son of Peter of Valencia.

Sergeant John de Valasio.

M. Rodrigo Diaz of Cardoniga son of Alfonso of Orense.

M. Peter Diaz of Curdoniga son of the same.

Peter Pardo son of Diego of Castro.

M. Peter Ruyz de la Puente son of John of Spinosa.

Corporal Alonso de Guzman, son of Diego, an inhabitant of Marchuela.

The Corporal of Cast. Don Alonso of Piedrota.

M. Diego of Suntigo son of Gaspar Paez of Balbol of Paz.

M. Peter Colodero son of Bartholmew Gomez of Iaen.

Anthony de la Chica son of John Gomez of Buena.

The Ensign Christopher d' Solo guren, a man well known and reputed of.

Corporal John Ramos son of Diego of Talanene.

Don Lopez de Vllon son of Peter of Ponteuedra.

M. Matthew de Solazar son of Bartholmew de Vega of Ponteuedra.

John de Torres, son of the same man of Seuill.

Amaro Nunnez of Nodall son of Alonzo de S. Vincent of Ponteuedra.

M. John of the Church, son of the same.

M. John Baptista Aguado, son of the same of Valdalaien.

John de Ribas.

M. John Polo, son of Diego of Xeres de la Fontera.

Andrew Peers, son of Domingo, of the City Adrigo.

Corporal John de Viso, son of Bartholmew of Bayon.

John Fustamante, son of John Bautista of Ronda.

John Peers de Espinosa, son of Francis of Seuill.

John Rodriguez, son of Albert of Tarisa.

Peter Maiordomo, the son of Peter Baiona.

Baltazar of Arenato, the son of Iaspar of Indel.

Alonson Valentine, the son of the same man.

Antonio Rodriguez, son of Alonso of Ianaucra.

Diego Cordon of Contereras, son of Martin of Xezana.

John Fernandes son of Melchar of Badez.

Thomas Daniel son of the same man of Zaragoza.

Francis Marinez son of John of Seuilla.

Domingo Alonso son of John of Carato.

Sebastian Montaro son of John Rodrigues of Xeres.

Bartolmew Peers son of John of Argurre.

John Philippe Romero son of John of Seuill.

John Baptista de Sales son of the same of Burgos.

Alonso Vasques son of Sebastian of Lucar.

Iacinto de Montillo son of Diego of Granoda.

Pasqual Estcuan son of John of Madrid.

Gregory Esteuan son of Alsonso of Madrid.

Francis de Aquirre son of Peter of Gibraltar.

Lorenzo Martinez son of the same of Sanclemente.

Don Fausto of Cauanillas and Castrexon, natural of Iudela.

Sebastian Ferrer son of Iosehp of the port of S. Maria.

Sebastian Diaz son of the same, natural of Cutatreza.

Don John of Garibay son of General John Gutierez de Gariba, he was the
leader of a squadron of Pikes of the Company of Bernardine de Lugo.

John Cauallero son of Sebastian Sanches, a natural of the Port of S. Maria.

John Cordero son of John Viegas of Faro.

Laureano de Quinones son of Lazaro of Sevil.

Antonio de Feria son of the same of Gibraltar.

John Vasquez son of Diego Alonso of Salamanca.

Rodrigo Nunnez son of Gracian of Gibraltar.

Alonso Romero son of the same of Caracena.

Diego Vrbano son of the same of Vitoria.

Don Martin of Cuena son of Michel of Zaragoza.

Don Alonso Farfan son of Don Alonso Fernandez of Trexo a natural, or native
of Sevilla.

Diego de la Cruz son of Diego of Albarquerque.

The Sergeant Antony de la Cruz.

Rodrigo de Cequiero son of Antonio Peers.

Amaro Garcia son of the same of Ponteuedra.

Michael de Arregin son of Sanco of the town Ycaua.

Austin Embrun son of the Licentiate Embrun of Sevill.

There was also a Soldier of Don Michaels Company de Reden.

Men belonging to Sea-affaires of the said Galeon Almiranta.
THe Master of the silver, or Ouer-seer of the treasure, Capt. James of Vreder.

The Surveyor John de Licaraza,

Master of the allowances or Vittaile, Peter Camarillo.

The Boteswaine Matthew Martin.

The Guardian Francis Sanchez son of Doming of S. Lucar.

The Marshall Peter Rodriguez son of the same of S. Lucar.

The Cooper Sebast. Martin son of Manuel of Sevilla.

The Cooper John de la Iglesia son of Peter of Sevilla.

The Chaplen and Licentiat Anth. Pernandezual Priest.

The Calcar of the ship John Dominguez son of Peter Matthew of Ayamonte.

The diuer John Baptista Moreto son of Simon of Genoa

The clark Philip Martin Culderon of Sevil his son.

The Surgeon Cicilio de Ribero son of Barnardo.

The Calcar John de Lagur son of Michael of the port of S. Maria.

The Carpenter Pet. of Huerta, son of the same of Sev.

The Carpenter John de Burto son of the same of Seuil.

The Pilot Martin Ximenez.

His companion Francis de Cardenas Gargy.

Mariners.
DIego Gomez son of Simon of S. Lucar.

Gonsalo Rodriguez son of Francis of Ayamonte.

Diego Martin son of Francis Dias of Moguer.

Francis Carasio son of Christoual of Cadiz.

Ieronimo Ferete son of Peter of Cadiz.

Michael Esteuan son of Francis Vasquez of S. Lucar.

Peter de Chauarria of Cadiz.

Lewis Jordan son of Iocomo of Cadiz.

Manuel Diaz son of Diego of Tauira.

Andrew Gomez son of Simon of Xerez.

Alonso Martin son of Joseph of Cadiz.

Ion Michael son of Michael of S. Lucar.

Peter Velasio son of Alonso Diaz of Ayamonte.

Francis Perez son of John of Ayamonte.

John Dominguez son of Christouall of Ayamonte.

Francis Rodriguez son of the same of Ayamonte.

Melchior Velasquez son of Mich. General of S. Maria.

Esteuan de Requaburen son of Domingo of S. Sebastian. John de Xanregui, son of
the same of Bernizo, Peter Quintero, son of Rodrigo of Huclua, Andrew Ximenes,
son of the same of Seuill, Lucas Lorenzo, son of Lorenzo Lucas of Cadiz, Alonzo
de Torris, son of Melchor Alfencio, of the I Will Tenerif, Domingo Pere^ra, son of
Gonzalo of Lugos, Domingo Antonio, son of the same of Faro: Manuel Ferera, son
of Vasco Vincente of Lugos, Stephen Rodriguez, son of the same, Vasco Ferera,
son of the same, Francis Xauelo, son of the same, Domingo Rodriguez, son of
Francis Perez of Lugos, Gonzales T^go, son of Sancho of Lisboa, Christopher
Martoquin, son of the same, of Lugos, Antonio Hermandez, son of Peter Gonzales
of Tanira, Manuel Diaz, son of the same of Lisboa, Martin Manuel, son of
Matthew of Vellaneuua, Iacome Garcia, son of the same, of Ponteuedra.

Ship-Boyes.
Christopher de mirande, son of Peter Martin of Sanlucar, John Munnos, son of
Ambrosio of Sanlucar, Sebastian Rodriguez, son of the same, of Sanlucar, saved.
John de Villegaz, son of Ferdinand of Lufra: John Diego, son of Diego Michael
of Sanlucar, Sebanstian de Arnia, son of the same, of Moguer: Hernan Diaz, son
of Iaspar of Tunira, Nicholas Romero, son of John of Sanlucar, Peter Runez, son
of the same, of Sanlucar, Melchor de los Reies, son of Matthew Rodriguez of
Ayamonte, Francis Miscino, son of Matthew of Sanlucar, John Peers, son of
Gonzales of S. Leucar, John Sobrana, son of Francis of Tercera, Peter Betinez,
son of Damian of S. Leucar, Ieronimo Franco, son of Lewis Burexa, of S. Leucar,
John Diaz, son of Michael of S. Leucar, Christopher de Soto, son of the same,
of Seuill: Mannuel of Petega, son of the same, of S. Leucar: Dionisius of
Oliuera, son of Fratuoso of Furo: Diego Rodriguez, son of Francis of S. Lucar,
Peter Maria Lopez, son of Lazaro of Genda: John de Falas, son of Alonso Diaz of
Ayamonte, Alonso de Perulfa, son of John of Sanlucar, Martin Garcia, son of
Alonso Ruiz of Monguer: John Martin, son of Lorenzo of Seuill, John Suarez son
of the same, of S. Iiago: John of Ecija, son of Lewis of Ecija: Matthew Buyz,
son of John of the valley of Baldiniofa: Diego de Calatraua, son of the same:
Francis Nunnez, son of Antonie of Seuill, saved: Francis de Silua, son of
Gonzules of Ayamonte: Dominigo Roifriguez: Jasper Hernandes, son of Domingo of
Portiman: Aluaro Fernandes, son of Gregory of Lugos: Anthony Lorenzo: Sebastian
Hernandez, son of Nicholas de Tupinna, a national of the Island Mudera: Gregory
Fernandes of Logos, John Cordero, son of Diego Martin of Guelua: Anthony
Fernandes, son of Christopher of Borges, Alfonso Lorenzo, son of the same of
Ponteuidua, John Francis.

Servants that were lost.
Lazaro de Medina son of Diego of San Lucar, Thomas de Aquino, son of Lazaro of
S. Lucar, John Mumioz, son of Alonso of S. Lucar. Francis Rodriquez, son of
Bartholmew Dominges of S. Lucar, Peter de Roa, son of John of Seuill: Francis
negro Allezudo, Luas Stenez, son of Francis Perez of Ayamonte: Blas de
Iglesias, son of Aluaro of S. Lucar: John de Aze^tuno, son of the same of
Tulunaro delu Reyna: Peter de Flores, son of John Dominques of S. Leucar:
Manuell de Morales, son of Anthonio of Aymonte: Peter Garcia, son of John of
the Port S. Mary: Peter de Casabon, son of the same of S. Lucar: Sebastian
Ruyx, son of Alonso of Curtagena.

Gunners or Officers of the Ordnance.
The Constable, Lope Ramos: Armero Jews de la Testa: Fernando de Vannos son of
the same of Vbeda: Peter Sunchez, son of the same of Seuill: Lewis Galaiz, son
of Christopher Daniell, of Port S. Mary: John Prieto, son of the same, of
Seuill: Matthew Fernandes, son of Manuel of Seuill: Francis de Gusinan, son of
Christopher, of Seuill: Sebastian de Arumbara, son of John Martinez of
Fuenzabia, Alonso Palamine: Rexedel, son of V^icont of Seuill: Diego Henriquez,
son of Gaspar of Cadiz, Ieronimo de Luna, son of the same, of S. Lucar^:
Bartholmew de Caesar son of the same, of S. Lucar: John Rodriuuez, son of Diego
Ruyz, of Auentudo of Cadri, Matthew Gomez, son of Domingo de fonzecu of S.
Leucar: John Martin, son of Anthony of Seuill: John Foelix Caro, son of
Cristopher Rodriquez of Seuill.

The Passengers in the saip Galeon, the Admiral.
Father Master, or Friar Peter dela madriz of the order of S. Astin Visitor of
Peru: Friar Francis de Currion, his companion: Friar Anthony of S. Austin:
Friar Christopher of vrtega: Don John de sayauedia: Don Martin Buesso: Don
Gunzalo Tamago, the Licentiate, Don Antony of Silua: the Licentiate, Lorrenza,
Arius Nuglaber: Don Diego de Guzman, the Iusticer of Cusio: Don Diego de
Guenar: Don Publo de Silua: John Delgudo of Leon El Moco: Cristopher de
Aspatia: The Secretary Martin, Salyado: Donna Maria de Ayala his wife:
Catalina: her nurse, or nurse child, two girls, her servants: the Licentiate
Fragosa Cinrinno de Alcula: Donna Froncisin his wife: Donna Isabella de Pernia:
Lewis Quintero, a neighbor of Callao: Done Ieronima his wife: Peter Quintero,
a neighbor of Arica: Donna Luise Quintaro his daughter: Michael de Vzarraga:
Laurence of Arriola, a neighbor of Poto: Francis Arriambo, a neighbor of
Toledo: Peter Valuerede: Donna Luisa de los Rios his wife: John de Valuerd his
son: Benitt de Castra, a Merchant of the Kings who went to be employed: Alonso
de $Word$, another Merchant: Don Martin de Vergunzo: Peter Gonzalez: Anthony de
La Cruz: Luis de mesones, a brother of John de Mesones: Diego de Yllesio, of a
Moore and a Christian, eight servants and slaves of the chamber.

Such persons as were lost in the Gallion, Santa Margarita.
The Company of Captain Bernardine de Lugo: Captain Don Bernardine de Lugo
saved: the Ensign Don Diego de Contreras: the Serieant, Don Francis de Burio,
saved: Auanderado, or the Ensigns servant, John Lopez, saved: The fife,
Phillip de Beninsa: the Drommer, Domingo Perez, saved.

Of Soldiers.
Captain Peter Martinez de Aliende: John Lorenzo, son of the same, of
Pontiuedra, Master Alonso Guldumez, saved. Master Andrew de ribas, the
Surgeant: Christopher a Horseman, Master Ieronimo de Moron son of Martin of
^rcos, Captain Ieronimo Ortiz. Master John Antonio ^uche son of the same, of
Cartegena in the Leuant, saved, Alonso Hernandez de Zafra: Captain Michael
Rico, son of John of Fonterraby: Master Gaspar del Real, son of John of
Carmona: John Rodriguez son of Peter Gonzalez of Ayamonte: Michael Agnodo son
of Anton of Vilasto: Antony de Castro, son of Peter Fernandez of Montilla:
Francis Nauarro son of the same of Carmona, saved. Master John de Esquia^l, son
of John Baatista of Moron: Master Thomas de Herreta, son of Anthony of Seuill:
Diego de Aliende son of Peter of Vtrera: Martin Munnoz, son of Andrew of
montilla, saved. Hernando de Surabia, son of Diego Rodriguez of Caceres: Don
Francis of Sepulu^da, son of Peter of Seuill: Francis Cortes son of John
Cauallero of Saint Lucar: Don Roque de Valasco son of Don Alonso of Miranda
Anthonio Pedrique son of Diego of Saint Lucar, saved. Don Anthony de Valasco,
son of Alonso of Miranda, saved. Francis Desanda, son of the same, of
Villareall: Iusepe Ribera, son of Peter of Seuill: Peter de Valasco, son of the
same, of Niebla: The Ensign John Baptista de Fantiago: Alonso Guerra son of
the same, of Seuill: Ieronimo de Morales, son of Gabriel of Seuill: Francis
Clauixo, son of Peter of Malaga: Michael Fernandez son of the same, of Leon,
saved. Iayme Ferrer son of the same, of Elda: Peter Martin, son of the same, of
Saint Lucar: The Sergeant Diego Gomez: Andrew Perez, son of John Lorenzo of
Saint Lucar, Martin de Mora son of the same, of the City Rodrigo: Benet
Sanchez Neuado, son of John of Caceres: Peter de Cabria, son of the same, of
Reynosa, Saved: John of Villa Neuua, son of John Stephen, of Saint Lucar:
Captain Anthony Romero, son of Francis Lopes of Seuill: Lewis de Iain, son of
Andrew Perez, of Seuill, saved: Peter Nunnez Rebollur, son of Alonso: Garcia of
Carmona, saved, Michael Sanchez de Auila, son of Marcos Sanchez of Carmona:
Isidor de Volle, son of John of Villa Frechosa: John de Ortega, son of Peter of
Saint Lucar, s^ued. Bartholmew Nauarro, son of Thome of Carmona: Fernando de
Acosta, son of Gutierez of Burguillos: Anthony de Saint Michael, son of Diego
of Ledesina, Anthony Martin, son of Alonso of Carmona, saved. Peter Nauarro,
son of the same, of Carmona: Hernando de Acosta, son of Gutieres of Burguilloz:
Anthony of Saint Michael, son of Diego of Ledesia: John Inigo, son of John of
Valencia: John Stephen, son of Rodrigo of Almendra Lexo: The Sergeant mayor,
Manuel of Abren, saved. Francis de Alochon, son of An^res of Madrid: Diego
Reyes, son of Melchor of Cordona, saved. John de Salus, son of Michael of
Barcelona, saved. Thomas Gonzales, son of Alonso of Villanoua de la Fuente:
Antonio Baptista, son of the same, of Seuill: Don John de Villabeta: Nicholas
Montero, son of Saluader of Seuill: Peter de la Fuentes son of the same, of
Seuill: Leandro de Aquita, son of Francis of Granado: Don Anthony de Montsalue
and Figuero, son of Gaspar des Rio: he was soldier to Gaspar de Vergas, and
took salary of him: John Rumirez Ossoria, son of Diego of Alcuna de Chucena,
he was a Soldier in the company of Don Michael de Redin, and took salarie of
him, saved: John Zeribo, of the said Company.

The Seamen belonging to the said Galeon of Saint Margerita.
The Officers.
The ouerseer of the treasure Peter Gatierez Espinosa: the surueyer, or his
agent Austine de Aquines master of the allowance of victual Martin Peroundia
the masters mate or boatswain, Christopher Bernitez, son of the same, of
Sanlucaar: the Guardian John Baptista de Valuord, son of Christopher Sunchez of
Cadiz, saved. The Steward, John de Ve as son of Hernando of port Saint Mary:
the marshall for the water, Lorenzo Garzill son of Diego of Cadiz, saved. The
Calcar of the ship, Hernando de Morales, son of the same, of Cadiz: The Cooper
John Michaell, son of Martin Fouar of Seuill, saved: another Cooper, Hieronimo
de Leon son of Gasper Rimero of Seuill, saved: another Calcar, Lope Mexia, son
of Alonso Diuy of Frima, saved: the Clarke Toribia de Valdes son of John of
Miedo the Carpenter: Luic Garcie son of John Rumos of the Harbor, The
Carpenter Diego de Rocha, saved: The Clerk to say service, the Lis^rtate
Anthony Ortiz, Ponce, he was a Priest-Clerke: the Pilot, Diego Roman: his
companion (...) saved. The Surgeant, John de Mercubo.

Mariners.
John Duarte, the son of Michael of Passage: he could not come on shipboord,
by reason he was sick in the Hospital of Hauana. Christopher Sunchez, son
of the same Cadez, saved. Francis Lovez Correa, son of John Rodrigo of Cadiz,
saved. Rodrigo de Hoieda, son of Peter Telley, of St. Lucar, saved. John de
Barrios, son of the same of Triana, saved. Michael Vicent, son of Vicent
Michael of Saint Lucar, saved. John Benitez, son of the same of vert Saint
Mary, saved. Manos Munnos, son of Peter of Saint Lucar, saved. Anthony Cordero,
son of Lewis of Ayamonte, saved. Anthony Zamorano, son of the same of Ayamonte,
saved. Sebastian de Duennas, son of Alexo Rodriguez. Christopher Rodriguez,
son of Stephen of Xeres, Christopher Duran, son of the same of Saint Lucar,
saved, as having embarked himself in another Galeone. Francis Correa, son of
the same of Ayamonte, saved. Rodrigo Alonso, son of John de Moron, of Aumonte,
saved. Peter Sanchez, son of Stephan of Ayamonte, saved. Michael Ruzio, son
of Austin of Aymonte saved. Francis Melgarcio, son of John Ruyz of Aymonte,
saved. Peter Gonzales, son of Domingo of Seuill. John Mendozu, son of Thome de
Cauaries. Michael Serouimo, son of Martin Ribere of Cadiz, saved. Sebastian
Munnos, son of Francis of Saint Lucar. John Rodriguez, saved. Gaspar de los
Reuez. Dumian Cordero, son of Anthony Christopher of Braudes. John Aluarez, son
of the same of Tauira, saved. Pasquil Cordero. Domingo of the Tower, son of
John of Cadiz, saved. Saluador Vicente, saved. Domingo (...), saved. John de
Lugue, saved. John de Castilla, saved. Bartholmew de Medina, saved. Austin de
Los Lautos. Francisco de sosa. Peter Cintado, saved. Bartholmew Lopez.
Sebastian Aluares, son of the same, of Lisbon. Anthony Hernandez, son of
Domingo of Opertoni Portugal.

Ship Boys.
Peter Mexia, son of the former of Triana: John of Vriburri, son of Martin of
Bilbao: he did not imbarke himself being sick on the shore. John de Castro,
son of Alonso of Triana, saved. Gonzalo Rodriguez, son of the same, of Port S.
Mary. Francis Tinoco, son of the same, of S. Lucar. Laurence Mendez, son of
John of Ayamonte, saved Manuel Correa, son of Rodrigo of Lepe, saved.
Christopher Carrasio, son of Francis Correa of Aymonte: he remained sick in
Cartagena. Domingo de Las Nieues, son of Iaspar of Ayamonte. Diego Martin
Francisco, son of Iaspar Rumirez, a national of Lope. Andrew Gonzales, son of
Bartholmew of Ayamonte, saved. Michael Hernandez, son of Manuel Rodriguez of
Triana, saved. Nicholas de Mendoza, son of John of Carmona. Michel Carasco son
of Francis of Seuill, saved. Francis Ramires, son of the same, of Toledo saved.
Peter Fermandez. Bernabe de Pin^da, saved. Diego Morion, son of Francis of
Toledo.

Servants.
Francis de Sierra, son of John of S. Luar. Peter de Castillo, son of Gonzales,
Martin of S. Lucar. John Marquez, son of Peter of S. Lucar. Francis of Azenedo,
son of Anthonio of S. Leucar. Diego Zaez, son of the same, of Seuill. Lucus
Francis, son of Antonio of Cadiz. Anthony Garcia, son of the same, of Sanlucar:
another, Anthony Garcia, son of Adrian of S. Lucar, saved. John Baptista de
Biedma, son of the same of Seuill. saved.

The Gunners of the said Galleon.
The Constable Marcos Perez, son of Alonso of Seuil^ Armero John Rodriguez, son
of the same, of Seuill, saved. Diego Perez son of the same, of the Port:
Antonio Periera, son of the same, of San Lucar: Hernando de Aremo, son of
Alonzo de Vargas, son of John of Seuill: John Suarez, son of the same, of Saint
Lucar: Simon Rodriguez, son of Christopher of Saint Lucar, saved. John de
Vtrera, son of Domingo, of Saint Lucar, saved. Gonsalo Perez, son of the same,
of Ayamonte: Peter Hernandez, son of the same, of Saint Lucar: Christopher
Ramirez, son of Francis of Saint Lucar: Francis de Barrio, son of Lope of Saint
Lucar: Martin Aluarez son of the same, of the Port, saved. John Va^tista, son
of Peter of Saint Lucar: Francis de Bannos, saved. Don Francis Cen^o, a Knight
of thirty (...) a months entertainment, for his estate and dignity: a
Gentleman Don John de Cabrera, saved.

The Passengers which went in the said Galeon: Santa Margarita.
Don Francis de Barrios, governor of Caracas: Gaspar de Roxas: Don Francis of
Roxas his cousin: Don John de Merl^ de la Fuente: Seraphin Francis of Valence,
son of Doctor Valencio: Father Iusepe of Arr^aga of the society of Jesus:
Father Claudio Colci his companion: Francis de Tou^r: Marias Lopez de Estremos,
a neighbor of Lima: Benit Rodriguez: John Felix: Don John Caro de Castro:
Anthonio de la Crux, a neighbor of Cartegena.

So that there were 462. persons, as you may perceive and understand by this
Relation, of seamen, soldiers and passengers, who embarked themselves in these
two Galeons, that is to say, the Admiral of the Fleet, called our Lady of
A^tocha, and the S. Margarite, which (as some will have it) signifies the ship
of pearl, amongst whom perished 391. and 71. were saved, as is by the same
apparent.

Concerning the rest, I find no other mention in the original, but what is
briefly handled before: only the Author falls to some business, wherein they
were employed after the storm, which accordingly I thus prosecute, not varying
from the true meaning of the same.

The 25. of September 1622. the great Marquess aforenamed, Governor of
Hauana, assembled once again a Council, to which all the Officers were
summoned, about the return into Spain with the rest of the Fleet, concluding
to depart after the conjunction of October, to which it should seem they all
condescended, except the General John de Sara moran, the Admiral Thomas de la
ray pura, and two principal Pilots of the Armado, or the whole Fleet, with the
Pilot of the Admiral, who for diverse reasons, besides the great provision and
treasure in the same, did not think it fit or convenient in so dangerous a
time, and after so fearful a warning, to adventure so great a substance and so
rich a prize into the hands of fortune, wind or weather; but rather to return
into Spain at the Spring of the year, and make use of a more prosperous
season: to which advice (as it should seem) this Nauall Council subscribed.

The eighteenth of September there departed from the Port of Hauana three
Barks or Frigots, under the command of Captain or Admiral Gaspar de Vargaz,
whose charge was to search for the Artillery and treasure of the lost Galeons:
and on Monday the 28. of September, after safe arrival, they there summoned
all the soldiers, seamen and passengers, who were miraculously preserved in
the tempest, when the said Admiral was lost under the command of Michael de
Cazaretta, and whom at their coming in Florida they found in safety, and with
whom the said Gaspar de Vargas returned after they had discovered where the
Admiral lay, which they might do by the topmast appearing above water, and
so very fortunately they dispatched their unfortunate business.

They divided into these Frigots or small Barks, the most part of the
Artillery or Ordnance, which with great labor and industry they got out of
the Galeons, beginning first with her that perished in the Bay of Tortaga, but
they were much troubled and encombred with two special pieces, which put them
to excessive ^oile. Thus were they able in respect of the Fortress of Tabaco
to search further, and at convenient leisure to effect that, which they came
about: for this Fort being built and erected of purpose to keep the
inhabitants in awe, and debar strangers from any intrusion, as also to
accommodate them, if by disastrous chance they should be driven into these
places, so watched the two perished Galeons, that they found what was to be
found untouched: whereupon the said Gaspar de Vargas writ of his success to
the Marquess, and of the toil he sustained in the Margarite, with other
adventures, as the danger and wonderful pains which the Diverse endured, and
the Sailers proved, even when they were in the waste of the lost ships, whose
bodies were broken to pieces, and lay in a manner under water.

When this was done, and that they could find or recover no more, at a quiet
and a still water, in the company of Captain Cazaretta they searched the
Creek, and the Bottom more narrowly for the bullion and treasure of the said
Galleon of Rosario, and had the fortune to find the most part of it, though it
seemed smoked, blacked, and impeached with the owse and frettings of the water,
yea after four natural days they drew it all out with the loss only of one
Ingot.

The next work in the harbor of Hauana, was the Currying and trimming such
ships as had escaped the tempest, whereupon to be more able to furnish the
three distressed Galeons that came Mastlesse into the harbor (as you have
heard) they cast a cross a ship of Cadiz, and disrobed her, as I may say,
taking her Masts, Tackling and furniture, whereby they supplied many wants, and
as well as they could, masted the Galeons again, so that they were thought fit
and serviceable to prosecute the voyage of the sea, when occasion should inuit
them to return into Spain.

The fourth of October, there came into the Port of Hauana, a certain Frigot
with twenty persons, and two Friars Vittorians, who saved themselves in a ship
of new Cumpechana in the first voyage, when they accompanied the Fleet of new
Spain, and were cast a shore on the rocks, and Islands of Bermuda, having
been hurried and tossed two days together with a strange storm and
wonderful tempest, and yet the Galeons and most of their Fleet were saved, God
be thanked, only some ships perished, amongst whom was theirs in which they
first embarked themselves; so that there were drowned 83 persons, who could by
no means be provided for, because one morning very early all the ship was
covered with water and ready to sink, whereupon the better sort procured to
get into the boat, which with much ado they effected, affoording leave to none
to enter but themselves, lest they should all perish, and so better save some.
They which went up provided one great basket of biscuit, and a little fresh
water, wherewith they sustained themselves, until they came into the harbor
of Hauana 26. days after their Navigations, by which occasion many have
reported, that they had no other shallop, but the boat of the ship.

The 24. of October being Sunday, the Marquess called a Council again for
the concurrency of al business, wherein it was propounded to acquaint his
Majesty by some pinnesse or other aduenturer, with their present affairs, and
so to provide for the furnishing of the other ships for new Spain, and if
Captain Gasparo de Veruas returned in the mean while, then might the
occurrences and particulars of the scarches of the lost Admiral and Galeon of
Saint Margarite be advertised all together, according to the agreement of the
court and assembly.

The second of November died the General of the fleet, John de Lara Moran of a
Calenture, which over mastred him.

Don Pedro de Vrsula, was also sent into Florida, to make further search in the
Margarite and Admiral, for treasure and other things, while Captain Gaspar de
Vargas went to provide especial necessaries: but no man was permitted to
search the sides of the broken ships, which by this time were come to the
shore, but the licensed Officers.

The 18. of November Don Peter Vrsula, arrived at the Creeks, where the Galeons
were lost, and began his adventure for the finding of more treasure, God grant
a good success may crown his service.

FINIS.

