Supplications of SAINTS. A Book of Prayers: Divided into three parts. 1
Daniels devotion. prayers for Several days. 2 Paul, and his company. prayers
for several occasions. 3 David alone. prayers for several parties.
Wherein are three most excellent Prayers made by the late famous Queen
ELIZABETH.

A third Edition, enlarged.

APOC. 8. 4. The Prayers of the Saints went up before God.

LONDON: Printed for Nicholas Bourne, and are to sold at his shop at the
entering in of the Royal Exchange. 1612.

THE CONTENTS OF the several parts.
1 Daniels Devotion: Containing three Prayers for every day in the week: with
other private Prayers for Morning and Evening in number. 27. Page 2 Paul and
his Company: Containing Prayers for diverse Occasions, general and particular,
in number 23. Page 3 David alone: Containing Queen ELIZABETH'S prayers, and
other Prayers in the name of diverse parties of several estates: in number. 21.
Page
Prayers accompanying the several parts.
A threefold Paraphrase upon the LORDS Prayer, Nine short Prayers beginning
with the letters of the name Elizabeth. Two Prayers and meditations upon the
passions of the life and death of our savior Jesus. A general thanksgiving,
etc.
To the most Gracious Lady, Lady ELIZABETH, eldest daughter of our Sovereign
Lord the King.
BEing willing, amongst others of my Function, to perform some office to the
glory of Gods people, and considering with my self the times we live in,
together with our own frailties: I have in that regard (most virtuous Lady)
labored to compose a small volume of short Prayers and to contriue it into this
Method; assuring my self that nothing is or can be more acceptable to
Almighty God, then the hearty Prayers of his people.

In which Collection I have also inserted three most sweet Prayers, made by
the late Queen Elizabeth of famous memory. Which as upon her occasions she
powered forth before the Lord, (as it is written of King Solomon) kneeling on
her knees, and stretching of her hands to heaven: so I thought them most worthy
to be registered for perpetual memory, being compiled by so renowned a person
as her self, and carrying in matter pithe, in style Majesty, and in words true
devotion.

And understanding of your Graces love of virtue, with the humbleness of your
mind, and zeal of serving God, I am therefore enboldened in the forehead of
this my Myte, to stamp your royal Name: not doubting of your Graces
favorable allowance. Which being my humble suite and desire, and craving
pardon for this boldness, I cease not as heartily to pray that the manifold
graces of the most High may be multiplied upon your Estate, and your Grace long
preserved to the joy and comfort of your most royal Parents (our Sovereign
King and Queen) the good of Gods Church, and the final salvation of your own
soul.

From the Parsonage house of S. Mildreds in the Poultry London, Septem. 7. Anno
Dom. 1610. Your Graces most humbly Thomas Sorocold.

To all devout People.
CHRISTIAN brethren, I have bin persuaded to publish to your view and
charitable interpretation, this handful of flowers, picked, sorted, and tied
up into a bundle, according to my slender ability, both of judgment and
invention. I have presumed also to entitle them SVPPLICATIONS of Saints,
induced thereunto by three reasons. First, because they are squared to the
practice of the two holy Prophets, and the blessed Apostle, and Saint, Saint
Paul. Secondly, three of these prayers, (which are indeed praestantiores, far
more eminent and excellent then all the rest proceeding from humane conceit)
were used and penned by the late noble Queen of famous memory ELIZABETH, and
may justly challenge the Denomination, as the remains of her Devotion, who
living a Religious and Peerless PRINCE, was truly accounted (as the Wiseman
speaks) among the Children of God: Wisd. 5. 5.
and now being taken from us, has her portion among the Saints. The third
reason is, because I hope they may be the daily exercise of your selves, who
being called to the participation of Jesus Christ, embracing the Gospel of
God, and having received the Sacrament of life, have also your part in the
Communion of Saints.

I have not held such a course as happily other Collectors of the like
Devotions have done, and yet I hope you will not condemn me but upon good
deliberation. I confess, they are not mingled with discourse, for Commoneri
aut doceri nostra locutione non quaerit. August. de Mag. lib. 1.
God desires not to take admonition or information from our reports: neither
are they interlaced with Meditations, for the places of Scripture which I have
prefixed before every one, will minister matter of that Devotion: neither have
I made any of them very long In mill versus extendunt Orationem suam, quasi
apud Dominum, multitudo sermonum opus sit. Chrisost. hom. demuliere Caman.
to draw them into a thousand periods (as Chrysostom says) as if it were a
goodly work to multiply much speech before GOD: But I have made them somewhat
brief, aiming at that Rule which our Lord and Savior prescribed, saying:
After this manner pray ye. That is (says Chrysostom again) Collecte voluit
discipulos Orare. Chrisost. Orat. dom.
He appointed the Disciples to gather the Petitions of their prayers, into a
short sum.

Wherefore if ye find them worthy the name of prayers, use them: if otherwise,
yet take them as mean grounds of Prayer and meditation, to set your devout
thoughts a work: with this liberty, that where I have been defective, I
refer it to the judicious to supply: and where I have offered any thing vain
or offensive, I am content to admit a godly Corrector. But how ever it be, yet
let me advise you not to wax faint or slack in Prayer: for such as have
learned of the Lord Jesus (says Saint Augustine) true humility and meekness
of heart, Plus cogitando and orando profierunt, quam in legendo and audiendo.
Aug. Ep, 122.
receive more profit by meditation and prayer, then in reading and hearing:
whereby ye may be sure, the religious Father meant not to traduce either the
preaching of the word, or the reading of any thing that may make a man wise
unto salvation; but enforced the more reverend respect, and more frequent use
of this Ghostly exercise, that as men are commanded to be Doers of the Word,
Iam. 1. 22.
so they should be seekers of Grace to do it by, and not Hearers only, for so
says the Apostle, they should deceive themselves. For when Paul has planted,
and Apollos watered: when one has read a learned treatise, and another has
heard a fruitful Sermon, they must refer the rest to him that gives the
increase: and unto whom will he give it? to him that seeks, unto him that
knocks, to him that asks humbly and devoutly in his prayer. Follow then his
counsel which says, Oration ascendat, vt Gratia descendat.
Put up your Prayers to him, that he may send down his grace to you.

Again beloved, all is not peace, if ye consider of what Church we are, while
we be in this world. S. Paul tells us that we are in a Warfare, 2 Cor. 10. 4.
and that Prayer, is a principal piece of our Armor: Ephesians. 6. 12.
therefore his counsel is, Ephe. 6. 28.
Pray always, and watch thereunto. For we cannot (as Abishai said to David, 1 Samuel 26. 8.
concerning his blow) make so sure work at one time, that we shall not need to
come again: But rather, so many are our sins, as the hairs of our heads; so
many our enemies, as the stars in the sky, and so fierce and strong the
Tempter, as a roaring Lion; that as the Man of God was angry with the King of
Israel (because when he bad him smite the earth with his dart, 2 King. 13. 19.
he smote only thrice) who should have smiten five or six times, that he
might have been assured of the overthrow of his enemies: So GOD that bids us
continue in Prayer, Coloss. 4. 2.
will be angry with us, if we pray not again, and again, as the importunate
widow in the Gospel prosecuted her suite: Luke 18. 3
yea (to speak of Devotion as he does of compassion) if we pray not seven
times, Mat. 18. 22.
yea, seventy times seven times, that we may obtain a blessing. I speak to
them that have understanding, judge you what I say, and I shall pray unto the
Holy One of Israel in heaven, that your inspirations may be heavenly, your
desires holy, and your Prayers here fervent and frequent, and there acceptable
before the throne of his Majesty, to the relief of your necessities, and to
the setting forth of his glory in JESUS Christ, Amen.

The faults escaped in some copies amend thus.
Page Lin. for read 4 6 Father. Trinity. 103 19 hope. heart. 114 14 apparelled
appalled. 229 4 Mark Make. 327 6 be, begin.

THE most absolute prayer, and best Rule of all holy Petitions, is that which
our Lord and Savior taught his Disciples. A Prayer large for matter, short for
Phrase, and sweet for order, which, (I having thus paraphrased as you see)
thought not so good to insert it into this bundle, as to place it here alone
before them all: as a Supplication not appropriate to any one part, but
apperaining and giving life to all, and fit to conclude every one.

A Paraphrase upon the Lords Prayer.
OUR FATHER By right of Creation. Merit of Mercy. Gracious provision.

Which art in Heaven. The seat of thy Majesty. The inheritance of thy
children. The kingdom of bliss.

Hallowed be thy Name. By the thoughts of our hearts. By the words of our
mouths. By the works of our hands.

Thy Kingdom come. Of grace to inspire us. Of power to defend us. Of glory to
crown us.

Thy will be done. In weal and woe. In fullness and wane. In life and death.

In Earth, as it is in Heaven. In us, as it is in thine Angels. Willingly,
readily, faithfully. Without murmur, Let, Deceit.

Give us this day our daily Bread. For the nourishing of our bodies. For the
feeding of our Souls. The relief of all necessities.

And forgive us our debts. Whereby thou art dishonored. Our Neighbor wronged,
or, Our selves endangered.

As we forgive our debtors. That have hurt us in our bodies. Hindered us in our
goods. Wronged us in our good Name.

And lead us not into temptation. Of the wicked World. The entising flesh, or
The envious Devil.

But deliver us from evil. Forgive that is past. Remove that is present.
Prevent what is to come.

For thine is the Kingdom Power and glory. To rule and govern all. To command
and do all. In all, and by all, All in all.


Now and for ever. At this present. In this world, and In the world to come.

AMEN As thou say, So it is As thou promisest, So it shall be. As we pray,
So be it, Lord.

PRAYERS: Beginning with the letters of the name ELIZABETH.
E
EVery day, O Almighty GOD and heavenly Father, will I pray unto thee, to have
mercy upon me, and to keep me in thy grace, favor and love.

Every day will I give thanks unto thee, o Lord IESV, the Son of GOD, for
thy gracious redemption of my body and soul; from sin, death and hell.

Every day will I laud thy holy Name, o holy Ghost, Gods Spirit, hearts joy,
elects comforter: beseeching thee, blessed Trinity, in sacred unity, to
replenish my heart with all charitable desires, and heavenly inspirations
necessary to Salvation. Amen.

L
LAy too thy helping hand, o Lord, strengthen my weak condition, and power
thine oil of grace into my wounded heart, that I may be able to walk in the
ways of thy commandments without reproof, and receive comfort in all my
needs and necessities. Amen.

I
IT is pity and compassion, o LORD, alone, which must cover mine
unworthiness: therefore renouncing all merit in my self, I fly unto thee
for succor. Leave me not, o Lord, but prevent me with thy goodness, now and
evermore. Amen.

Z
ZEalous, O LORD, I am of thy truth. Wherefore I pray thee, sanctify my heart
to a right conversation in this world. Direct me by thy laws, that I never
step beyond the limits of my duty: and suffer me not to enter into any
action, which either may dishonor thee, or bring my life into infamy. Amen.

A
ADmit me, O merciful Lord, to thy gracious favor: many are the dangers of
this life, and I have no patron to defend me, but thee. Heaven is thine, and
the earth is thine; keep me on earth, as one of thine, and bring me to Heaven
to reign with thee. Amen.

B
BLessed Lord, I have sinned, but my pardon is with thee. If I were as sinful
as Marie Magdalen, as outrageous as the prodigal son, and as bashful to
come near, as the Publican, yet Jesus has made satisfaction for my sin:
therefore in mercy forgive me now and evermore. Amen.

E
ENter not into judgment with a poor creature, O LORD dust and ashes is my
state here, only I am created after thine Image, for a better world: destroy
not then the work of thine own hands, but show thy mercy and goodness unto
me, this day and evermore. Amen.

T
Think upon me, O LORD, thy word never failed, and thy compassions have no
end. By the virtue of the one, and the substance of the other, purify me from
all iniquity, and lead me into all truth this day and evermore. Amen.

H
Have mercy upon me, O LORD. accept my Prayers which I power out before thee,
and grant my requests. Mercifully prosper the things that I take in hand: save
me from mine enemies: a blessed life, and a happy end, good Lord send me.
AMEN.

Supplications OF SAINTS.

The first part.

Daniels devotion.

DAN. 6. 10. He kneeled upon his knees three times a day, and prayed. This
part contains private Prayers, For Morning, Noone and Evening, every day in
the week.

Also four other Prayers for Morning and Evening: and two Prayers upon the
Passion of our Lord Jesus.

Sunday.
Morning Prayer.
Psalm. 145. 10. All thy works praise thee, O Lord, and thy Saints shall bless
thee.

Psalm. 119. 170. O let my Supplication come before thee: deliver me according
to thy word.


OH LORD GOD, Almighty Father, and thou well-beloved Son of the Father, Jesus
Christ, with the holy Ghost, holy, blessed and glorious Trinity; eternal God,
Lord of the Sabbath, and the fountain of all wisdom. I do not present these
my Supplications before thee for my righteousness, but for thy great mercies.
I trust in them truly, without diffidence: I trust in them only, without any
other plea: I trust in them always without wearines, and therefore I beseech
thee, grant me merciful audience. Mercifully hear me, O Lord, mercifully
hear me O Lord God. First, I extol thy infinite goodness and mercy, together
with thine eternal wisdom and truth, that thou have protected me all this
night past, and made me to rest and sleep so quietly and securely under the
shadow of thy wings. And (I beseech thee, from the bottom of my heart) to
protect me this day with thy mighty hand from all dangers, both of body and
soul. Give thy holy Angels charge over me, to keep me in all my ways:
drive away from me the evil angel and deadly enemy; remove all offenses of
this world. Mortify and kill in me all carnal lusts, unlawful pleasures,
and evil affections, that they may have no dominion or reign in my mortal
body, and give me a contrite heart to bewail my former life, and let me find
comfort in thy mercy, for the remission of my sins.

Sanctify me (O holy Father) this holy day, with thine especial grace, that I
may honor thee as a Creator, love thee as a redeemer, and expect thee as a
Savior, and that I may have modest carriage in my behavior, true devotion in
my Prayers, and reverent attention to hear thy sacred word; and so unlock the
ears of mine understanding, that I may observe, learn and embrace, such
things as are necessary for me, to the better confirmation of my faith in
Christ Jesus, and the salvation of my soul by his blood. Raise me, O Father,
by the power of thy sons resurrection, from sin and iniquity, and give me
spiritual, rest in the communion of Saints, that hereafter when I shall leave
this world, I may keep the everlasting Sabbath with thee in the Kingdom of
Heaven.

Behold (O Lord) I knock at the door of thy mercy, for all these graces, with
all the powers of my strength, soul, and mind: beseeching thee to continue
unto me the right use of all the powers and faculties of the same, and to send
thy holy Spirit to bear witness to my Spirit, that I am thy child, and shall
be heir of thy Kingdom, with Christ Jesus our Lord, and through his merits,
for whose sake, I beseech thee, to grant all those things all that I have
prayed for. Amen.

Noone.
A prayer for the Ministers of the Word.
O Lord Jesus, which have commanded us to pray for laborers to the Harvest, we
beseech thee, send painful Ministers into thy Church. Endue them with such
wisdom and speech, as the adversaries may not be able to gainsay. Open unto
them the door of doctrine, give them the spirit of boldness, that they may
faithfully dispense thy Mysteries, and speak thy Word freely. Take away all
contentions and differences from among them. Make them examples to those that
believe, in soundness of Doctrine, and pureness of life. And because the rule
of our life depends upon thy word in their mouths, bless them with all graces
fit for their calling, that we may give thanks unto thee, and praise thy Name
for evermore, Amen.

Sunday.
Evening Prayer.
Genesis 18. 27. 30. Behold, I have taken upon me to speak unto my Lord. Oh let
not my Lord be angry, and I will speak.
OH eternal God and merciful Father, from the bottom of my heart I give thee
continual thanks that of thy mercy thou have nourished me, preserved me by
thy power, and governed me by thy word, and holy Spirit this day, and all this
week: yea, and at all other times of my life hitherto: and I most humbly
beseech thee, in the merits of Christ Jesus my Savior, not to respect mine
unworthiness, but to cover and bury all my misdeeds in his grave, which I have
either wittingly or ignorantly done; especially, O Lord, those which in this
week past I have committed in thought, word, and deed, against thy Divine
Majesty.

Water, o Lord, the seed ^f thy holy word, which I ^aue received this day, ^ith
the dew of thy grace, that with sound iudge^ent and godly devotion ^may put in
practice such things as I know to be ^leasing to thy divine Ma^estie; and that
my heart ^eing always obedient to ^hy Commandments, and ^he fear of mine
enemies taken away from me, I ^ay pass my time in ^eace and holiness, through
^hy gracious protection.

Be merciful unto me, ^O Lord) forgive the evil that I have committed, supply
the good which I have omitted; restore what I have lost, heal my sores, cleanse
my filthiness, lighten my darkness, and alter the whole state of my mind,
that nothing may be wanting to good purposes in me.

O LORD, stretch out thy hand over me, and of thy wonted goodness defend me
this night from all evil: keep me from fearful and wicked dreams,
unprofitable cares, vain cogitations and outward violence; preserve my body
from eternal death: reserve my soul from everlasting damnation. Compass me
about, on every side with thy grace inwardly and outwardly: that when I shall
either take care for things of this life, or carefully seek for those things
which appertain unto the Kingdom of Heaven, I may hear the voice of thy holy
spirit, sounding in my heart, from the mouth of the Apostle; Philip. 4. 19.
My God shall fulfill all your necesstties, through his riches, with glory in
Jesus Christ. Grant, O Lord, these and all other graces meet for me, even for
Jesus Christ's sake, my only Lord and Savior. In whose Name I further pray
unto thee, saying that Prayer which thy Son in his Gospel has taught us, Our
Father which art in Heaven, etc.

Monday.
Morning prayer.
Psalm. 66. 20.
Blessed be God, which has not turned away my prayer, nor his mercy from me.
O Heavenly Father, and Almighty God, which beyond all measure have unlocked
the treasures of thy favor and blessing unto me, from time to time: I most
heartily thank thee forth sweet sleep and comfortable rest which I have
taken this night, through thy gracious preservation of me, and now (O Lord) I
consecrate my soul and body to thy service this day again, and ever
hereafter, desiring that my prayer early now this Morning, may have access
unto thee.

O Lord, I pray thee bless, preserve, and keep me this day, by thy power from
sin, shame and all evil, and so direct me with thy grace, that all my
thoughts, words, and works, may please thee. Stand, I beseech thee, between me
and mine enemies, bodily and ghostly. And as thou have now raised up my body
from a sound and heavy sleep: so deliver my soul from the dead sleep of
sin, and the darkness of this world. Help, O Lord, the creature which
depends upon thy providence only. Further my business, that I may truly
walk without sin, and safely work without danger in that vocation whereunto
thou have called me in this life.

O Lord Jesus have mercy upon me miserable sinner, pardon and forgive me all
my sins, negligences, and ignorances. Remember not mine obstinacies, and have
compassion upon mine infirmities. Set thy holy Passion, Cross, and Death,
between thy judgment and my Soul, both now and at the hour of death. Of thy
mercy, O Lord, strengthen my weakness, and mortify my corrupt nature,
enclining to swearing, wantonness, lying, or any other sin whatsoever; and
grant that I may so walk in thy ways, by the light of thy holy word, that no
worldly vanity bewitch me to sell my self to work wickedness.

O holy Father, grant me a sound mind, and the right use of my senses
continually, that knowing what I do, and practicing what I know, I may
worthily lament the wickedness of my life, and ever upon my unfeigned
repentance, feel thy comforts in my soul, and never forget the desire of the
life to come. O Lord, bless me in all the passages of this life, and after
death, restore the same body and soul to life eternal. Hear my prayers, O
Lord God, for Jesus Christ's sake my only Lord and Savior, Amen.

Noone.
A Prayer to God the Father.
O Merciful God and loving Father, on whose providence we depend for all our
necessaries, we thank thee for our royal creation after thine own Image,
and all other good graces now and ever bestowed upon us. Give us grace, we pray
thee, so to live as becomes thy children, in all holiness and righteousness.
Incline our hearts to thy law, and not to covetousness: open our eyes that we
may behold the secret things of thy Law. Make us fruitful in all good works,
forgive us our sins, and wash us in the blood of thy Son; cleanse our
hearts, and renew our minds to thy holy will: prosper the works of our hands,
and bring us safely from all dangers to the end of this day, for Jesus Christ's
sake. Amen.

Monday.
Evening Prayer.
Psalm. 55. 17.
Evening and Morning, and at Noone, will I pray and cry aloud, and he shall
hear me.
ALmighty God, which give infinite occasions unto every creature to praise
thy holy Name, I come unto thee with the holy Prophet, that mine eyes may
prevent the night-watches, beseeching thee to accept this mine Evening
Sacrifice of praise and thanks, for the depth of thy goodness, which I am not
able to express, and the Sea of thy mercies, which have ouer-flowed this day
to my great comfort. Season, O Lord, my senses inward and outward with the Salt
of thy grace, that with a sanctified heart, I may make a godly use of all those
good things which I have heard, seen, or read this day. And further, lighten
mine eyes that I sleep not in death, nor walk in darkness spiritual or
corporal, to endanger either my body or my soul.

O Lord, let mine eyes sleep, and enjoy that moderate recreation which thou
have appointed for my wearisome condition, but let my soul continually watch
unto thee, to attend thy coming, that when my sleep has not been
unmeasurable, to please excessiuely the ease of my flesh, I may be the better
disposed to thy service to morrow.

Preserve me Lord, from all uncleanness, both of body and soul, from all
dangers that walk in the night: and keep me from all temptations of him that
is the prince of darkness. Forgive me the sins and offenses which I have
committed this day, in thought, word and deed, against thee, or my neighbor.
Give me grace to water my Couch with tears, in unfeigned repentance of my sins
past, and so to pass the residue of my life, that in regard of thy justice, I
may retain a holy fear, to stand always in awe of thee: and in regard of thy
mercy conceive sure hope never to despair.

O Lord, keep me this night, both in body and soul, that I may joyfully rise
again, be thankful unto thee, and diligently walk in my vocation and
calling, to the glory of thy holy Name, and the commodity of my neighbor, for
Jesus Christ's sake, our only Lord and Savior. Amen.

Tuesday.
Morning Prayer.
Psalm 90 14.
Satisfy us early with thy mercy, that we may rejoice and be glad in all our
days.
O Blessed LORD GOD, great in power, fearful in Judgment, and rich in
mercy: which bindest, and no man loses; and loosest, and no man binds; I
yield thee most humble and hearty thanks, for that of thy fatherly goodness,
thou have vouchsafed me this last nights sleep in peace and rest: and again,
loosing the bonds wherewith I was tied, have given me power to see this Morning
light. Now, O Lord, (I beseech thee) power upon me this day, the dew of thy
blessing, that through the operation of thy gracious beams, I may bud forth,
and bear the fruits of true faith in my life and conversation. Continue thy
goodness and mercy toward me, and by thy power raise me from the deep
sleep of all unrighteousness, discharge me from the works of darkness, and
clothe me with the Armor of light, that I may walk honestly as in the day,
and live soberly, righteously, and godly, in this present world.

Grant me, o Lord, true understanding and knowledge of thy word, which is the
Glass of thy will. Increase in me all godly desires, together with true
contrition of heart, that I may unfeignedly despise the pleasures of this world,
and with hearty repentance be converted unto thee. Send thy holy Angel to guide
me, and keep me in all my ways; and prosper the work of my hands, that I
never fail in my vocation to do good, and eschew evil.

O Lord, I beseech thee, preserve and keep my senses safe and sound, that I be
neither corrupted by prosperity, nor cast down by adversity; nor be too
fearful of thy judgments, or too bold upon thy mercy: But grant me grace, O
merciful Lord, that I may apprehend all things that come from thee with a
religious, contented mind, and in the end of my days, by a lively Faith, may
joyfully arrive in the Land of promise, the Kingdom of HEAVEN, through the
merits of JESUS CHRIST, my only Savior and Redeemer, Amen.

Noone.
A Prayer to God the Son.
O Blessed LORD Jesus Christ, Son of the eternal God, blessed be thy name
for our redemption. Great was thy love, sore was thy Passion: Print in our
minds, we beseech thee, the continual memory thereof, that we may love thee
which so louedst us, and evermore praise thee that have bought us at so dear a
price. Reject not our prayers which we offer to be pesented to thy Father, but
mercifully help us, and heal all our infirmities: increase our faith, and
teach us obedience, forgive us our offenses, and hide us in thy wounds from thy
fathers just wrath. Make good thy promises unto us for the world to come, and
enable us with thy Grace for the performance of all thy Commandments: Prosper,
O Lord, our handy work, and bring us safely to the end of this day, for thy
truth, and for thy Names sake, Amen.

Tuesday.
Evening Prayer.
Psalm. 46. 5.
Happy is he that has the GOD of Jacob for his help, whose hope is in the
Lord his God.
O Most holy Father and gracious GOD, which give unto all sorts of men the
cheereful light of the day, that in thine assistance they may follow their
honest vocations: and likewise the silent night, that then they may return
thanks unto thee for thy benefits, and so rest their wearied limbs, and busied
minds: I sinful creature give thee thanks for the total sum of all this
thy goodness, whereof I have been this day partaker through thy mercy.

O Lord, look not upon mine unworthiness, folly, and wickedness, but appease
thy just anger, conceived against me, and forgive what has been amiss in
me this day, even for his sake who is thy well-beloved Son, and my dear
Advocate. Root up the thorns of mine evil inclinations and affections, and in
their place make the fruits of virtue spring. Inflame my heart with the desire
of heavenly love, that I may keep thy commandments with zeal as hot as
fire, loving thee above all things, and mine neighbor as my self.

Give me grace, o Lord, to serve thee in true faith and holiness, all the days
of my life, and to overcome my mortal enemies, the desires of the world, the
pleasures of the flesh, and the suggestions of the wicked spirit, remembering my
promise made to thee in Baptism, for the performance whereof I depend only
upon thy holy spirit. Let thine Angels pitch their Tents round about this house
for defense, now in the time of this darkness, and grant that this nights
sleep may be quiet unto me without grief or trouble. Preserve me and mine both
in body and soul, from al dangers which may come either by foolish dreams,
noisome spirits, or uncleanness of corrupt Nature. Waken me again, O Lord, in
due time, and let me behold the light of the next day, prepare me to thy
service every day in all truth and sincerity, that when I have run the race of
this life, thou may be pleased to call me to be partaker of a better, that
so I may live and reign with thee evermore, through Jesus Christ my only Lord
and Savior, Amen.

Wednesday.
Morning prayer.
Psalm 143. 8.
Cause me to hear thy loving kindness in the Morning, for in thee do I
trust; cause me to know the way wherein I should walk: for I lift up my soul
unto thee.
O Blessed GOD and merciful father, the Sun of the world, never going down,
which bring forth, nourishest and refreshest all things, both in heaven and
earth: I most humbly thank thee that thou have preserved me this night, and
ever hitherto under thy protection, suffering me to live until this present
hour: that thou have succored and defended me in all my needs and
necessities, and have provided so graciously and mercifully for me. Now I
beseech thee (o Lord) not to abridge the hand of thy mercy toward me, but let
the spring of thy grace flowing from the sanctuary of thy goodness, arise to all
the parts of my soul, in such proportion, as may be for thy glory and my
comfort.

Mortify (O my God) all corrupt affections in me, and pardon my innumerable
sins. Fill me this day with thy grace, that I may spend it to the honor of
thy Name. Set a Watch before my mouth, and order my lips, that I may utter
nothing unadvisedly, either before thee or men. Keep my senses within their
limits, direct my will to that which is good, and order my judgment, for the
accomplishing of those things that appertain to my vocation.

O Lord, defend me from all shame and disgraces: shield me from al violence,
and guide me safely from all perilous and dangerous ways. Make me as thy
Spouse, inwardly and outwardly prepared by thy grace, to be presented a pure
Virgin unto Christ. Display upon me thy banners of love, spread abroad in my
heart by the Holy Ghost: that with the eye of Faith, I may behold and see the
Cross of Christ, and his sacred wounds, the comfortable price of my
redemption; and stand so fast in this Christian warfare, that nothing make me
yield to the temptations of the Devil. O Lord, so strengthen me with thy
grace in this vale of misery, that all my outward members may follow the
direction of my heart, and my heart being sincerely dedicated unto thee, I may
serve thee in holiness and Righteousness, all the days of my life, for Jesus
Christ's sake, my only Savior and Redeemer, Amen.

Noone.
A Prayer to God the holy Ghost.
O Holy Spirit, the Author and giver of life, which have guided me thus far
this day, and guarded me from manifold evils; I praise thee, I bless thee, I
glorify thee for thy great mercy. Continue thy goodness toward me, I beseech
thee, though I deserve it not: inspire my mind with holy motions, convert me
from evil, confirm me in all that is good. Comfort me, thou comforter, when I
shall have most need. Clear the storms of temptation, and inflame the
coldness of my zeal, with the fire of thy love. Lead me into all truth, and
reclayme me when I go astray: Oh prosper the works of my hands; bring me
safely from all dangers to the end of this day, for Jesus Christ's sake, Amen.

Wednesday.
Evening Prayer.
Psalm. 40. ^^
Withhold not thy tender mercies from me o Lord: let thy loving kindness and
thy truth always preserve me.
O Lord God, thou who art my life, the length and strength of my days; I most
heartily thank thee for keeping me this day from manifold dangers, both of
Body and Soul, which might justly have fallen upon me. Now I humbly beseech
thee, bring not into judgment what I have done amiss this day, but mercifully
pardon the escapes and offenses of the same. Forgive and forget (O LORD) all
mine idle and vain words, and impute not my foolishnes unto me. Destroy in me
the kingdom of sin, the power of Satan, the desires of the world, and the
vain delights of the flesh.

Lord, into thy hands I commend my self, even soul and body this night and
ever. Lighten my darkness that I sleep not in death, and defend me that no
evil happen unto me. Take not thy holy Spirit from me, but continue the
motions thereof in my heart, that when as the Tempter shall come with his
assaults, I may be furnished with the shield of faith to quench his fiery darts.

Comfort me (o Lord) in all those things wherein I have been any ways
dismayed this day. Confirm my weakness, and grant that this nights sleep
may be sweet and healthful to my body, and a profitable memorial of that
sleep, which at my last end in that great night, shall make a separation
between my body and soul. Let thine unspeakable mercy preserve me, thy
endless sweetness rejoice me, thy heavenly truth strengthen me, thy knowledge
embolden me, and thy goodness keep me, now and for evermore, from mine enemies,
visible and invisible: that I may awake in the Morning in perfect sense, and
good health, and for the same be thankful unto thee, and carefully betake me
to my vocation and calling, for Jesus Christ's sake, my only Lord and Savior.
Amen.

Thursday.
Morning Prayer.
Psalm 145. 18.
The Lord is nigh unto all them that call upon him: to all that call upon him in
truth.
O Lord God, which art the light that no man can attain unto, and yet
lightenest every one that comes into this world, and mercifully driuest away
the darkness of the night, and shadow of death: I praise thy holy Name, and
thank thee that thou have vouchsafed me this favor, to pass this night in so
comfortable rest, and to be brought again safe and sound, unto the morning
light. Now (I beseech thee) by the blessed Incarnation, and holy Nativity of
thy Son Jesus Christ (the blessed day star that appeared to the world) let
thy mercy this day arise upon me, and let the day star of thy light shine in my
heart, that I be not carried away through the power of darkness, to spend this
day after mine own mind and pleasure, but that I may carefully follow thy
fatherly will revealed in thy holy word.

Increase in me (O Lord) the gift of faith and hope, to believe in thee and thy
promises made in Christ, that neither by mine own negligence, nor the
infirmity of the flesh, nor the grieuousnes of temptation, I be driven away
from faith in his blood. Disperse O LORD, the thick mistes and clouds of mine
iniquities, and wash them away in the blood of thy Sons passion. Give me a
will to work duly in my vocation this day, that I be not idle; and order my
skill with the rule of thy wisdom, that I be not unfruitful. Bless my body
and soul, that none evil or harm come unto me, and my memory and senses,
that they pass not the limits which thou have appointed them.

O Lord, lighten my mind to look upon good things only, inflame my heart with
the love of them, and conduct me by thy grace to attain them: that as thou
have awaked my body from sleep; so my Soul may be raised from the slumber of
sin, and darkness of this World, and they both being companions and fellows
in the way of godliness, may be made partakers of everlasting life at the
latter day, through Jesus Christ, our only Lord and Savior, Amen.

Noone.
A Prayer for Sobriety.
O Lord God, which have commanded us to be sober, and watch, direct my paths
in the right way to all sobriety, spiritual and corporal. Suffer me not this
day, nor any other to abuse thy good creatures, or turn thy grace into
wantonness: let me not be overcome with surfeiting and drunkenness, but avoid
all superfluity, using all temperance and moderation, both in meats and
drinks. Grant me a stayed mind, and a lowly conceit of my self: Bless
me, that I may be wise, but to sobriety, that I may live soberly,
righteously, and godly in this present world for Jesus Christ's sake, Amen.

Thursday.
Evening Prayer.
Psalm 145 9.
The Lord is good to all, and his tender mercies are over all his works.
O Lord God, my most loving and merciful Father, great in mercy, and constant
in truth: I do acknowledge my bounden duty of thankfulness unto thee, for
thy manifold graces and benefits imparted unto me this day, though I be
unable to recount them, and far more unworthy to receive them. Nevertheless,
in full assurance and confidence of thy love to me in Christ Jesus, I commit
now into thy hands again this night, my soul and body, and all my senses, my
thoughts, affections, words, and deeds: all within me, and all without me,
my faith and my continuance in the same, beseeching thee of thy mercy to keep
them day and night blameless, and undefiled against the day of thy coming.

Pardon, I pray thee, and forgive me all the sins which this day I have
either wretchedly effected, or wickedly imagined against thine honor, and the
good of my Neighbor. Lay not the frailty of my younger years unto my charge.
And for the better confirmation of thy gracious pardon, I humbly entreat thee
(o Lord) to annexe unto thy Grant, the power of thy grace, to attend upon me,
that I may this night quietly take my rest, under the shadow of thy wings, void
of all fear, spiritual darkness, danger, and despair. Strike my heart (o
Lord) with thy fear, that fearing I may escape those things which thou
threatnest, and give me the comfort of thy salvation, that in loving thee, I
may obtain those things which thou promisest: and when the darkness of this
mortal life, (as the darkness of the day now does) shall come, grant me (O
LORD) a watchful heart: willingly disposed, and thoroughly enabled with thy
grace to abandon these transitory nights and days, and depart hence in the
peace of a good conscience, into thine everlasting rest, through Jesus Christ,
my only Savior and Redeemer: In whose name I further pray unto thee, saying
that form of prayer that he that taught us, Our Father which art in Heaven,
etc.

Friday.
Morning Prayer.
Psalm 73 25.
Whom have I in heaven but thee? and there is none upon earth that I desire
besides thee.
O Almighty Lord my most loving Creator, and redeemer, I thy unworthy servant,
give thee humble and hearty thanks, for thy gracious protection and
preservation of me in health, wealth, and safety, this night past, and
evermore: beseeching thee so to direct me by thy holy Spirit, that I may live
and walk this day according to thy godly will and pleasure, in all harmless
manner to the profit of my neighbor; and in all holiness, to the glory of thy
blessed name.

Lighten my mind, O Lord, that I may clearly see those things that please
thee. Grant unto me the knowledge and true understanding of thy word, that
without all vanity or curiosity, I may know what is thy holy will and
pleasure in all things, and also express in my living those things which I
know. On bended knees (O Lord I beseech thee) reject me not utterly for mine
offenses, neither take thy grace and assistaunce from me. Bless my judgment,
and all my senses, that no sudden motion make me to conceive any grief so far
as to forfeit my reasonable understanding.

Bless (O Lord) my labors and travails in this world, that I may have
wherewithal to relieve my necessities upon all occasions. Indue me with thy
fear, an humble mind, godly sorrow, and a good conscience, that I may carry an
honest and upright meaning, to deal justly and truly with all men.

O Lord, temper and order all things unto me in such peaceable course, that I
be never further tempted and proved, then thou will make me able to bear, and
so help me in the same, as may be most to thy glory. Give me patience against
all prouocations, and faith in all temptations; forgive me all those things
whereunto I have yielded contrary to thy commandment, and so arm me with
thy holy Spirit, that I may walk more warily, and more wisely all the days of
my life, for Jesus Christ's sake, mine only Savior and Redeemer. Amen.

Noone.
A Prayer for Chastity.
ALmighty Lord, which know that in our flesh dwells no good, and yet have
made our bodies the Temple of the Holy Ghost, give me grace this day and ever,
to crucify the flesh, with all the affections and desires thereof, and to bring
it in subjection unto the Spirit. Quench the flames of all carnal desires in
me, abate the heat of lust, and let me not be led away by any wanton company.
I know my members are the members of Christ, sanctify me (I beseech thee) that
whether I be married, or live single, I may avoid all uncleanness, and always
know how to possess my Vessel in holiness, and not in the lust of
Concupiscence, for Jesus Christ's sake, Amen.

Friday.
Evening Prayer.
Psalm 73. 28.
It is good for me to draw near unto God: I have put my trust in the Lord God,
that I may declare all thy works.
O Eternal GOD, my merciful and loving Father in Christ Jesus our Lord, I
render unto thy Majesty due praise and thanks for thy fatherly goodness, in
protecting me this day, from many damages and dangers which might have
happened unto me, and now (I beseech thee) to keep and protect me this night:
me, and all those that depend upon me, that we be neither disquieted by
dreams, nor afraid of any terror. Have mercy upon me (O God) have mercy on
me, and of thy wonted goodness, forgive me all my transgressions, especially
those which I have committed this day against thy holiness: show me the light
of thy countenance, and let me find comfort in the remorse of my conscience.
Bless me (o Lord) and water me with the dew of thy blessings, and let the
drops of thy sons blood, shed for my sins, (and yet crying for mercy)
distill into my heart by a lively faith, for the comfort of my soul, and the
amendment of my life.

I beseech thee, O Lord, take from me all manner of darkness, misbeliefe,
infidelity, carnal lusts, and affections; and so strengthen me with thy
grace, that the Bark of my weak Faith sink not, nor I be ouerturned by the
storms of Satan, the waves of wickedness, nor the tempest of a biting
Conscience. Enter thy judgments in the Tables of my heart, that I may be
content to spare of my ordinary sleep, and be more earnest upon the
meditation of thy sacred word, then the kings of the Nations have been to
turn over their records in the night season. Be mindful of me, when I
happen to forget my self, and think upon me sleeping and waking.

Grant me (o Lord) this freedom and liberty, that I may lie down in peace
and rest, and rise up again in due time safely, to the honor and glory of thy
Name, and the managing of my worldly business in thy fear, through Jesus
Christ, our only Lord and Savior, Amen.

Saturday.
Morning Prayer.
Psalm ^^. 8.
The Lord will command his loving kindness in the day time, and in the night
season his song shall be with me, and my Prayer unto the God of my life.
OH IMMORTAL and everlasting God, Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, I thy
unworthy servant beseech thee, to accept this my Morning Sacrifice of praise
and thanks, due unto thee alone, for protecting me with thy mighty hand, from
the fears of this night past, and refreshing my weary body with natural and
kindly rest: and hereunto (I humbly entreat thee) to join thy further grace,
for the rousing up of my slothful and sluggish nature, that I may arise from
sin, and walk in the way of thy Commandments with all cheerfulness this
day and evermore.

Pardon (O Lord I beseech thee) the evils, and abominations of my life and
conversation. Cut off the roots, boughs, leaves, and fruits, of the evil tree
of my heart: put away the inward lusts, doubtings, and denying of thy
providence, with all those gross and out-ward sins which I have committed
daily against thee: and give me a sure hope of everlasting life, that always,
while I am in this world, I may have the taste and feeling of it in my heart.

Give me grace, O Lord, to shun and avoid all those things which thou either
hate, or have no pleasure in. Take from me a proud look, and a deceitful
tongue, bloody hands, and a heart any ways given to wicked imaginations. Keep
me this day from all perils that may come unto my soul and body, either by
Satan himself or his Ministers. Bless my senses and understanding, that in
all things I may hear and speak reason: and suffer me not (I beseech thee) to
speak, think, or do any thing this day, but that which may please thee, be
answerable to my vocation, and tend unto the advancement of thy glory, and the
health of my soul.

O Lord, I pray thee, send thy blessing upon all my labors, and give me a mind
to help them that have need, according to my ability. And so prepare my
heart in all my business, that I may always begin it in thy Name, and go
forward in thy fear, and finish it with thy blessing: that whatsoever I shall
do, it may prosper. Grant this (O Lord) for Jesus Christ's sake, our only
Mediator and Redeemer. Amen.

Noone.
A Prayer for Patience.
O God which art the God of Patience, and consolation to the Patient, stay my
unbridled nature this day and ever, from all discontentednes of mind, and
furious actions. Give me grace to take in good part whatsoever does befall me,
and let my heart acknowledge it to be the Lords doing, and not by chance. Quiet
my mind in the manifold disquietings of this world, and open mine eyes that I
may see help in thee. Prevent all that is against me, and all that falls
out, turn to the best for me. Thy will be done, and grant me patience for
Jesus Christ's sake. Amen.

Saturday.
Evening Prayer.
Psalm 139. 14.
I will praise thee, for I am fearfully and wonderfully made. Marvelous are
thy works, and that my soul knows right well.
Honor and praise be unto thee, Oh Lord most high and immortal GOD, for thy
gracious goodness and mercy extended to me this day, and always,
notwithstanding all my wickednesses which cry daily against me, and mine
enemies that would swallow me up. I beseech thee (o Lord) continue thy
gracious and merciful favor unto me, let the shadow of thy wings be my
cover, thy Holy Ghost my comfort, and thy holy Name my Rock and defense,
against all fear and trembling which may overtake me, this night or any other
time. Forgive me all that is past, even all the evil that I have done or
thought, and grant that I may ever hereafter serve and please thee in
holiness and newness of life. Be thou my shield and defense against the
suggestions, illusions, and temptations of Satan; and all the allurements and
baits of the flesh, with all alterations, prouocations, changes and chances of
the world. Sanctify me with thy grace, that my body may be kept undefiled, as
the Temple of the holy Ghost, and my soul defended, cherished, and tendered,
as the apple of thine eye.

O good GOD, the Sun is gone down, the Web of this day is almost spun, and
the night at hand. Bless me (I beseech thee) this night, and take me into thy
custody, save me waking, keep me sleeping, that I may both sleep and wake in
peace and safety. Prepare me (O Lord) for the day following, the holy sabbath,
the hallowed day of thy rest, and my great duty: and then so unlock the
mysteryes of thy holy word unto me, that I may therein learn the lessons of
thy glorious Majesty, and mine own mortality.

Grant me (o Lord) such grace as I may make a right use of all things, and
that the hearing of thy word, and the good examples of thy servants, agreeing
with the rule of thy word, may be both as a bridle to restrain me from sin,
and a spur to set me forward to all holiness of life, and conversation in
this world. O Lord grant me these and all other good things, even for Jesus
Christ's sake my only Lord and Savior. Amen.

A Prayer for the Morning.
O Lord God, most mighty and merciful Father, I unworthy creature acknowledge
mine own vileness, natural corruption and abominable sins, many times
committed against thee: I beseech thee admit me to render thee my bounden
thanks, for thy manifold mercies extended toward me this night past, and all
other times of my life: for my rest and sleep, my food, and raiment, my health,
peace and liberty, and the hope of a better life in the merits of thy Sons
bitter passion. Now dear Father, I beseech thee to continue thy merciful
favor unto me this day and ever hereafter. Forgive me all mine unthankfulness,
unkindness and prophanenes toward thee, thy word and service, or toward my
Neighbor. Set all my sins over to that reckoning, which thy Son Jesus
Christ, my Lord, has made up for them upon his Cross; never lay any of them
to my charge, but freely forgive and forget all.

O Lord strike my heart with thy rod, that I may always be furnished for a true
and unfeigned repentance; that I may not be blinded in my sins, to delight in
them, or to think that thou will not respect my untowardness; but that I may
be weary of them, grieve for them, and by all means possible strive to attain
to a true mortification of the flesh, and so live holily, and justly, and
soberly in this present world.

O good God, I humbly entreat thee, leave me not to my self, mine own lusts
and desires: but assist me with thy grace to hearken unto thee and thy word,
and to pass my time in fear and trembling, as an obedient child of so good a
Father.

Bless me Lord this day, and prosper all that I shall take in hand; let me
have all my directions from thy will, and the success from thy merciful hand.
Give me a competent stay for the maintenance of this mortal life. Continue
may food, and raiment, health, peace and liberty, that I may with a quite mind
and thankful heart pass my time in this vale of misery, doing good to all
men after mine ability, without disgrace to my self, or harm to any one.

Grant these good things most merciful God, and all other needful graces,
not only unto me, but unto all thy dear children in the world, to the good of
our souls and bodies, for Jesus Christ's sake, in whose name I further call
upon thee, as he has taught us, in his Gospel, saying, Our Father which art
in Heaven, etc.

A Prayer for the Evening.
O Eternal GOD, and most merciful Father, I do confess against my self
that my heart and hands are full of all filthiness and sins whatsoever, and I
am altogether unworthy to speak unto thee, or to come near thy presence.
Nevertheless being so much bound unto thee, as this day past, and all other
times of my life do witness, I offer unto thy holiness (by the hands of Jesus
Christ my Mediator) my humble duty of praise and thanksgiving for my creation,
election, redemption, vocation and sanctification, with all other good graces
appertaining to this life, or that which is to come. And namely, o Lord my
tongue and lips shall glorify thee, sitting above the Cherubins, for
preserving me this day past from so many miseries and casualties whereinto I
might justly have fallen, if thou would have entered into judgment with me.
But Lord thou art merciful and passest by my offenses, to win me by thy long
sufferance: I beseech thee make me thankful for all thy mercies.

O Lord, pardon and forgive me all my sins: grant me every day more and
more the sight and feeling of them, with hearty sorrow and unfeigned repentance
for the same. Give me grace to believe all the sweet promises that thou have
made unto me in Christ Jesus, both for the remission thereof, and the hope of
a better life: strengthen me from above with thy mighty hand, to walk in every
good way without fear, and to bring forth the fruits of a true and lively
faith in my life and conversation, all the days of my life.

Arm me O Lord with thy grace and holy spirit against all the common
corruptions of the world, the temptations of the Devil, and the allurements of
the flesh: and settle my mind to the continual exercise of devout prayer,
with the hearing of thy sacred word watching for thy coming both public and
private.

Continue thy goodness toward me, in providing for me such things as are
necessary for the maintenance of this present life, and bless the same under
my hand: that the little which I have may be increased, and the increase may
serve, as well to furnish my necessary uses, as to minister unto the
necessities of others, according to mine ability.

Keep me, Lord, this night from all evils, which may happen either unto my
body, or my soul. Extend thy goodness toward all those that depend upon me,
or I on them. Give me quiet sleep and rest, and when I shall awake, let all my
thoughts and cogitations be holy meditations on thee and thy law. Bless me O
Lord, all the nights and days of my life, and at the end thereof send me a
blessed departure, and afterward a joyful resurrection unto life eternal.

Grant me these good things most merciful father, and all other needful
graces, for Jesus Christ's sake, in whose name I further call upon thee, as he
has taught us in his Gospel, saying, Our Father, etc.

Short Prayers for Morning and Evening, by I. F. 1581.
A short Prayer for the Morning.
GOD of Light, who have preserved me, and brought me from the darkness of
this night, shine into my heart this day and ever, by thy blessed and holy
spirit, that I may be enlightened, and led into all Truth, that I may walk
faithfully, as the child of light before thee, casting away the works of
darkness, in the place that thou have set me, doing and performing diligently
those things that thou have required of me, either to the praise of thy name,
or to the comfort of my Brethren* Grant this good Lord, I humbly beseech thee,
for Jesus Christ's sake. Amen.

A short Prayer for the Evening.
I Thank thee O Father, for thy gracious protection of me this day. I beseech
thee keep me also this night under thy wing, that I resting in thee, may find
such comfort and strength both in body and soul, as may enable me to the
performance of my duty. Grant this I humbly beseech thee for Jesus Christ's sake
my only savior, in whose name I further call upon thee, as he has taught us,
in his Gospel, saying, Our Father which art in Heaven, etc.

A Prayer to God the Father, as a Preparatiue to the Meditation ensuing.
O Gracious Lord, almighty and everlasting God, the father of my Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ; who was borne at Bethlem in great poverty: Grant me, I
beseech thee, a room among the wise men of the East, to offer the poor talent
of my weak devotion unto him all the days of my life: even a true Faith, for
pure Gold, the perfume of devout Prayer, for sweet Frankincense, and hearty
Sorrow, with bitter Tears of Repentance, for dropping Myrrh.

And because he came into this world in such humility, yet furnished with
such a measure of love, that he was content for my sake, to be laden with the
burden of all our infirmities, to carry our sorrows, to under go a world of
injuries and miseries, and at the last in a shameful death to offer up
himself in Sacrifice to thee for my redemption; vouchsafe me thy Grace, that I
may pick up some Crummes under his Table, and gather up some fruits at the
foot of his Cross, that when I have seen, what Judas sold, and the Jews
bought: what Judas lost, and I have gained, I may bathe my soul in the purple
stream of his most precious blood and then entombe him, and lay him up in a
believing heart, until his glorious appearance: So that all the days of my
life, being washed (as the Apostle says) being sanctified, and being justified
in the name of the Lord Jesus, and by the spirit of my God, I may never be
without sorrow for my Sins, thankfulness for thy Benefits, fear of thy
Judgments, love of thy Mercies, nor remembrance of thy presence. Amen.

A Meditation or Prayer upon the Life, Death, and Passion of our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ.
O LORD Christ Jesus, Son of God, thou holy, mighty, and wonderful God and
Man, who art the life of the living, and the death of Death, and therefore both
in life and death advantage: Whose life for my sake, was feebled with natural
infirmities, and death caused by violent sorrows, and yet thy life mild, and
thy death qiuet. I beseech thee give me a fleshie heart, to weep and shed
tears down my cheeks, if not for thy pains (who did sweat drops of blood
trickling down to the ground, and afterward dyedst for my sake) yet for my
sins, which then bred thy sorrow, and now work my woe.

Lord, I know that for me, the tempest of thy Fathers anger, and fire of his
wrath was stirred and kindled against thee; wherefore now with the wise men of
the East, and all the Jews, I come to seek thee in the Stable at Bethleem,
and in Mount Caluarie. At Bethleem, where the Manger was thy Bed to be borne
in: in Mount Caluarie, where the Cross was thy Bed to dye on. In Bethleem,
where a handful of Straw was the pillow for thy sacred Head to rest on: in
Mount Caluary, where a crown of Thorns and a number of Nails pierced and
fastened both head and body. In Bethleem, where course swaddling clothes were
thy best Roabes: and in Mount Caluarie, where thou did hang naked in much
misery. I come to adore thee, to praise thee, to pray thee, that as in thy
life time, thou wast content to be bred, borne and brought up in manifold
infirmities, (to strengthen our frailty, and to demonstrate the truth of thy
Humanity) and then at thy death, to disarme thy self, and to be broken with
them, for the discharge of our Captivity, and the assurance of our access to
the Throne of grace. So thou will be pleased as a gracious King to hold out
thy golden Scepter of mercy to my fearful conscience, that I may come near
to look into thy wounds, to sue for compassion and pardon, and to taste of thy
goodness, who am a sinful wretch, full of corruption and manifold
infirmities.

2 O sweet Jesus, how shall I recount the large seuerals of thine innocent
passions, from thy poor Nativity, to thy guiltles death? From thy bloody
sweat and heavy agony in one garden, to thy strange burial in another? How
can I think of thy labors in preaching, thy weariness in travailing, thy
watchfulness in Praying, thy temptings in fasting, thy tears in pitying, and
not confess more justly of thee, then David did of his Jonathan, Very kind
have thou been unto me: thy love to me was wonderful, passing the love of
women?

Was it not enough, even for love to me, to be clothed with the veil of
flesh, but that thou must be compassed with the shadow of death? Was it not
enough to become Earth, Earth, Earth, but thou must become also Woe, Woe, Woe?
The God of heaven to become the Son of Man! The Lord of life to be made the
child of death! The Master to be turned to be a Servant, and from a Servant,
to be counted a bad Servant! No proof brought, and yet scourged without
measure: No Indictment found, and yet crucified without mercy! Oh, the beloved
of the Lord ran through Briars of Passions! Oh, the holy Lamb was betrayed,
carried away, bound, condemned, consorted with malefactors and Thieves; and,
like Jonas, plunged in the maine depth of sorrows, and swallowed up of the
whale of death! O Lamb of God, that take away the sins of the world, have
mercy upon me.

3 O Lord Jesus, it is the joy of my heart, that thou have taken and borne all
mine infirmities. All, spiritual and corporal: true evidences of thy
humanity, but no impediments to thy Charity. All of Soul, all of Body, and
yet neither deformed in fashion, nor distempered in passion, nor tainted with
any guilt of sin. Thy soul heavy to the death, shall bring my soul to
life: I should never have been heartily merry, except thou had been
painefully sad, and grievously sorrowful. I should never have been verily
satisfied, except thou had truly hungered and thirsted. I should never have
been delivered from fear, and absolutely bold, except thou had naturally
feared.

O thou euer-glorious God, the consolation of Israel, and the hope of all the
ends of the earth, relieve my careful Conscience, that am sad, disordered
and disturbed in mind for fear of thy judgments, and because I have
displeased so gracious a God, and loving Father.

Oh, never let my soul be overtaken with fear so far as to despair: nor
overwhelmed with the Sea of thy wrath, nor apparailed with the suggestions of
Satan: But let it always hear the voice of thy Blood, speaking better things
then the blood of Abell, and crying, not for revenge, but for pardon, for me,
who by my manifold transgressions have robbed God of his honor, the Church of
a member, and my soul of life.

4 Oh man of sorrows, but mirror of patience: What a week of pains was this
to thee? What a Good Friday was that for me? What days of sorrows were then
one after another to thee? and yet with what patience did thou pass them
over? Patient, when Caiaphus so despightfully used thee: Patient, when Pilate
so vnrighteouslie judged thee: Patient, when false Judas so cunningly, and
treacherously saluted thee, and designed thee to be taken. Again, patient,
when thou did carry thine own Cross: patient, when the Crown of Thorns
drew blood from thy sacred head; and patient, when all others reviled,
reproached, bespitted, scoffed, and abused thee.

Oh thou that so patiently and peaceably, mildely, and meekely, did carry
painful and pangfull, heinous and heavy sorrows for me: I beseech thee,
let thy patience discharge my impatiencie, and let thine infirmities which thou
did truly take, and willingly bear with such power and innocence, inform
mine ignorance, comfort my sadness, kindle my love, discharge my fear, and
moderate my anger. O Lord, grant me patience to bear thy holy will in all
things, and give me grace in the midst of all troubles, yet to continue in thy
fear.

5 When I desire grace, O sweet Jesus, to fulfill thy commandment of Love and
Charity, which is the end of thy commandment, out of a pure heart, and of a
good conscience and of faith unfeigned, where shall I take my pattern but from
thee, such a lover as is Love himself? for whom did thou not love? As for
thy Disciples, thou did love them as Scholars, and cherish them as children,
and style them thy friends. Thou did stoop down to wash their feet, that
were not worthy to untie thy Shoe. Thou did restore Peter, that had
abiured thee: thou did save the Thief that dyed with thee: thou did
confirm Thomas that douted of thee: thou did forgive James and John, that
asked too much of thee. The bloody persecutors and crucifiers, who did curse
and execrate themselves and their children, to do thee a mischief, they, even
they had thine earnest prayers, before thou did either dispose of thy
Mother, o^ pray for thy self. Yea, that Judas that betrayed thee and sold
thee for thirty pence (making no price of thee, but taking a base offer) thy
holy hands did wash his unclean feet, and thy sacred lips did touch his
profane mouth.

O thou fountain of Love, that do drench those that love thee in the
stream of thy pleasures, and imbalmest even thine enemies with the oil of
compassion, and love Mankind with an everlasting love, so far, that after
they had borne arms against thee, thou did embrace them in the arms of thy
Mercy* O thou that did grieve till thou might dye for me: Thou that
would be betrayed with a kiss, as it were to meet death in the middle way:
Thou that did reprove Peter, when he diswaded thee from it, and did
hasten on Judas, lest he should be too slack to bring thee to it. Kindle, o
kindle my desires to thee, inflame my heart with thankfulness to thee, inspire
my soul with the fire of zealous love to burn always, and flame upon the
Alter of my heart, that for thy love to me, I may evermore love thee above all
things, and my neighbor as my self.

6 This is the Consummatum est, O sweet Jesus: Thou have given me that which
thou did not owe me, and have forgiven me that which I did owe thee: Thou
wast content to be the Byword of the people, and the curse of the Law, for my
sake. Blessed be thy Name; blessed be thy Life; blessed be thy death. For thy
death is my birth: thy crown of Thorns is my garland the scarres of thy body,
are the stars of my firmament. Thy gracious wounds are my happy plasters.
Thy bitter Mirrhe refreshes me, thine infirmities strengthen me, thy stripes
heal me, and thy blood cleanses me.

Lo, I have nothing to take to but what I have from thee; Therefore Bone Jesus,
esto mihi Jesus, O good Jesus make good thy good name Jesus unto me, and let
thy Passion work compassion for me, that by thy mercy I may obtain remission
of my sins, and by thy merits may obtain everlasting salvation in the
kingdom of heaven. Amen. Amen.

Supplications OF SAINTS. The Second Part. Paul, and his Company.

ACTS 21. 5. We kneeled down and prayed together: the Men, their Wives, and
Children.

This Part contains Prayers of an Assembly, for diverse purposes.

A Morning Prayer, for private Families.
Mat. 18. 20*
Where two or three are gathered together in my Name, there am I in the midst
of them.
O Eternal GOD and most merciful FATHER, which give to them that want,
comfortest them which suffer, and forgiuest them which repent, we sinful
creatures sue unto thee for grace, hoping in thy mercy, which is over all.
Keep us we beseech thee, this day, as thou have kept us this night past,
keep us in thy fear, faith and love. Forgive us all our sins in the blood
of thy Son, teach us to sorrow for them, and separate them from us, that
would separate us from thee.

O Lord, remove from our minds; all ignorance and blindness, and make thy
word unto us, like the star which led the wisemen to Christ* and all thy
works profitable Instruments, to draw us unto thee. Guide us with thy Spirit,
that we may make conscience of all that we do, and never make light of any
evil, but even abstain from all appearance of it. Strengthen our weakness, and
lighten our understanding, that in the brunt of temptations, we may discern
between good and evil, right and wrong.

Give us the sacred hunger and thirst after righteousness, that our first care
may be to know thy truth: and let us so profit in the school of Christ, that
in sickness we may find patience, in prison joy, in poverty contentment, and in
all things hope.

Prosper (O Lord) our labors, and the works of our hands, and grant us to
learn something of every thing, till we come to lodge with thee in the
Kingdom of Heaven. Let our loving affections grow one toward another
unfeignedly, that we may love our brethren, and they us, and pray for them, and
they for us, and both of us be heard of thee for our selves, and one for
another, and thy Son for us all.

Bless, Lord, the universal Church, with truth, peace, and holy Discipline.
Continue thy mercy toward this realm: Preserve our gracious KING, the QVEENES
Majesty, and Prince HENRY their Son, with all their royal Progeny, and whole
Family. Sanctify the Ministers of the Gospel, the Bishops, and all other
that labor in the word and Doctrine. Bless his Majesty's Council, and all
other in authority, with necessary graces. Bless the places of good learning,
the Grammar Schools, the famous Universities, and the Innes of Court. Bless
this City and place wherein we live: remove the punishments due for the sins
thereof: and give them grace with Niniue to repent in time, lest they be
destroyed.

Bless all our friends, kinsfolks, and others, for whom thy will is that we
should pray. Strengthen them that suffer for thy cause, and send them the
Comforts of thy Spirit. Comfort them that lie in anguish of conscience for
remorse of sin, and convert them that go astray* and teach us by their
example to see our own weakness, and to look better to our ways. Bless
this Family with grace and peace, that the rulers, children and servants
thereof, may all know their several duties, and practice the same in thy
fear, for Jesus Christ his sake, our only Lord and Savior, Amen.

Another for the same use.
Psalm. 108 3.
I will praise the Lord among the people: and I will sing praises unto thee
among the Nations.
O Lord God, most heavenly and merciful father, though we be unworthy the least
of thy mercies, yet have thou from time to time made us partakers of many, for
which we praise and magnify thy holy Name: Beseeching thee to give us
understanding hearts to feel our evils, and direction from thy spirit, to
avoid the same. And as thou have in great mercy kept us this night, in the time
of darkness and dangers; so we beseech thee to keep us this day, that the
Sun of righteousness may rule in our hearts, all the darkness that lurketh
in them may be scattered (to the comfort of our souls) and we may walk as
thy Children in clear light without danger. Indue us with gifts and graces
needful for us, and grant that with a pure and sincere conscience, we may use
them, to the benefit of our brethren, and the discharge of our own duties.
Keep the watch of our tongues, and the door of our lips, in such sort, that
no rash, evil, or vain word pass thereby; and so rule and govern our hearts,
that we may not think any thing but that which shall be to thy glory.

Grant us thy blessings of health, peace, and maintenance, and thy holy spirit
to instruct us, as well in the wants thereof, as in the lawful use of them. In
all our Consultations, words, and works, let us remember thy presence, that
thou see us wheresoever we do bestow our selves, and wilt iudge-vs if we
go astray, and do amiss. Chase away from us all rancour and malice,
covetousness, uncharitableness, and unkindness, and whatsoever is contrary to
thy love, which is to us ward in Jesus Christ our Lord.

Take from us all ignorances, and negligences, with the want of judgment and
discretion; and prevent all those things that thou know may hinder us in our
Christian calling. Increase our Faith, patience and obedience. Let thy blessing
be upon this whole household, to lead us in thy truth, and protect us in our
ways, and al those whom thou have made dear unto us, whether they be present
or absent. Be good to our children, servants, and friends, that live with us,
that we may live together in the service of thy Gospel, to grow up in godly
conversation, and soundness of faith. Give us grace by thy corrections, to
fear thee more carefully, and to sorrow for our sins more heartily. O LORD
grant these things, and whatsoever thy know to be necessary for us, for
Jesus Christ's sake, Amen.

An Evening Prayer for private Families.
Psalm. 116. 21. 13.
What shall I give unto the Lord, for all his benefits toward me? Because he
has inclined his ear unto me, therefore will I call upon him as long as I
live.
O Lord God, Father of all that is called Father in Heaven and in earth, we
render thee thanks in all abundance, for thy merciful preservation of us this
day, and all the times and days of our life: that thou have brought us safe
and sound, through so many dangers, and powered upon us (contrary to our
deseruings) so many excellent and notable blessings, both Spiritual and
corporal. Good Lord (we beseech thee) keep us evermore from day to day, as
thou have done, and make us constant in the profession of thy holy name, and
the practice of thy law, that neither the violence of man, nor subtlety of
Satan, be able to make us to turn away from (...).

LORD turn thy face from our sins wherein we have so delighted, alter our
hearts, and wash and cleanse us from all stains and corruptions, in the blood
of thy son. For give us all that is past, and grant us the assurance of that
forgiveness, sealed up in our consciences by thy holy Spirit. Kindle thy love
so fervently in our hearts, that we may detest whatsoever is against thee and
thy word.

Forgive us our great contempt, and intolerable barrenness in good works, our
foul unthankfulness, and the abuse of thy graces: and strike our stony
hearts, with the rod of thy fear, that we may attain unto a due thankfulness
for thy benefits, and a most unfeigned and earnest repentance for our sins.

O Lord bless us all, this night, that after our bodies have been refreshed
with competent sleep, we may see the light of the next morning, and arise safe
and sound to serve thee in our several vocations. Sanctify our minds, that by
the help of thy mercy, we may enjoy the rest of a quiet conscience. Bless thy
Church and her Ministers: preserve our King, with the Queen his wife, and the
noble Prince HENRY: protect the Magistrates of Justice, and all faithful
people: rear up the heavy hearted, and turn the chastisements of thy children
to their good.

LORD be merciful unto them whom thou have made any way helpful unto us, and
bless every one of us in our place, that we may truly serve thee, fear thy
Majesty, and love thy authority. These things (O Lord) and all other needful
for us, we crave at thy hands in the Name, and for the righteousness of Jesus
Christ, our only Savior and Redeemer, saying, as he has taught us, Our
Father which art in Heaven, etc.

Another for the same use.
Psalm. 113. 3.
From the rising of the Sun unto the going down of the same, the Lords name
is to be praised.
O Everliving God, and euer-louing Father, which have not left us
comfortless, but have given us thy Son for a ransom, thy word for a guide,
and reserved a Kingdom for our inheritance in heaven: we give thee thanks
for these and all other thy most gracious benefits, beseeching thee, that we
may have the grace to make such use of them, that they may never be in vain to
us. O Lord forgive us all our sins, and remove from us those things which
our consciences are afraid of* Assure us of thy gracious pardon, and renew us
by thy holy Spirit, that we may unfeignedly hate and detest whatsoever is
displeasing unto thee. Lord, give us a sincere heart to serve thee, and let
this be the hour of our conversion. In all tentations give us strength to
resist; in all troubles, patience to beat, and constancy to persevere in our
Faith, hope and Patience unto the end, that the hope of mercy may keep us from
the horror of despair, and the fear of Justice, for the sin of presumption.

O good God, order our times in such comfortable sort, that we having peace in
thee, our bodies and minds may be the more able to do their several offices
in our vocations. Instruct us by thy word, guide us by thy spirit, mollify us
by thy grace, humble us by thy corrections, and win us by thy benefits. O
Lord, we beseech thee, let all things work for the best to them that love
thee. Continue thy favor and goodness unto us this night, that we taking our
natural rest, and quietness, may through thy protection be all defended from
immoderate sleep, fearful dreams, and outward violence of our Enemies.
Touch our hearts with a desire and longing after, Heavenly things, that
whenever it shall please thee to call for us, we may be willing to come unto
thee, as Children to their Father, strangers unto their country, and members
of thy body unto the head. Grant us (O Lord) these and all other things
needful and meet for us, for Jesus Christ's sake, our only Savior and
redeemer, Amen.

A Prayer for the Catholic Ch^^ch, and all the estates thereof.
Psalm. 125. 4.
Do good (O Lord) unto those that be good, and to them that are upright in
their hearts.
O Sun of the eternal God, thou sweet Spouse of the CHVRCH, bless, (we
beseech thee) preserve and keep thy poor CHVRCH militant here in earth, the
blessed company of all faithful people. Make all Kings and Princes, and the
supreme governors of every nation careful h^^sing Fathers and nursing Mothers
to thy Church. Let all the members thereof be of one mind, and one heart, that
there may be such holy concord in knowledge of thy truth, and such obedience to
their superiors, with brotherly unity in all matters, as they may neither
procure thy scourge, nor the Princes sword against them.

Grant the Gospel a free passage, and long continuance, and remove not the
Candlestick for their unfruitfulness or unthankfulness. Put thy principal
spirit upon the Ministers of the Word, the Archbishops, Bishops, and Pastors
of several congregations, and give them grace to follow the steps of thy holy
Apostles, and blessed Martyrs, that being inflamed with true zeal, and
furninished with sufficient knowledge, they may be willing and able to labor
in season, and out of season, for the feeding of thy flock. Bless their
labors, to the winning of Souls to thee, and bless them with boldness of
speech, and innocence of life, that like sworn Soldiers to the cross of
Christ they may live and dye under thy banner. Cast down the beams of thy
heavenly light upon such public places as are appointed for the trayning up of
younger years, in sound knowledge and commendable qualities; namely, our
Universities Oxford and Cambridge, the Innes of Court, and all Grammar
Schools, the seed-plots of the Church. Sanctify their memories to treasure up
good things, purge their consciences to have peace in thee, reform their wills
to thy will, and let all their affections be ordered aright, and their Vessels
seasoned with the best liquour in the beginning, and so to continue.

Bless the higher powers of authority, make them truly humble in the top of
their height, that their heads being lifted up to honor, their hearts may not
be puffed up nor swell with pride: but so rule their hearts and minds, that
all Kings and Princes may truly serve thee, reverence and stand in awe of
thee, abette and maintain thy Church and truth, and wisely foresee what is
best for the advancement of thy glory, and the good of the commonwealth. So
deal also (O Lord) with all subordinate authorities, and keep them from
factions, treasons, and conspiracies. Let the Judges be learned and vncorrupt,
and the Lawyers men of Conscience, to deal sincerely and uprightly in their
business, without either fear of greater Personages, or unlawful favors to
friends, or desire of rewards from any.

Calm the Waves, and quiet the storms of all persecution, repress the rage
and cruelty of all Tyrants, Heathen or Christian. Take away all Antichristian
practisers of the Church of Rome, which persuade nothing but the infection of
youth, and the subversion of the State Confound all Heresies and Heretics,
disperse all Schisms and Sects, that there be no iars, nor difference of
opinions amongst thy servants, but that we may be like minded, having the same
love, being of one accord, and of one judgment.

In fine (O Lord) comfort them that are ouerworne with War, wasted with
exactions, vexed with plagues and sicknesses, consumed with famine, overflowed
with waters, and scattered with fearful threatenings from the skies. Convert
the simple, confound the obstinate, gather the dispersed, heal the broken
hearted, supply our wants, and amend all that is amiss for thy truth and for
thy Names sake, Amen.

Another for the same use.
Ephesians. 5. 25. 26.
Christ loved the Church, and gave himself for it, that he might sanctify,
and cleanse it, with the washing of water, by the word.
O Lord God, thou just Master of the VINEYARD, and loving head of the Church,
send thy Spirit into the hearts of all them that preach or profess thy holy
Truth: all men religious and secular: yea, men and women, Princes and subjects,
rich and poor, even all the people believing in thy Name, and depending wholly
upon thee. Give unto them all, O Lord, one Law, one Baptism, one Hope, one
Spirit, that there may be but one voice among all that profess the Catholic
Faith. Keep back the famine of thy Word, and send such laborers into thy
Harvest, as be sound in doctrine, faithful in their work, and godly in
conversation, in number many, and in power wonderful.

Open, we beseech thee the hearts and ears of the people, for the receiving of
thy word, that ir may dwell in them plenteously, in all wisdom, and bring
forth fruit against all the cares, crosses and courses of this wretched world.

O Lord, thou have found iniquity in thy Saints, and the heavens are not
clear in thy sight: Oh then correct us in thy judgment, not in thy fury;
least we should be consumed, and brought to nothing. Purge the garden of the
Church, and let no Weeds ouergrow the flowers. Suffer neither sin nor
superstition to choke the good growth of faith or manners in thy people: but
keep them from all evil, Heresies, phanaticall opinions, seducing spirits,
and deadly contentions. Keep our necks from the grievous yoke of
Antichristian bondage, whose religion is rebellion, whose faith is faction, and
whose practice is the murdering of souls and bodies: and repress the
furiousness of Tyrants, which labor nothing but the spoil of the Church, and
to abolish true Doctrine, Prayer, and pure religion. O Lord Jesus, amend all
that is amiss, and grant us thy grace all the days of our life, even for thy
truth and for thy Names sake, Amen.

A Prayer for the Kings Majesty, his royal Issue and Family.
Eccles. 10. 17.
Blessed be thou O Land, when thy King is the Son of Nobles.
O Almighty God, king of all kings, the Fountain, Rule, and stay of all
Sovereignty: we most humbly thank thee that thou have not left us unto our
selves, to do what seems best in our own eyes, but have set over us a
Noble, Wise, and gracious King, thy servant James, our supreme head, next
under thee. Lord make all thy good to go before him day and night: uphold his
Crown, maintain his State, give him continual peace, long life, and much
happiness. Endue him with wisdom and understanding, to do such things both in
the Church and Common wealth, as may be acceptable in thy sight, profitable to
his subjects, and hurtful to none that love thy truth. Mercifully hear him in
all his petitions, and effectually work for him in all dangers, in the day of
battle, in his greatest consultations, in the time of his recreations, in the
plots of Treason, and in the hour of death. Make us thankful for all thy
preseruations of him, both at home and abroad, in this kingdom, and else
where. Bless, preserve and keep him, together with his royal Queen, and the
noble Prince Henry his son, and the rest of all their hopeful Issue, that as
they are like Olive branches, to his comfort, round about his Table, so they
may be as the tall and goodly Cedars, for the defense of this kingdom from all
evil. Let him still embrace the truth, and manfully mainetaine it against all
treacherous plots, and sinister persuasions: distasting (as he has always
done) both alteration of religion, and toleration of another. Let thy power
always go forth with his armies, and give them glorious victories. Banish
from his Court all privy foes, foreign and domestical, and keep him from al
sort of dissemblers.

Let not our sins (O LORD) provoke thee to shorten his days, and deprive us
of thy good blessings, but convert us to thy good will and pleasure, and give
him the crown of old age, long and long to continue in the ways of
righteousness.

O holy Father, give him such excellent gifts, as be fit the Majesty which he
bears, that he may be in faith like Abraham; in courage like David; in
wisdom like Solomon; and in hearing good and evil, as an Angel of GOD.
Enrich his Counsel and Nobles with wisdom, loyalty and fortitude; and make
his servants that stand before him in their several places (with all other
subjects) as so many lines drawn to one Center, that their hearts being tied
unto him, they may be always fearful to offend, willing to obey, and
faithful to accomplish whatsoever may stand with thy glory, our Kings honor,
and the good of the Common wealth, for Jesus Christ's sake, our only Lord and
Savior, Amen.

Another for the same.
1 Timothy 2. 1. 2.
Let Supplications, Prayers, Intercessions, and giving of thanks be made for
all men: for Kings, and for all that are in authority.
O Almighty GOD, which have the Kings heart in thy hand, as the rivers of
waters, and turnest it whithersoeuer it pleases thee: we humbly beseech thee,
to keep thy Universal Church, and our Commonwealth, with peace and
prosperity, in thy worship and Service. Give (O Lord) grace unto our most
Noble King James, that he may love, honor, fear, and serve thee, and that he
may only put his trust in thee. Indue him with the spirit of wisdom and
knowledge, and with all other good gifts and virtues, necessary for his roial
function. And especially inflame his heart with an earnest and true zeal, to
set forth thy glory, and to make thy will known unto all his Subjects, that
they may both with heart and mind observe and keep the same: and that both he
and al his subordinate Magistrates may indifferently and faithfully minister
judgment and Justice to all his people.

We beseech thee (O Lord) preserve his body in health, his mind in
quietness, and both in all sincerity and godliness; that by his good example,
he may both stop the mouths of his adversaries, and win the hearts of all
those that believe. Make his days (O Lord) as the days of Heaven, that he
may reign many years over us: and we his Subjects may long live a peaceable
and quiet life, in all godliness and honesty, under his sacred government.

Grant unto him wise and faithful Counselors, loving and obedient Subjects,
dutiful and true servants. Deliver him (O Lord) from all Conspiracies,
Treasons, and other dangers, and grant him always a glorious victory over all
his enemies. Pardon and forgive him all his sins, make him walk all the
days of his life in the way of thy Commandments, that he may live in thy
fear, and die in thy favor, and that in the resurrection of all flesh, he
may receive a Crown of righteousness, the only thing which he does wish and
hope for, through the merits and mercy of Jesus Christ, our only Lord and
Savior, Amen.

A Prayer against temptations of the World, Flesh, and the Devil.
Mat. 26. 41.
Watch and pray, that ye enter not into tentation.
O Most merciful and MIGHTY God, the Fortres of the faithful, rock of
defense, and refuge for all distressed souls, which know we be set in the
midst of so great dangers, that without thy help we cannot avoid our ruin: I
beseech thee keep my body and soul from all tentations, and snares of the I
iuell, and suffer not my senses to range and wander abroad in matters of
pleasure and delight, which are to no purpose good. Lord, take from me that
which is deformed by my corrupt nature, and continue that which thy GRACE has
wrought in me; that having thy whole armor fitted unto me, I may be able to
withstand all assaults of the enemy.

Let me not be drawn away by sensuality, and the desires of the flesh, but
give me power to tame this body, that by sobriety moderation and abstinence
from superfluous things, I may bring it into such subjection, as I may the
better serve thee, and walk in the spirit. Lord, sequester me from the
darkness, filthynesse, and deceitfulness of this World, that I be not
fashioned like thereunto, to follow the multitude: but being changed by the
renewing of my mind, I may walk uprightly and godly, looking for the blessed
appearing of my Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.

O Lord hold back thy hand in the day of trial, and lead me no further into
temptation, then thou will make me able to bear.

Grant (O Lord) that I may with strong faith resist Satan, and by watching,
fasting, and Prayer, mortify the lusts of the flesh, and by continual
meditation of thy holy Law, avoid the foolish vanities, and dangerous pleasures
of this world.

Let not knowledge puff me up, prosperity mislead me, poverty dismay me,
sickness turn me to impatiency, nor any lack or want of necessaries for this
life, bring me to distrust in thy providence, or force me to seek unlawful
means to win them. Arm me (O Lord) with thy Spirit, encourage me with thy
presence, and let all thy Children feel the effectual working of thy power
which is ever made perfect through weakness, even for Jesus Christ's sake,
our only Lord and Savior, Amen.

A Prayer for the Remission of Sins, and all things necessary thereto.
Psalm. 106. 6.
We have sinned with our Fathers, we have committed iniquity, and we have
done wickedly.
O Lord God, in greatness infinite, in power omnipotent, in counsel wonderful,
and in judgment terrible; although I miserable sinner, have by thy Justice
truly deserved everlasting damnation for my horrible sins, yet I beseech
thee, cast me not away with him that had not on a wedding garment, for I
appeal from thy rightful justice to thine unspeakable mercy, and humbly cast
down my self at thy feet, and beseech thee of compassion and pardon.

Behold Lord, I am a piece of that purchase that cost so dear a price as the
blood of thy dear Son, my body and soul are the temples of the holy Ghost,
the posts whereof are sprinkled with his precious blood, which cries for
mercy: therefore enter not into the course of judgment with me, (for there I
know I shall be overthrown) but forbear, forgive me, and acquit me, upon
that satisfaction which he has made for penitent sinners.

O Lord, though the stipend of my sin be death, and the merit of my
transgression eternal perdition, yet is thy mercy above all thy judgments,
and thou can forgive more then I can offend: wherefore I pray thee, set his
Cross and passion between thy judgments and my soul: look upon me with
the eye of mercy and compassion, as thou did upon the sinful woman at the
banquet, and the Publican in the Temple, whose pardons are registered in thy
book for my Comfort.

O Lord bow down the height of thy Deity, to behold my vileness and misery
(a lively image of the prodigal son) who know no other help, but only thou
my most loving Father, whom I have so highly offended. Power the oil of mercy
into my defiled and fainting heart: search it, that I may not flatter my self,
to extenuate my sin; cleanse it, and season it with the Salt of thy grace, to
receive and retain all goodness hereafter. Lord, I thank thee, for thy
patience and long suffering, that thou have not suddenly (after my desert)
taken vengeance on me, but given me a longer time of repentance: wherefore (I
beseech thee) appease thine anger toward me now, but loose in me the works
of darkness, create in me a new heart, and because thou look for my
amendment that I may have thy favor; I beseech thee grant me thy favor that
I may have amendment: give me grace to repent unfeignedly, with fasting,
weeping, and mourning, and make my faith lively to believe that I am forgiven
in Jesus Christ.

Let not the faults of my forefathers light upon my head, who have walked in
their sinful steps, neither be angry with me for their sakes; but let the
well-doing of Jesus Christ, who has shed his blood for me, succor me, and
procure my pardon.

Forgive me all my sins of youth and age, negligences and ignorances,
thoughts, words, and deeds, and keep me from presumptuous sins. O Lord,
look not upon the Pharisee, for he dissembleth: nor upon the Publicane first,
for he says little for himself in outward show: nor upon Mary Magdalen only,
for she had but seven devils: but look upon me, that of sinners am chief,
worse then either Pharisee, Publicane or Mary, who have as many sins as hayres
upon my head, and a greater clogge upon my conscience then any burden that man
has to bear. O Lord, keep under Satan, that he compel not my troubled
Conscience to despair, quench all the motions of my mind, striving against
thy divine pleasure, and restore in me the Image of thy Son, that I may live in
thy fear, dye in thy favor, rest in thy peace, rise in thy power, and remain
in thy glory, for Jesus Christ's sake, our only Lord and Savior, Amen.

A Prayer for obtaining of Faith, Hope, and Charity, and all Christian virtues.
Pihl. 4. 19.
My God shall supply all your needs, according to his riches in glory, by Jesus
Christ.
O Father of Lights, of whom is every good giving, and every perfect gift, I
beseech thee to bless me with all spiritual blessings in heavenly things in
Christ. Increase the little grain of my weak and feeble faith, direct it to
the true object, the merits of Christ Jesus, and let it not be bare and dead,
but effectual, working by love. Make me strong therein, and constant, to give
credit to thy word, without doubting, and pro, tect me among the diverse and
manifold errors, sects, and heresies of this world, that fight against the
foundation. Lord let me not be disappointed of my hope which I have in thee,
but make good thy promises unto me, and so work in my heart, that I may have
courage in conflict, patience in trouble, and comfort in all things. Keep me
from insolency and pride, and grant me true humility, and lowliness of
mind, that I be not puffed up to contemn my brethren, but give me that due
consideration of mine own vileness and infirmities, that as dust and ashes, I
may tremble and stand in awe of thy judgments, and as a sinful man, esteem
better of others then my self.

O dear Father, when Satan shall accuse me, my conscience bear witness
against me, the whole world forsake me, and all things set themselves against
me for my sins, then strengthen me (I beseech thee) in thy faith, that I fall
not from thee: inflame my cold heart, with the heavenly affection of unfeigned
love, that I may love thee, (O blessed Trinity) with all that I have, above
all, and my Neighbor as my self.

Grant me a compassionate and charitable mind, to help and succor others to
my ability, to forbear and forgive them, though they be mine enemies. Purge
my veins, and suffer not the stinking poison of envy and wrath to infect my
blood: and so moderate my affections that the Sun go not down upon my
wrath, but that I may be satisfied in knowing that vengeance is thine. Give me
grace to follow the examples of all painful and godly laboring men, in
matters of my vocation, and keep me from the hateful sin of sloth and
idleness, the highway to beggary. Grant me a contented mind against
covetousness, amoderate appetite against gluttony and surfets: and a chaste body
from disordered lust. Comfort me (O Lord) in all grievous accidents, and at
the point of death, and give me grace to fasten all thy confidence in thee,
that whereas now I see by Faith only (as it were in a glass darkely) I may
then see face, to face, the only thing which I desire and hope for, thorough
Jesus Christ, Amen.

A Prayer before the receiving of the Holy Communion.
1 Cor. 1^1. 26.
As often as ye eat this Bread, and drink this cup, ye do show the Lords
death, until he come.
O Lord God, merciful FATHER, which after the sacrament of regeneration have
appointed us, to receive oft-soones the blessed Sacrament of thy Supper, for
confirmation of our faith: have mercy upon me vile wretch, who for my natural
corruptions, and manifold transgressions, am not worthy to approach unto thy
Table, or come near thy house.

Oh gracious God, pardon me, and disdain not to accept me into thy favor,
but forgive me all my sins that I have done, said, or thought, in pride,
wrath, envy, gluttony, sloth, covetousness, or wantonness: give me a true
and lively faith, to believe thy word, and the promise of my pardon annexed to
thy Sacraments.

Inflame me with love and charity toward all men, to forgive and forget, to
do good, to pray for them, that I may follow the steps of my blessed Savior.
Open the eyes of mine understanding and help me to examine my self,
concerning my knowledge, faith, and repentance. Send me the hunger and thirst
after this righteousness: satisfy me with this heavenly food* make me verily
partaker of all the benefits of his Passion. Oh dear Lord Jesus, since thou
have suffered so many things for my sake, and have commanded me not to
despair, nor distrust thy goodness, grant me grace to eat of this bread
and drink of this Cup worthily, that I may continually remain in thy grace
and favor. O Lord GOD, the FATHER, give me the full consolation of this
mystery and commemoration, that my Faith may be increased, my hope confirmed,
my charity inflamed, my weak conscience comforted, all dangers repelled, and
my soul assured of her salvation in the blood of Christ. Let no profaneness
enter into my heart, so long as I am about this holy action; but give me grace
to receive with purity of heart, and cleannes of soul, with love dread, and
steadfast Faith. Have mercy upon me good Lord, that by unworthy receiving, I
be not guilty of his precious body and blood, who came down from heaven,
lived with men, and swam through a red sea of blood in his agony and passion,
to be my Redeemer. Have mercy upon the whole Church, and to this purpose have
mercy upon this place, and this company, that they may serve and please thee in
this holy service, and all other actions of their life, for Jesus Christ's sake,
Amen.

Another of the same, before the Communion.
1 Cor. 11. 28.
Let a man examine himself, and so let him eat of that Bread, and drink of
that Cup.
O Almighty God and merciful father, I am a secret sinner; and my heart is a
bottomless pit of all corruptions: wilfully and foolishly, ignorantly, and
obstinately have I sinned against thee, unto whose eye all the secrets of my
soul lie open: but now I come unto thee as a sick man unto the Physician, as
an unclean man to the well of mercy and grace, offered in the precious
bloodshedding of Jesus Christ, and represented unto my soul in this blessed
Sacrament. Have mercy upon me (O Lord) have mercy upon me, and forgive me
all the evil that I am guilty of: Give me grace that I may discern the Lords
body, and so reeciue ie in this Sacrament with such chastity of body,
humblenes of mind, thankfulness of soul, hearty contrition, dread and
reverence, as is meet for so high a mystery.

O Lord Jesus, it is truly said of thee, that thou did receive sinners and
eat with them, and I verily believe that thou art the same still, full of
goodness and mercy: wherefore I beseech thee, leave me not to my self,
reject me not from thy table. Come into my heart, and purge me from all
filthiness of the flesh and Spirit. Enter into my soul, seal and sanctify
me, both within and without. O Lord be not angry with me a barren and dry
tree, a creature with a face of brass, and heart of flint: I have not so many
tears as are sufficient to wash thy feet with Mary Magdalen, but thou have
shed as much of thine own blood, as suffices to wash away all the sins of
me, and all the world: then be not angry with me, o Lord, but let thy grace
supply my wants, let thy mercy pardon my sins, let thy holy spirit prepare my
soul, thy merits enrich my poverty, and thy most precious blood wash away all
the spots of my life, that I may worthily receive this heavenly Sacrament: so
that I may be strengthened thereby, and thoroughly filled with the heavenly food
of thy body and blood: for the mortification of the old man, the confirmation
of my faith, and the final salvation of my soul: O Lord hear my prayers, and
grant my requests I beseech thee, Amen.

A Prayer after the receiving of the holy Communion.
1 Cor. 5. 7.
Purge out therefore the old Leaven, that ye may be a new Lump, as ye are
unleavened, for even Chrst our Passover is sacrificed for us.
O Jesus the Son of GOD, my Lord and Savior; with all humble and hearty
thanks I praise thee for suffering death upon the Cross for my sins, and
admitting me a miserable sinner, to the participation of this blessed
Sacrament, the memorial of my redemption. Let me (o Lord) find and feel in
my heart, the invisible power of thy heavenly grace, effectually working the
transformation of me into thee, the wonderful union of me with thee; and thy
Spiritual habitation and abode in me.

Apply all thy merits and good things unto my soul. Let me never doubt the
forgiveness of my sins, but ever open the door of this Sanctuary unto me,
that I may run thither in my greatest need, and apprehend thy gracious
pardon, ratified by this Seal of thy covenant.

Quicken me (O Lord) in this life, revive and renew me, that I may disclaim
my old conversation, and be^ome a new man Keep me (...) I slip not out of
this building, nor become as a branch cut off, and good for nothing: but as
thou have severed me from the wicked, in calling me to the knowledge of thee*
so keep me from all their corruptions.

Give me a perfect love toward thee, that I may not delight in any thing but
in thee, nor seek any other honor but thine.

O Lord Jesus, I meekely beseech thee, let thy holy spirit strengthen me
against my frailty, thy power and strength defend me against worldly troubles
and adversities, thy merits purchase my needful pardon, and thy blood be the
Medicine for all my sores, even for thy truth, and for thy Names sake, Amen.

Another of the same, after the Communion.
John 15. 13.
Greater love, has no man, then this that a man lay down his life for his
friends.
O Jesus CHRIST, the Lamb of GOD, which have so loved MANKIND, that thou have
been contented to become One with him, meat unto him, and to die for him upon
the Cross to take away the sins, of me, and many; grant that this my
receiving of this blessed sacrament may be a true testimony unto my
conscience, that I have through faith in thee, received full remission of all
that is past, and am become (as it were) a new creature in thy sight.

O sweet Jesus, which have vouchsafed me this honor, to come to thy Table,
and feed upon thee, grant me grace I beseech thee, so to perform, and fulfill
my duty, as this honor which thou have done me requires: linc^e me unto
thee, and give me power and strength to believe thy promises without distrust,
and to show my religion by my good life and conversation. Assist me with thy
grace that I may walk worthy this blessed Sacrament, to love thee and thy Law
unfeignedly, and utterly to forsake all vanity, Idolatry, carnal desires, and
all the works of the devil.

O Lord God, so moderate and order all mine affections, that I may be joined
with the brethren together in love, the bond of peace, and truly fastened unto
thee my head for ever. Stir up my mind that I may always consider the
bitterness of thy death, the greatness of thy love, and never forget to be
thankful unto thee.

O blessed Lord, preserve and maintain this ordinance amongst us, that it may
be always a note and badge of our public profession: and give us all one
heart, and one mind in the unity of the Spirit, for the reverent and worthy
receiving of the same, whenever we shall come to thy holy Table again, Amen.

A Prayer for the Fruits of the earth, and other nourishments of this mortal
life.
Psalm. 104. 27.
All wait upon thee (O Lord) that thou may give them their meat in due
season.
O Eternal GOD' which feedest with thy blessing every living thing: and
satiffiest the lawful desires of thy servants with good things; we beseech
thee make us to covet those things that be pleasing to thee, let us find them
easily, and search them wisely* know them truly, and exercise them
effectually, to thy glory, and our salvation. And we pray thee hear us
favorably, praying earnestly for the fruits of the earth, and the
nourishments of this life, that we may (though unworthy) be partakers of thy
comforts therein. Give us, O Lord, this day our daily bread, prepare our
ground, and prosper our corn. Bless the seed time with the first and latter
rain, and meet temperature of air. Keep our fruits while they be in the
earth, from hail and thunder, from excessive droughts, and overmuch rain,
from Mildewes, and all noisome worms.

Send us a joyful harvest, and bless that which we shall reap, that for our
unthankfulness it waste not away without our relief* Increase our cattle,
with all other our provision, which we shall carefully labor for. Bless our
Basket, and our store, that we may have wherewith, as to furnish our selves* so
to give some relief to others. Protect our servants and workmen, that they
may be strong to labor, wise to forecast, and faithful in their business.
Keep our Garners, barnes, and storehouses, from fiery meteors, boisterous
winds, thieves, and sudden inundations. Prosper our works and travels, whether
by sea or land, and bless and prosper all them that any way labor for any of
those things that we shall have occasion to use.

Send remedy (o Lord) for all hardness and misery, turn our dearth into
cheapnesse, and our scarcity into plenty. Open the hearts of rich-men, to
whom thou have given much, that they may have a charitable respect of the poor
at all times. Help us (o Lord) and give us such things as we stand in need
of, yet neither of poverty, nor riches too much but a competent store, and the
lawful use of things necessary for this life, through Jesus Christ our Lord,
Amen.

A Prayer for Friends and Benefactors.
1 Pet. 4. 8.
Charity shall cover the multitude of sins.
O LORD which have said, Pro. 19. 27
that He that gives unto the poor, lends unto the Lord: and look what he
lays out, it shall be paid him again, we beseech thee, to be gracious and
merciful to all those for whom we are bound to pray by Nature, by desert, or
any other duty whatsoever. Of thy special favor remember all our
benefactors and friends alive, even all those our parents, kinsfolks, and
others which have brought us up, taught, promoted, or any way relieved us.
Bless them with all blessings, that have done good, either to our bodies with
temporal benefits, or our souls with profitable instructions. Bless their
estates, that in their godly disposition they may have always wherewith to
relieve and comfort others in their discretion. Give them the consolation of
the holy Ghost, to the keeping of Faith and a good conscience. And as they have
showed mercy unto us, and comforted us, so Lord, help and comfort them in
their greatest needs, that both they and their Families, may both have comfort
in their estate and condition here, and find mercy with thy Son our Savior
Jesus at the latter day.

Lord let their almesdeeds and prayers, be always in thy sight, as those of
Cornelius, that as they have been unto us an odor that smells sweet,
whereby we have received plenty, and been filled; so they may be as
Sacrifices acceptable and pleasant unto thee. Vouchsafe us this grace (o Lord)
that we be not guilty of any ingratitude toward them, but rather ready,
according to our abilities, to recompense them, if need require.

Let not that which they have bestowed upon us be cast away; but make it
fruitful, and us worthy of it. Grant this, O thou GOD, which do good both
to the just and unjust, for Jesus Christ's sake, our only Lord and Savior,
Amen.

A Prayer in time of War.
Psalm. 74. 18.
Remember this, that the enemy has reproached O Lord, and that the foolish
people have blasphemed thy Name.
O God, mighty in battle, we beseech thee, bear not in mind our vile deserts,
but of thy mercy pity thy poor afflicted, endangered, and persecuted Church.
Consider and behold, how they which hate thy Sanctuary are now up in arms to
root us out for our profession. Therefore (o Lord) we pray thee maintain
thine own cause: Bless our forces by Sea, and by Land, and grant to the
people one heart, one mind, and one strength. Give unto the Counselors and
Captains wisdom and courage, wisely to foresee, and valiantly to defeat the
devises of their enemies. Keep all the soldiers from treason and treachery,
the leaders from wrong plots, the people from tumults, and all of them from the
sins and enormities that follow the camp.

Strengthen (o Lord) and hold up the hands of Moses, and the weapons of the
Church, Preces and lachrymas, that our fasting and prayer may be heard, and
Israel may have the victory. Put Sisera to flight in thy good time, and rather
then he return to do mischief, bring him to his end by an hand unlooked for.
Turn the weapons of him and his followers into their own bosoms: scatter,
break, and sincke their ships, destroy their armies, and confound their
forces. Consider (o Lord) the end of our enterprises, how we fight for thy
Truth, and either reconcile us and our enemies by thy Spirit, to worship one
God, and hold one Truth, or else abate their pride, and confound their malice,
to thy honor and glory, for Jesus Christ's sake, our only Lord and Savior,
Amen.

Another in time of War.
Psalm. 34. 7.
The Angel of the Lord encampeth round about them that fear him, and delivers
them.
O LORD GOD of Hosts, that have heretofore sundry times miraculously defended
us, we beseech thee show thy self in this needful time: bless and preserve
us, who have reposed our trust only in thee. Bless our Armies abroad, which
are joined together for the defense of thy truth; and the safety of our
country: sanctify us likewise at home to please thee, that whatsoever they or
we do, it may prosper.

Be present and president at all their consultations, and give thou the casting
voice in all determinations. Suggest heroical motions into the heart of their
Leaders* banish all heart-burnings and divisions: and assist them with the
spirit of unity and concord, that they may strive all one good way. Mark them
wiser then their enemies: yea, give them more experience then the aged, and
better intelligence, and more sound aduertisements then their foes. Lord
anoint their shields, bless their swords, hallow and consecrate all their
weapons and engines of war with happy success to do thy will.

Bless the season of the year unto them, and sweeten the close air in their
multitudes: that neither Sun nor Moon annoy them, nor alteration of dyer, or
place, disable them from their service. Command the winds and Sea to favor
them, and let the Land speak peace unto them. O Lord disappoint the counsels
and power of thine enemies, and make a joyful peace for thy servants, through
Jesus Christ our only. Lord and Savior, Amen.

A Prayer for Comfort to sick persons.
Hos. 6. 1.
Come, and let us return unto the Lord: for he has torn, and he will heal
us: he has smitten, and he will bind us up.
O Most, GRACIOUS God and loving father, which give health to make us the
better to acknowledge thee and thy liberality, and sometimes sendest sickness
to recall us thereby, when we have sinned against thee: we humbly beseech
thee, for this, and all thy servants thus afflicted, not to enter into a severe
judgment with him for his life past, but in remembrance of thine own mercy,
to forgive him his sins, and upon the satisfaction of thy son, to acquit
him of thy judgment.

O Lord, grant him a true zeal, and affections agreeable to thy will, that he
may rightly receive the gracious offers of thy great mercy. Qualify all the
troubles which either the grieuousnesse of his sin remembered, or the
bitterness of his pangs sustained, the subtlety of Satan, or the fear of
death may bring upon him, and lay no more upon him o Lord, then he shall be
able to bear. Speak comfortably unto him, as thou have done unto all those
that have sought for their bodily health at thy hands. Dispose and move his
heart to receive this fatherly correction* and gracious visitation, with the
patience of Job, the faith of Abraham, the courage of Peter, and true
submission to thy blessed will, either for life or death: and though that his
outward senses, the tongue and voice, be not so quick as they have been to
praise thee, and pray unto thee, yet Lord, we beseech thee, stir up his
heart, in flame and inspire his mind to perform all such things as thou
requirest, and may be profitable for the soul in this combat.

Apply, (o Lord) the holy and wholesome medicines of thy Sons Passion, death,
and Resurrection, unto the soul of this poor creature, against the extremity
of fear, faintness, doubt, and desperation. Take away the extreamitie of his
pain, mitigate his sorrows, make his bed, wipe all tears from his eyes, and
ease his careful conscience. Comfort him at the hour of his departure: open
unto him the gates of mercy: open thine arms to receive him into thy favor,
that he may go to the grave in peace, being vpholden by thee, in the
assurance of a free pardon for all his sins, and the hope of a joyful
Resurrection. In the mean time (o Lord) settle his spirits, that they do not
wander, or fly out into any unruly motions. Continue his remembrance, that he
may not forget thee, but daily and hourly have thee in mind, which art the
anchor of his safety. Keep his tongue from all vain and idle talk, his heart
from all fears, and protect him safe under thy wings. Be merciful unto us,
who as feeling members of one body, adore thy holy Name, and implore thy divine
help for this thy servant, and let this example teach us more humility,
fear, and reverence toward thee, now and ever. Hear our prayers* o Lord for
Jesus Christ sake, Amen.

Another for comfort to the Sick.
Iam. 15
The Prayer of Faith shall save the Sick, and the Lord shall raise him up: and
if he have committed sins they shall be forgiven him.
OH LORD God, which both in SICKNESS and health, have appointed us to pray one
for another, promising a blessing in greatest extreamities: we poor sinners
present our selves before thy Majesty, in the behalf of this thy poor
servant, that lies visited under thy hand. Good Lord, we beseech thee, seal
in his heart by thy holy spirit the forgiveness of all his sins. Let the
sweet feeling and taste of a lively Faith, distaste all the filthy corruptions
that are in him; that his body and soul may be presented pure and undefiled
unto thee in the blood of thy Son.

LORD lay not to his charge what he has said or done amiss throughout all
the whole course of his life, but reale him up in hope, speak comfortable unto
his soul, and lead him by thy Spirit unto the treasures of thy mercy. Take
from him the fear and sorrow of death: raise the siedge of his spiritual
enemies, that are round about him, and give him strength against all the
assaults of the devil, that he may have a perfect victory. Let the knowledge
of thee, (which he has learned since thou did call him) stand him now in
stead, and relieve his faith; that he may have true repentance, and yield
unto thee due obedience and hearty thanks for whatsoever thou shall do.

O Lord, give unto him a taste of thy glory, and those joys which thou have
prepared for him, that in the comfort thereof, he may fight a good fight,
keeping the faith, and when the time of his departure shall come, willingly
forsake this present evil world, and live with thee for ever. Grant this (O
Lord) for JESUS CHRIST'S sake, our only Lord and Savior, Amen.

A Prayer before a Man undertake a Journey by Sea, or land.
Exodus 13. 20. 21.
So they took their journey, and the Lord went before them, by day in a pillar
of clowd to lead them the way, and by night in a pillar of fire to them light
both by day and night.
O Lord God, thou Keeper of Israel, who preseruest our going out, and our
coming in, into thy hands I commit my self, and all that I have, whether I
be at home or abroad. In the Name of him that was wearied in his journey, and
sat down upon the Well, even Christ Jesus, I beseech thee to direct my paths
in this my journey, as thou did Jacob in his Voyage too and from Haran, Jonas
at Sea, and in the Whales belly, and the children of Israel when they passed
over Jordan. Grant me health, give me strength and courage, and also refresh
me when I am weary: keep me from the hands of spoylers, the sleights and
deceits of thieves and robbers, from savage beasts and evil workers Grant that
wheresoever I come, I may always find godly men, which may honestly entertain
and courteously entreat me. Keep me from lewd company, that I cast not in my
lotte with them, to be partaker of their wickedness: but let me always have thy
fear before mine eyes, to avoid all wandering paths, knowing that whersoeuer I
walk, thou spiest out al my ways.

Show me (o Lord) in the day time thy comfortable Pillar of Cloud, and in the
night thy Pillar of fire; that both day and night I may escape the hands of all
mine enemies, and they likewise may be afraid to attempt any thing against me,
when they shall see thy wonderful protection of me. Yet Lord, if thou have so
appointed, that before I return, I must go to my long home, and dye in this
voyage, I beseech thee, that upon whatsoever this vessel of my body be split,
or wheresoever this Tabernacle fall, yet my soul may be safe, and arrive at
the everlasting land of Promise, the common Home of the Elect.

Make me partaker of all good prayers, and give me grace likewise to remember
that duty for all my brethren. Furnish me with necessaries while I shall be
abroad, give me bread to eat, and clothes to put on* and when I shall have
finished my business, LORD bring me home again, (if it be thy will,) and
show me this favor, that I may find my friends and favorers, wife, children
and Family, in perfect health at my return for Jesus Christ's sake, Amen.

A Prayer in time of present danger, or any other affliction, in body or mind.
Job. 2. 10.
What shall we receive good at the hand of God, and shall we not receive evil?
O Eternal GOD, which shuttest, and no man opens, and openest and no man
shuts, my humble request unto thee, is for my self, and all such as suffer
any cross or affliction in body or mind, that it would please thee to open
such speedy way and means, as they may be eased and delivered from the same.

O Lord, in this affliction, which does so grievously pierce my soul, I
beseech thee, give me grace to acknowledge it thy Fatherly correction for my
sin, that I may learn to be more careful of my duty to thee. I thank
thee, that thou have laid no more upon me, nor punished me to my confusion: I
beseech thee grant me a more patient mind, and stay thy hand in due time,
that I may recover my strength with comfort in thee. All is thine, and thou art
all; to thee therefore do I fly for succor, because there is no succor but
under thy wings. The sorrows of hell do compass me round about, the fear of
death is before mine eyes: help, o help me; save me, oh save me, for thine
own sake, for thy SONS sake, for thy glories sake, for I am the workmanship
of thy hands.

Keep my senses, under, standing and judgment, and save me from every
conceit that tends to fear, fury, or distrust in thy mercy. O Lord,
advise and teach me wisdom and moderation in my grief, yea, with thy power
overrule me that it be not my overthrow.

Of thy mercy, LORD, comfort the appalled consciences of all those that grieve
under the burden of their sins, fearing the heaviness of thy wrath for the
same Have mercy upon all those whose tender affections are too nearly touched
with the loss of their companions, children or friends, and let them not take
any thing to heart, otherwise then may stand with discretion, reason, and
Christian moderation.

Give thy comforts and consolations unto all those that by any means suffer
trouble or torments, for the profession of thy Gospel, of the service of their
Prince. And if it please thee to detain some under a longer Cross, for thy
greater glory, of their further trial? yet Lord; let them not be tempted above
their strength, but arm them with further patience and hope in thee, that so
they may persevere unto the end. O Lord, weaken the power of Satan, and the
tyranny of his ministers, which either by inward tentations or outward
violence, have bred the woe of thy servants, and rid thy servants from all
their troubles, that they may sing joyful praises unto thee, through Jesus
Christ, Amen.

See the Prayer of one afflicted in Conscience. In Part. ^.

A Prayer in time of plague or other extraordinary sickness.
1 Samuel 2. 6
The Lord kills and makes alive: brings down to the grave, and raises up.
O Lord our GOD, in whose Name stands (...) help, and who amongst other evils
have promised us to deliver thy people from the snare of the hunter, and from
the noisome pestilence, we beseech thee, take this thy plague away from us: and
as the stench of our sins has ascended up into thy nosthrils to provoke thy
wrath against us in it: so let our humble supplications upon our knees, come
before thee to procure our happy release from it.

Lord, call back thine angel, and cause him to sheath the sword again. We are
thy children, and the work of thy hands: we are sorry for our sins, which
are the cause of all this, and we purpose amendment: we are but Men, dust and
Ashes, we are not able to bear long, therefore Lord, have mercy upon us, and
that soon. God Lord, accept our sorrows, and send us comfort, and suffer us
not to perish after so miserable a sort.

We thank thee, o Lord that thou have not left us altogether comfortles, nor
cast us off without hope, but have somewhat with drawn thy hand, and spared
many hundreds of us, in comparison of those whom thou slewest a little before:
and we rejoice at this abatement, yet we stand in awe: we presume upon this
thy favor, but with fear and trembling: we trust it shall be every day
better, yet we are careful to win it by pleasing thee. Wherefore, (o Lord)
we beseech thee bless us and all those that depend upon us: set thy saving
mark upon our houses, as thou did for the Israelites in Egypt; and give
order to the destroyer that he hurt us not. Put thy strength to our medicines:
guard our regard which we have of our selves: let thy good blessing make the
preservatives of the Physicians, and ourshifting places for more security,
profitable unto us.

Give us grace (o Lord) that we trust not too much in outward means, but only
in thy mercy, and blessing upon them. Keep us in our down lying, and
vp-rising, and protect us walking in our vocations. Have pity upon our
distressed brethren, comfort the desolate widows, and provide for all
fatherless children. Gather us together again, that by these means are
dispersed, and continue thy merciful work in diminishing our dead number,
till we may justly say in confidence and thanks with the Prophet, We shall
not die but live, and declare the works of the Lord. Grant this (O Lord) for
Jesus Christ's sake, our only Lord and Savior, Amen.

The ancient Prayer, called, O bountiful IESV.
O BOVNTIFVLL Jesus, o sweet Jesus: o IESV, the Son of the Virgin Mary, which
art full of mercy and truth: o sweet Jesus, have pity upon me, according to
thy great mercy. O benign Jesus, by the same precious blood which thou wast
content to shed upon the Altar of the Cross for us miserable sinners: I
beseech thee, vouchsafe to cast all mine iniquities out of thy sight, and
despise not me who thus humbly beg of thee, crying and calling upon thy holy
Name Jesus. This Name Jesus, is a sweet Name: this Name Jesus is a Name of
Salvation: for what is Jesus but a Savior?

O good Jesus, which have created me and redeemed me with thine own blood,
suffer not me whom thou have made of naught, to be damned. O good Jesus, let
not my wickedness have power to destroy me, whom thine Almighty goodness
has made. O good IESV, reknowledge that which is thine in me, and that which
is not of thee, take that away from me. O good Jesus, even now while the time
of mercy is, have mercy upon me, and let me not be confounded at the time of
thy fearful judgment.

O good JESUS, although I vile sinner, by thy straight Justice, have deserved
to be punished everlastingly, for my most grievous sins, yet having sure
confidence in the truth of thy righteousness, I appeal to thine unspeakable
mercy: I am sure thou will have mercy upon me, like a loving Father, and a
merciful Lord.

O good JESUS, what profit is there in my blood, if I descend into the pit of
eternal corruption? For surely they that be dead shall not magnify thee, nor
any that go down into the place of silence. O most merciful Jesus have mercy
upon me: o most sweet Jesus deliver me. O most holy Jesus, be merciful unto
me a sinner.

O JESUS, accept me wretched sinner, among the number of them whom thou have
elected to salvation. O Jesus, the health of all that hope in thee, the life of
all that believe in thee, have mercy upon me. O sweet Jesus, the remission of
all my sins. O Jesus, the Son of the Virgin Mary, power thy grace into my
heart, endue me with wisdom, charity, chastity and humility, and in all
mine adversity, grant me a holy, inviolable and steadfast patience, that I may
perfectly love thee, and have my only delight and affiance in thee, world
without end, Amen.

Supplications OF SAINTS. The Third Part. David alone.

PSALM. 142. 1. 2. With my voice unto the Lord did I make my Supplication. I
powered out my complaint before him.

This Part contains Prayers in the names of diverse parties, of several
estates: with a form of general thanskgiuing.



PSALM 112. 6. The righteous shall be had in everlasting remembrance.

Queen Elizabeth's Prayer of Thanksgiving, for the overthrow of the Spanish
Navy, sent to invade ENGLAND, Anno 1588.
MOst omnipotent Creator Redeemer, and Conseruer. When it seemed most fit time
to thy worthy Providence to bestow the workmanship of this worlds Globe: with
thy rare iugdement, thou did divide, into four singular parts, the form of
all this Mold, which aftertime has termed Elements: all they serving to
continue in orderly Government of all the mass. Which all, when of thy most
singular bounty, and never yerst seen care, thou have this year made serve
for instruments to daunt our foes, and to confound their malice. I most humbly
with bowed heart, and bended knees, do render my humbliest acknowledgments,
and lowliest thanks. And not the least; for that the weakest Sex has been so
fortified by thy strongest help, that neither my people need find lack by my
weakness, nor Forreiners triumph at my ruin: Such has been thy unwonted
grace in my DAYS; as though Satan has never made Holy Day, in practicing for
my life and state: yet thy mighty hand has ouerspread both with the shade of
thy wings, so that neither has been overthrown, nor received shame, but
abide with blessing, to thy most glory, and their greatest ignominy. For which,
Lord, of thy mere goodness, grant us grace to be hourly thankful, and ever
mindful. And if it may please thee to pardon my request, give us thy
continuance in my days, of like goodness; that my years never see change of
such grace to me, but especially to this my kingdom: which LORD grant (for
thy Sons sake) may flourish many ages after my end, Amen.

Queen Elizabeth's Prayer for the success of her Navy, Anno Domi. 1596.
MOst omnipotent MAKER and GVIDER of all Worlds Mass, that only searchest and
fadomest the bottom of all hearts-conceits, and in them see the true
original of all actions intended: Thou that by thy foresight do truly
discern, how no malic of revenge, nor quittance of injury, nor desire of
bloodshed, nor greedines of lucre has bred the resolution of our now set-out
Army, but a heedfull care, and a wary watch, that no neglect of foes, nor
ouersuertie of harm, might breed either danger to us, or glory to them.

These being the grounds, thou that did inspire the mind, we humbly beseech
thee with bended knees, prosper the work, and with the best fore-windes, speed
the Journey, give the victory, and make the return the advancement of thy
glory, the trump of thy Fame, and suertie of thy Realm, with the least loss
of English blood. To these devout petitions, Lord give thy blessed grant, Amen.

Queen Elizabeth's Prayer for her Navy, Anno Dom. 1597.
O GOD, All-maker, Keeper and Guider. Inurement of thy rare seen, unused, and
seeldheard-of goodness powered in so plentiful sort upon us full often, breeds now
this boldness to crave with bowed knees, and hearts of humility, thy large hand
of helping-power to assist with wonder our just cause, not founded on prides
motion, nor begun on malice-stock, but as thou best know (to whom naught is
hid) grounded on just defense from wrongs, hate, and bloody desire of conquest.

For since means thou have imparted to save that thou have given, by inioying
of such a people, as scorns their bloodshed, where safety ours is none.
Fortify, dear GOD, such hearts in such sort, as their best part may be worst,
that to the truest part meant worst, with least loss to such a Nation as
despise their lives for their Countries good. That all foreign Lands may laud
and admire the omnipotency of thy work, a fact alone for thee only to
perform. So shall they name be spread for wonders wrought, and the faithful
encouraged to repose in thy vnfellowed grace: and we that minded naught but
right, be in chained in thy bonds for perpetual slavery, and live and die the
sacrificers of our souls, for such obtained favor. Warrant dear Lord all
this with thy command, Amen.

The Householders Prayers.
Psalm. 55. 22.
Cast thy burden upon the Lord and he shall sustain thee, he shall not suffer
the righteous to be moved.
O MOST mighty God, merciful and loving Father, I wretched sinner come unto
thee, in the Name of thy dearly beloved son Jesus Christ, my only Savior
and Redeemer, and most humbly beseech thee, to be merciful unto me, and to
cast all my sins out of thy sight and remembrance, through the merits of his
bloody death and Passion. Power upon me (O Lord) thy holy Spirit of wisdom
and grace: govern and lead me by thy holy word, that it may be a Lantern
unto my feet, and a light unto my steps. Show thy mercy upon me, and so
lighten the natural blindness and darkness of my heart, thorough thy grace,
that I may daily be renewed by the same Spirit and grace: By the which (O Lord)
purge the grossness of my hearing and understanding, that I may profitably
read, hear and understand thy word and heavenly will, believe and practice the
same in my life and conversation, and evermore hold fast the blessed hope of
eternal life.

Mortify and kill all vice in me, that my life may express my Faith in thee:
mercifully hear the humble suit of thy servant, and grant me thy peace all my
days, graciously pardon all mine infirmities, and defend me in all dangers of
body, goods or name, but most chiefly my soul against all assaults,
temptations, accusations, subtle sleights, and baits of that old enemy of
mankind Satan, that roaring Lion, ever seeking whom he may devour.
Favorably protect and keep all that thou have given me, as Wife, Children or
Servants, and aid me (o Lord) with thy grace, that I may be able to govern,
nourish, and bring them up in thy fear and service.

Cast a gracious eye upon me, and lend me thy directing hand, that the labor
and pains which I am to undertake this day, may prosper and let all my
dealings be just and true. Bless, (o Lord) thy Universal Church, and perfect
the work which thou have begun amongst us: Bear out most gracious King James,
the Queen his wife, their royal Son Prince Henry, and all their Children,
always in thine own bosom; and set thine eyes always upon them for good. Let
the spirit of knowledge and holiness remain in his Ministers. Bless all his
Counsel, with wisdom and discretion; his Nobles with fortitude and courage:
his Judges with justice and mercy: his Magistrates with diligence and
faithfulness: his people with fear and obedience, that we may all with one
mind, and one mouth, say with the Prophet, He that is mighty has done great
things for us, and Holy is his Name. Amen.

Another of the Householders.
Ephesians. 9 6.
Know that your Master also is in Heaven, neither is there respect of persons
with him.
LEad me (o Lord) in the way of thy truth and righteousness: and govern all
mine actions to thy glory, the good of thy Church, and the discharge of my
duty. Defend and deliver me from all temptations, from all mine enemies, and
from all deceits, and dangers. Kindle my heart and mind with a fervent zeal
of thy holy word, that I may understand and know thy will, and walk in thy
ways. Strengthen me with thy holy spirit, boldly and constantly to profess
the honor and service of thy holy Name, least at any time through fear of
worldy afflictions, I fall from thee.

Give me a contented mind with my estate, and such blessings as thou (O LORD)
of thy bountiful goodness and mercy have bestowed upon me: that I may use
them, and be thankful for them. Grant me patience in all my troubles and
afflictions, that I neither grudge at thy fatherly corrections (knowing them to
be tokens of thy love, and instruments of my exercise and trial) neither seek
revenge of my wrongs knowing vengeance to be thine, and that thou will reward
it in due season.

Keep my mind from all evil thoughts, my tongue from lewd and vain
speeches, my body and every member thereof, from all sinful actions. Let all
my love, my faith, and hope, my delight and confidence only and always be in
thee. Open my heart to have pity upon the poor brethren, give me the gift of
chastity, that I may possess my vessel with sanctification and honor, and
not in the lust of concupiscence, even as the Heathen do, which know not God.

Give me o Lord, sorrow for my sins, thankfullnes for thy benefits, fear of
thy judgments, and love of thy mercies, and teach me to bring up my children
and govern my servants, in good order and godly discipline, according to thy
holy ordinance: and because by thy grace I am that I am, let thy demands, be
no greater then thou have given me grace to perform. O Lord, pardon and
forgive all my sins, and grant me grace to live in thy fear, and die in thy
favor, that I may rise to live with my Lord Jesus, and evermore dwell with
him, in thy most glorious and joyful kingdom, the only thing which I desire
and hope for, through the merits and mercy of the same Jesus Christ, thy only
Son, and my only Savior and Lord, Amen.

The Wives Prayer for her Husband, in absence, or otherwise.
Psalm. 37. 4.
Delight thy self also in the Lord, and he shall give thee the desires of thy
heart.
O Lord God, which have made every married Couple one flesh, and have ordained
that they should be of one mind, and one judgment, and careful one for
another, as members one of another: I beseech thee, lead me and my husband in
the way of thy Truth and Righteousness. Govern all our actions to thy glory,
the good of thy Church, and the discharge of our duties. Defend and deliver us,
(o Lord) from all temptations, from all our enemies, and from all deceits and
dangers, here, or elsewhere.

Grant my husband being abroad, to prosper in his business, and send him a
healthful and happy return home: that I who without him am sorrowful in my
self, and should be a stranger to the world, if he were not, may with him live
in the estate of thine honorable ordinance, in peace and comfort, and always
for thy great goodness and mercy toward us, praise thy most holy Name.

Grant us both grace, (o Lord) one to love and cherish the other, one to be
faithful and dutiful toward the other: and give us both the gift of
Chastity and Sobriety, that both in body and mind, we may live a pure life,
bring up our children, and govern our servants with godly Discipline and good
order, in and according to thy holy word.

O LORD, pardon and forgive both of us all our sins, and grant us both grace
to love; honor, fear, and serve thee all the days of this our miserable and
sinful life* that in this life we may have comfort in that which thou have
given us, and after our death, we may receive the fruits of that hope which
we have laid up in thy mercies, through the merits and mediation of thy
Son Jesus Christ, our only Lord and Savior, Amen.

The Widows Prayer.
Deuteronomy. 10 18.
The Lord does execute the judgment unto the fatherless and Widow, and loves
the stranger, in giving them food and raiment.
O Lord God which art nearly touched with a care of the afflicted, and
despisest not the Widow when she powers out her Prayers before thee, I
beseech thee, to have compassion upon me, a poor and desolate Widow. And
whereas the bands of death have made a separation between me and my husband,
who was my head, and the best stay I had in this World, next under thee: I
beseech thee let me not take this cross impatiently, but trust in thy
goodness, that nothing may be able to separate me from thee, which art mine
only stay, and the joy of my soul.

Preserve me Lord, from the paws of ravenous and greedy cormorants, which lie
in wait to supplant the weakest, and devour our Houses under the pretense of
godliness and color of right. Grant that in the sight of all Governors and
Judges, I may find favor and equal dealing in my suites and complaints,
against all violence and oppressors. Give unto all men willing and ready minds
to do me good, and open their hearts, to help and pleasure me in all
reasonable demands. Provide for me, by ministering cloths and nourishment fit
for mine estate; have pity upon me in all my necessities, and stretch out thy
hand to deliver me.

Bless me as thou did that poor Woman of Sarepthah, that that small thing
which thou have given me, may serve to supply the necessary uses of me and
mine Dispose the hearts of my children and servants to obedience, peace, and
holiness, that I which am the weaker vessel, deprived of him whose
countenance should have kept them in awe, may by thy help, bring them up in
godly Discipline. Give me the grace of thy holy Spirit, that at all times, and
in all mine afflictions, I may trust in thee, and continue in Prayers and
Supplications day and night: not given to any quality, but such as befitteth a
modest matrone, and the handmaid of the Lord, for Jesus Christ's sake, our
only Savior and Redeemer, Amen.

The Prayer of Women with Child.
John 16. 21.
A woman when she is in travel has sorrow, because her hour is come.
O Lord GOD, by whose Decree, for the offense of our first Parents, we bear
in our wombs, and bring forth children in pain and sorrow, be merciful unto
me, that now feel the accomplishment of that sentence in my self: and as thou
have vouchsafed me this blessing to conceive in my womb, and to nourish that
which thou have wrought, until this time; so grant, that in due time I may
see the fruit of my body, safe, sound, and perfect, without blemish or
deformity.

Keep me (o Lord) from an untimely birth: grant that through Prayer, faith,
and patience, I may escape all sudden fears, and unadvised thoughts. Comfort
me when I shall draw near unto my hard labor, and when I shall fall into
those terrors, horrors and pangs which accompany that hour, show thy mercy
upon me and my Babe; that my sins may be forgiven me, and that it may not be
punished for my offenses. Give me patience, that I be not too fearful, and
unruly, but that I may remember what modesty befitteth a woman in those
dangers, and repose all my affyance in thee. O Lord, send me help, and
preserve me that I perish not.

Grant thee (O Lord) safe deliverance in due time, and make me a joyful
Mother, when that hour comes, let not my sins so many, be called in
question either now, or at that instant, but forget, O LORD, and forgive them:
bless my poor infant, and lodge it in the virtue of thy covenant, and when
thou shall be pleased to call it into open light, give me wisdom and strength
to bring it up in thy fear, and (as it were) to travel again with it, till
it be borne again unto a heavenly life, to thy greater glory, and my further
joy, through Jesus Christ, our Lord, Amen.

The Midwifes Prayer.
Psalm. 68. 35.
O God, wonderful art thou in thy holy places: even the God of Israel, he will
give strength and power unto his people. Blessed be God.
O LORD GOD, who only have power to take all children out of their mothers
wombes, and to bring them to the light of this world, I thine unworthy servant,
whom thou have deputed to this great Business, for the help and comfort of
many in their extremities, do most humbly on bended knees, beseech thee, to
vouchsafe me thy gracious assistance in the same.

Have mercy upon me, o Lord, and in all mine actions let me have thy fear
before mine eyes, that I may be careful, both for rich and poor, to do good
and not hurt, to save life and not to destroy. Help mine infirmities etc
imperfections, that I be neither too fearful, nor too violent in doing my
duty: and grant me skill and judgment happily to finish every work that I
shall undertake.

Give me, O Lord, an understanding and tender heart, a ready, steedie, and
gentle hand, a watchful eye, and a willing mind. Mercifully look upon me, o
Lord, that whenever I shall be called to do mine office, either by night or
day, to the sick, or to the sound, I may be defended from all bodily harms,
and preserved from the infection of all contagious diseases by thy gracious
favor. Prosper, o Lord, the works of my hands, o prosper thou my handie
work, that I may do all things to thy glory; the comfort of all good women,
and mine own credit, through Jesus Christ our Lord and Savior. Amen.

A Prayer in time of women's travel.
Let thy work (O Lord) appear unto thy servants, Psa. 90. 16* 3.
and thy glory unto their Children.
O Gracious God, and loving father, of whom the whole familye in heaven and
earth is named, we beseech thee mercifully hear the voice of all us thy
hand-maydes here assembled in thy name, for the help of this our Sister in her
Agony now approaching. Lord, look upon her in mercy, and mittigate the
judgment which thou have laid upon her, and all Women for sin. Give her
courage of heart, and strength of body to bear the pangs of her labor so
fearful and vehement. Sweeten them with the drops of thy mercy, and qualify
them by thy gracious power* pardon her offenses, and receive her prayers.

Loving Father, give her patience and willingness to be advised and ordered by
her friends in so great a work: that she may remember, that as in justice
thou have greatly increased her sorrows and conceptions: so it is thy will to
have a holy seed brought forth into the world, which being sanctified by thy
grace, may be consecrate here to such godly services, as thou have appointed,
and afterward made partaker of thy glory, in the kingdom of heaven. And
therefore (O Lord) we pray thee, bless her and the fruit of her Womb, let thy
mercy be no less showed in the birth, then in the wonderful forming and
fashioning of that she bears. Guide all our hands that are about her, and
lay to thy helping hand with us. Give her an easy, and speedy deliverance.
But if it be thy will to lay any greater weight of thy wrath upon her acording
to thy doom, yet good Lord we beseech thee, let thy holy spirit so comfort her
inwardly, with thy promises made to all, and thy goodness showed to others, that
neither her natural frailty, north temptations of Satan, nor the
extremities of her Throws cause her to faint. Comfort her, help her, finish
thy work in her (o thou preserver of mankind) that she being safely delivered,
and her Babe preserved, they may both live to thy will and pleasure, and we
altogether praise thy holy Name, through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.

A Prayer after the deliverance of women.
Psalm 127. 3
Lo, children are an heritage of the Lord, and the fruit of the womb is his
reward.
O LORD God, by whom all men and women are wonderfully and fearfully made, we
give thee most humble thanks, that in thy judgment toward this our Sister,
thou have remembered mercy, in giving her safe deliverance, together with a
comely fruit of her body. Good Lord we pray thee continue thy great goodness
toward her, and keep her from all further annoyance and dangers of
Childbed. Preserve her day and night, sleeping and waking, that so in her time
she may be restored to her former health and strength, and walk in her
vocation according to thy will, with thanksgiving.

Give thy blessing to the Infant now borne, Leave out all this, if the child be
not born alive.
that it may in due time increase in wisdom, and stature, and favor with God
and man: that it may be partaker of the sacred Seal of holy Baptism, and
borne anew by the power of thy Spirit, live a holy and sanctified life in this
world, and afterward be made heir of everlasting life. O Lord, bless the
mother also for the BABES good, that she may have strength and means to bring
it up to thy glory, and use all such good endeavors as become a careful and
natural Mother.

Lord give thy grace to all us, which have been eyewitnesses of this thy mercy
and goodness: and let this and all other thy works daily put us in mind to
be thankeful unto thee, for our creation, preservation, and all other thy good
gifts: to call upon thee, love and fear thee, walking in thy sight in all
sobriety, chastity, and godliness, from this day forward for evermore, for
JESUS Christ's sake, Amen.

The Childrens Prayer, in their Parents life time.
Pro. 10. 1.
A wise son makes a glad Father: but a foolish son is the heaviness of his
mother.
O HEAVENLY Father, Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, and all that believe in
him, endue me, I beseech thee, with thy holy Spirit, that I may be a babe of
thy heavenly Family, regenerate and made a new creature in the same Christ
Jesus, my Savior. Make me by all means to honor my Parents, after the
example of thy Son our Savior, and not by any means to breed their sorrow
and grief: that when thou shall see it good to make me ancient, and bless
me with children, then I may have joy in them, by their obedience and
holiness.

Join, (O Lord) unto the towardness of my Nature the aid of thy grace, that
I be not seduced by false teachers to corruption, either in Faith or manners:
but that all my understanding and conceits may tend to the good of my soul,
and the bettering of my life.

Restrain (O Lord) the vntamednesse of my youth, which at this time is wont to
begin to show it self: that I never pass the limits of thy good pleasure.
Keep me from wandering concupiscence and idleness, from wicked company and
naughty fellowship.

Forgive me all the misdemeanors which I have at any time committed against
thee and my parents, and give me ability and grace to help them in their
weakest age, and greatest need; remembering the pains which my mother endured
for me, and the charges of my father. Make me obedient unto them, and all
other my betters, teachers and Governors: help me in all dangers and
necessities, and grant me thy favor all the days of my life, and thy
kingdom at the end, for Jesus Christ's sake, Amen.

Another Prayer of Children.
Psalm. 37. 5.
Commit thy way unto the Lord, trust also in him, and he shall bring it to
pass.
O LORD GOD, I beseech thee, to lead my Parents in the way of thy Truth and
righteousness. Govern all their actions to thy glory, the good of thy CHVRCH,
and the discharge of their duties. Defend and deliver them from all their
enemies, and from all deceits and dangers; that I who am a child in age,
understanding and discretion, may by their godly wisdom, care, and
painfulness, be brought up in all godly instructions, nourture, and good
order, and so live and serve thee in righteousness and holiness all my da^es.

Grant me (o Lord) an obedient and dutiful mind not only toward my Parents,
but all such as it shall please them to make instructors and Rulers over me:
that I may submit my self to their godly admonitions and government. Incline
my heart now in my tender years, to seek for wisdom and good learning with
all diligence. Preserve me from all evil ways, and lewd company.

Mortify (O Lord) the raging lusts, and follies of youthful affections. O
Lord pardon and forgive me all my sins, that I may live in thy fear, and
dye in thy favor, and so receive the inheritance of that place, which thou in
heaven have prepared for me, through Jesus Christ, my only Lord and Savior,
Amen.

The Orphans, or fatherless Childs prayer.
Psalm. 27. 10.
When my Father and my Mother forsake me, then the Lord will take me up.
O Lord GOD, the succor of all them that are in distress, and Father of the
Fatherless: I poor Orphane, by thine appointment deprived of my Parents and
chiefest stay in this World, beseech thee to hear my desire, and to set thine
eyes upon me for good. Have pity upon me (O Lord) and in all perils and
necessities stretch out thine helping hand, and deliver me appoint me faithful
Patrons and Gardians, which will be touched with an earnest care of my
welfare, that I may be brought up in thy fear unto every good work.

Give me grace to be obedient to those that have the ouer-sight of me, to
hearken to good counsel, to fear thee, and fly evil company. Grant that I
may find favor and upright dealing at the hands of them that have the
oversight of me, and before all other Governors and Judges whatsoever. Let me
not be oppressed by the mighty, nor seduced by the crafty and subtle, but
deliver me from greedy and devouring cormorants, and dissembling friends that
would make a pray of me.

Let me not run too and fro to seek my bread, but provide for me (O Lord) I
pray thee, food and raiment, and so furnish me in this short time of my
Pilgrimage, that I may have a competent living. Bless my studies and
endeavors, increase my years and knowledge to sit always my estate and
calling, direct me with thy Spirit, and bless me now and evermore, for Jesus
Christ's sake, Amen.

The Scholars Prayer.
Pro. 6. 23.
The Commandment is a Lamp, and the Law is light, and reproof of
instructions are the way of life.
O Lord God which have said, If any man lack wisdom, let him ask of GOD,
(which gives to all men liberally, and reprocheth no man,) and it shall be
given him. I beseech thee, breath into my Soul the Spirit of Understanding,
that in my childe-hoode, I may learn; and as I grow further into years,
practice the study of those things only, that are agreeable to thy laws. Have
mercy upon me, and lighten mine understanding with the beams of thy divine
wisdom, that I may have judgment to make the best choice, wit and capacity
to conceive, and memory to retain and bear away all such good things as I
shall either hear or read.

Lord, hew and square the rough table of my heart, prepare it, and make it
smooth and fit to receive into it the impressions of thy divine grace and
wisdom. Grant that I may carefully seek for the pearls of true knowledge,
and obediently submit my self to all those that are my teachers, and have the
oversight of me. Give me such a desire to attain unto knowledge, that my
study through thy working, may be a pleasure unto me, and that I may not
wilfully lose or vainly bestow that precious time, which never can be called
again. Pour into me thy holy Spirit, that all my travel and pains in study
being blessed by thee, I may plentifully reap the fruit of my labors, and be
thankful unto thee.

O loving Father, be thou my Schoole-maister, to instruct me, and let all my
studies be referred to the right end, that I be neither infected with Heresy,
nor partaker of any Sect or Schism. Lord, when I shall have attained unto any
measure of knowledge, let it not puff me up to stand high in mine own
conceit, or be proud of thy gifts; but let me be wise unto sobriety, and
carry my self humbly, lowly, and modestly; and so order all my studies and
endeavors, good Father, that I may firmly resolve, speedily be, and constantly
continue in performing any thing that is agreeable to thy will, that so every
thing may serve me for the furtherance to a godly and virtuous life, and the
discharge of a good conscience, through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.

The Soldiers Prayer.
Exodus 15. 3
The Lord is a man of War, his Name is Jehovah.
O LORD God of hosts, which teach my hands to fight, and my fingers to
battle, I humbly beseech thee, to have mercy upon me, that am subject to so
many dangers every day, that I fall not before mine enemies. Touch my heart,
that I may truly feel my sins, and worthily lament them before thy Majesty:
and since I have undertaken this service, not for any covetousness, or revenge
of blood, but in obedience to my Prince, and to defend a righteous cause,
suffer me not (I beseech thee) to give my members as weapons of
unrighteousness unto sin; but to look carefully unto my ways, seeking to
discharge my duty toward thee, and to acquit my self in all loyalty toward
my Prince.

O Lord, gird me with strength, and make my way upright: conduct me with thy
hand, encourage me with the Trumpet of thy Word, arm me with faith and hope
to thee-ward, and strengthen me to the combat. Bless all our company in our
attempts, and suggest unto us the best means to save our selves, and defeat
the purposes of our enemies. Arm us with thy grace, that we may manfully
fight in thy quarrel: make our name fearful to our enemies, and abate their
Pride. Range us within the limits of truth and honesty, that we be not given
to those vices which accompany the War, vile affections, inordinate motions,
and merciles cruelties. Lord, it is nothing with thee to help with many, or
with no power: Help us, O Lord our God: for we rest on thee, and in thy Name
are we come against this multitde. O Lord thou art our GOD, let not man
prevail against thee.

Keep us (O Lord) from treasons, mutinies, and conspiracies, either against
our Prince or Captains. Lord hear the mournings of all Captives detained in
the hands of their enemies, and work means for their deliverance: And if it
please thee at any time to lay that cross upon us, or otherwise to expose us
to death in the field, then Lord, keep us in thy Faith, that we may live and
die thy Soldiers, fighting the good fight of hope fixed in thee, and dye in
thy favor, for Jesus Christ's sake, Amen.

The Servants Prayer.
1 Cor. 7. 22
He that is called in the Lord, being a servant, is the Lords freeman.
O Lord God, which have made us all one in Christ Jesus, whether we be bond or
free: I beseech thee, grant me a contented mind that during the time of my
bondage, I be not ashamed of that condition of life, wherein thou have placed
me: Cloth me in the livery of a true Christian, and grant me always to bear
the mind of an honest man. Give me grace to obey, and be subject to mine
earthly MASTERS, with all fear; whether they be good and courteous, or froward:
and to perform their designs which Cross not thy Commandments.

Vouchsafe (O LORD) to send me an understanding heart, to manage my business
aright: and make me faithful withal, to be circumspect and diligent, to do
all things for the best. Grant me a single and true heart, without Hypocrisy
and dissimulation, that I do not pass over my years with an eye-seruice, as
a man-pleaser, but justly and sincerely, that I may in my time procure that
Christian liberty and freedom which I serve for.

Lord, bless my Master in all his affairs and dealings: let him not be
subject to any thoughts of cruelty toward me: Strengthen my body to perform
that business that I am appointed unto, and keep me from murmuring and
grudging against any of my betters, and envious detracting from the estimation
of others.

Especially (o Lord) keep me from evil company, that I be never entised to
spend wastefully, or embezell any thing committed to my custody, nor hearken
unto the persuasion of any such as wish not well unto my Lord and Master. Send
peace and quietness between me and my fellows, that in love and kindness
we may all with one heart, and one mind, constantly and cheerfully join
together, to follow our Masters business, and serve thee, and after this life
become freemen of the new Jerusalem in heaven, in the blessed company of all
faithful people, for Jesus Christ's sake, Amen.

Another of the same.
Whatsoever good thing any man does, Ephesians. 6. 8
the same shall he receive of the Lord, whether he be bond or free.
LEad me (o Lord) I beseech thee, in the way of thy Truth and righteousness.
Govern all mine actions to thy glory, the good of thy Church, and the
discharge of my duty. Defend and deliver me, (O Lord) from all temptations,
from all mine enemies, and from all deceits and dangers.

Bless (O Lord) I beseech thee, my Lord, Master, and Mistress, with all
heavenly wisdom, understanding and godliness, and with worldly health and
happiness: that I who am their Servant, may by them and under them receive,
not only the spiritual food of my soul, but also the temporal sustenance of
my body: doing my service not outwardly, as desirous to please men: but with
singleness of mind from the heart, as fearing thee (O Lord my God) that
thereby I may receive that reward which thou have promised.

Give me (o Lord) an obedient and duti-full mind toward them, that I may
submit my self to their honest and lawful commandments, and do them true and
faithful service with all humbleness and patience. Grant me grace (o Lord) to
frame my life according to thy holy word; nourish mutual love and good will
between me and my fellows: preserve me from all evil ways, from lewd
company, and from idleness. Keep my mind from evil thoughts, my tongue from
lewd and vain speeches, and my body and every member thereof from all sinful
actions. Mortify in me (O Lord) the raging lusts, and follyes of youthful
affections. O Lord, pardon and forgive me all my sins, and grant me grace to
love, honor, and serve thee, in holiness and righteousness all my days, that I
may glorify thee in this world, and be glorified of thee in the world to come,
through Jesus Christ, my only Lord and Savior. Amen.

The Maids prayer.
1 Samuel 25. 24
Let thy hand-mayd, I Pray thee, speak in thy audience and hear the words of
thine hand-mayd.
BLessed LORD, which in former times have not despised the low estate of thy
Hand-mayds, when they sought unto thee: vouchsafe to lend thine ears to the
hearty desires of me thy poor servant. Consider, O Lord, that in the labors
both of body and mind, I am the weaker vessel, of less capacity, and more
infirmity: and bestow upon my youth such competent strength, that I may grow
in stature, wisdom and favor with God and man. As I grow up in years, so
Lord, let me grow up in grace: Crown my Virginity with chaste and religious
thoughts, and my body and mind with godly watchfulness to wait for thy
coming with the wise virgins.

Give me grace to think always that a good Name, and honest reputation, is
better then any dowry to a modest Maid. Make my behavior meek, my talk
sober, my body chaste, and keep me from lewd and wanton company, that I partake
not with them in the follies of youth Pardon my fore-past vanities, and by the
power of thy Spirit enable my weakness, to avoid all evil. Defend me from
slanderous and bad tongues, surmising minds, and wicked temptations, I beseech
thee.

O Lord make me faithful and trusty, wise and wary in the ordering of such
goods, as are committed to my custody by my Master or Mistress, father or
mother. Marry me unto thee, O Lord, in righteousness, in judgment, in mercy and
compassion: and if it be thy will hereafter to call me to the honorable estate
of corporal Matrimony, make me to follow Rachel in love, Rebecca in wisdom,
Sara in faithfulness and obedience to my husband, and all other worthy Matrons
in modesty and honesty, for Jesus Christ's sake, our only Lord and Savior,
Amen.

The Prayer of one afflicted in conscience for sin.
Dan. 9. 19.
O Lord, hear: O Lord, forgive: O Lord hearken and do: defer not for thine
own sake, O my God.
O Most merciful God, which by the sending of thy Son into the world, have
brought to pass, that where sin abounded, there grace abounded much more. I
forlorn wretch disquieted in mind, and afflicted in conscience for fear of
thy judgments upon my sin, do with bended knees, and tears unfeigned, a most
humble supplyant, beg and crave of thee some succor and relief, open, o open
the gates of thy mercy to the greatness of my miseries: my abject countenance
witnesses my distressed mind. My spirit is sorrowful, my heart is heavy, my
words are stopped with sighs, and my plants watered with tears: to thee I hold
up my hands, to thee I lift up my heart, to thee I pray, requiring thee of
mercy. O Lord, what shall I desire of thee, that deserve nothing at thy hands?
what can I hope for, that am even heartlesse? Lord if thou have said, Shall not
my soul be avenged on such a one as this, remember thy promise else where, I
will have mercy on him that could find no mercy, and let it light upon me: if
Satan presume, God has forsaken him: think upon the decree for the seed of
the Woman, and let the power of thy Sons Passion defeat all the devises of the
devil against me.

O Lord hear me speedily, if thou do not, then I am out of hope; my
conscience accuses me, my memory gives evidence against me, my reason
condemns me. My spirit is weary of this bondage, and I have bid my life
farewell. My conscience is clogged, when I behold the bloody wounds of my
soul: the voice of joy and mirth is gone from me: I am deeply plunged in
discomfort, I have neither worth to appease thy wrath, nor patience to endure
thy indignation. I pray thee therefore send the comfort of thy holy Spirit into
my heart, and strengthen my faith, that I be not swallowed up with over much
heaviness. O Lord let thy Majesty appear in thy mercy, forgive my sins,
the unhappy ground of all this woe, and I am recovered of all mine infirmities.
Try not the law with me, lest I come to judgment: sanctify all those good
means unto me wherein I seek relief, as Prayer, Conference, Reading, and
hearing of thy holy WORD. Moderate and mitigate my vexation, increase Faith,
establish hope, grant patience, and keep me from despair. Take away this
Cup from me, if it be thy will: if not, suffer me not to be tempted above my
strength.

I have an humbled and contrite heart (O LORD) look upon me: I go mourning all
the day long, and am like unto him that is at the point to die, O Lord, comfort
me: thou that wilt not break a bruised Reed, spare me: thou that delightest
not in the death of a sinner, revive me: though my heart condemn me, yet good
Lord acquit me, relieve me, release me, say unto my soul, I am thy salvation.
Hearken Lord unto my Prayer, and grant my requests, for Jesus Christ's sake,
Amen.

The Sicke-mans Prayer.
Job. 1. 21.
Naked came I out of my Mothers womb, and naked shall I return thither.
O Loving LORD, and most holy Father, I poor wretch thy servant, feeling in
this sickness which thou have laid upon me, the punishment of that
corruption and transgression that is in me, and all flesh, do most willingly
submit my self to thy holy ordinance to bear this Cross, and taste of this
bitter cup which I have deserved, and much more: so I may follow thee whither
thou art gone.

Therefore (O Lord) since thou have not yet called me to the Bar of death,
but sent thy Heralds to sommon me to a trial: I beseech thee, look on me
with thine eye of merciful pity, and help me in this day of Visitation.
Pour thine oil of grace into my wounded conscience, purge my defiled soul,
forgive me all my sins: and give me competent comfort and consolation in this
distress. Let me not dye ere I begin to live, give me time to repent, and
occasion to amend. But if thou will needs put any more of thy wine of
correction into my festred sores, lay no more, (o Lord) lay no more upon me,
then I shall be able to bear* make good unto me that goodness, which thou have
granted me under the great Seal of thy promise. Supply my want, pardon my
sins and aid me against all temptations, and I am recovered of mine
infirmities.

I offer here unto thee (O Lord) a penitent heart for the time past, and
promise through thy grace amendment, if it shall please thee to draw out the
thread of my life any longer: yet I neither desire the continuance of this
mortality, nor a more speedy deliverance, otherwise then as thou will. Lord
look not upon my merits, for they are either none, or not good: nor upon my
life, for it has been naught: but look upon Christ, thy dear Son, who from
the Altar of the Cross cried unto thee on my behalf, and accept his
satisfaction for my sins.

Arm me with patience to take up my Cross, and follow thee, even to bear
thy visitation willingly: and give me strength by faith, to resist the
adversary in in the brunt of temptations. With my sorrow and pain increase
thy grace, that when I am in greatest agony, I may find comfort, believing,
and saying with the holy Prophet. Psalm. 73. 26
My flesh fails, and my heart also, but GOD is the strength of my heart, and
my portion for ever. O Lord, if thy decree be gone forth, as it was to
Hezekiah, that I shall dye; and not live, give me grace to put in order my
things of this world, that I may depart in more peace: and when the pangs of
death have shut up the eyes of my body, and taken away the use of my tongue (I
beseech thee) let the eyes of my soul still behold, and look upon thee, so
that when I shall leave my earth to earth, and my body to the grave, thine
angels may carry up my Soul unto thee, and I be partaker of a joyful
resurrection, through Jesus CHRIST our LORD Amen.

A Prayer to be said at the point of death.
O Lord, my time is at hand, my soul is heavy even unto death. Look down
upon me, pour thine oil of grace into my heart, pardon my sins, strengthen my
Faith, shorten my pains, and drive away Satan. Help me in this conflict.

Look upon thy Christ, he is my Savior and Redeemer. Come LORD Jesus;
welcome. Into thy hands I commend my soul: take it (O Lord) take me, the
work of thine own hands, and let me die in thy fear, and rise again in thy
favor, that I may come to thy bliss, for JESUS Christ's sake, Amen.

A General Thanksgiving, to be used by all men, at all times.
Psalm. 86. 12. 13
I will praise thee, O Lord my God, with all my heart: and will glorify thy
Name for evermore. For great is thy mercy toward me.
O Blessed LORD and everliving GOD, whose mercy is over all thy works, and of
whose fullness we have all received, and Grace for grace: I poor SAMARITANE
that have been helped, healed and honored by thy holy Hand, do pour forth
my heart unto thee, that I may neither ungratefully remember thy benifits, nor
ungraciously forget thy severe judgments, who both in the one and the other,
have been beyond all measure so gracious unto me. I thank thee, O Lord, for
all the external and internal graces bestowed upon me, the Spiritual and
corporal, the Caelestiall and terrestrial blessings which I have received.

And in earthly matters, o Lord, I acknowledge my self deeply bounden unto
thee, for my Being, breathing, life, and motion. That thou have made me of a
more noble nature then the rest of the Creatures, creating me after thine own
Image, enduing me with reason, furnishing me with excellent faculties of the
mind, and perfect sense.

And I give thee thanks, O LORD, that thou have given me a BODY so sound and
so free from great infirmities, and have set me in a calling so fit for my
condition, and given me such a competent estate. That thou have preserved me
from so many harms in such dangerous accidents: as in sickness, thunder,
lightning, plague, pestilence, fire, and water: and from the assaults of
thieves and robbers, by Sea and Land, attempted or intended against my body,
house, or goods; and delivered me out of so many troubles and vexations as I
have fallen into.

O Lord, how am I bound unto thee, that thou have lent me such kind friends;
and that I live in such honest reputation among my neighbors: that I have such
liberty of seemly recreation, such quietness of life, such opportunity of
well-doing, and thine Angels by thine appointment to protect and safe-gard me
in all my ways.

These things (O Lord) I enjoy, though unworthy, by thy goodness: whereas
there be many that have not found the like favor at thy hands, Blessed be thy
Name therefore. And yet o Lord, thou have been much more gracious unto me: thy
Spiritual favors and thy Caelestial blessings exceed all these. Therefore as
I am bound, so, much more I bless thee, that thou did elect me before all
worlds to glory: that thou did work my redemption by the blood of Christ
Jesus in his bitter Passion: that I was borne in the light of the Gospel, to
know thee, and through Sanctification in thee, have had the grace to take upon
me the profession of the Truth, to abandon all Superstition and Heresy, to
do good unto any, and to do any thing that may do good, either public or
private, and in some measure to keep my self unspotted of the world.

Oh, what shall I give unto my Lord, that has done so great and mighty things
for me? O Lord, I give thee thanks that thou have given me such an honorable
Calling and vocation of Christianity, that thou have incorporated me a member
of the Church, giving me such a gracious portion of Faith, hope, love, zeal,
patience, peace and joy, the beginnings of Regeneration.

What am I (O Lord) that thou have granted me such things? to receive such
profit by the preaching of thy Word, and the Privilege of thy blessed
Sacraments; to be washed with thy blood, to sit at thy Table, and to feed on
thee the everlasting Bread?

These I thank thee for, and for these also; even for my part which I have in
the Communion of Saints; for the benefit which I have of their Prayers in the
Church militant, the aid of their counsels, with the pleasure and comfort of
their godly examples, for the bettering of my life: that thou have given me a
care to use a good Conscience in dealings in this world, and an earnest desire
to continue so still: yea, rather to grow better.

And in fine, I cannot forget (O Lord,) thy mercy of longanimitie and patience
toward me: That thou have granted me so long and so large a time of
Repentance, and have vouchsafed me therein, to have thy Son JESUS Christ,
for my Mediator, by whose intercession my Prayers have access* unto thee, and
receive their happy answers.

I praise thee, I glorify thee, I worship thee, I magnify thy blessed Name, O
Lord, by whose goodness I want nothing fit for a Christian; nor any thing
that may fit me for Heaven: where, I thank thee, for making so glorious a
provision, and such a gracious preparation for my Soul, and whither I beseech
thee to bring me, O my GOD, in thy due time, and in the mean time to continue
thy goodness unto me, for Jesus Christ sake, my only Savior and Redeemer.
Amen.

Soli Deo gloria.
FINIS.
A Table of the Prayers in every Part.
The first Part.
PRayers for Morning, Noone, and Evening, every day in the week. Fol. 1. etc.
A Prayer for the Ministers of the Word. 7 A Prayer to God the Father. 20 A
Prayer to God the Son. 32 A Prayer to God the Holy Ghost. 44 A short Prayer
for Sobriety. 55 A short Prayer for Chastity. 66 A short Prayer for Patience.
78 A Prayer for the Morning. 85 Another Prayer for Evening. 91 A short Prayer
for Morning. 97 A short Prayer for Evening. 99 A Preparatiue to the Meditation
ensuing. 101 A meditation and Prayer upon the Life, death, and passion of
Christ. 105
The second Part.
TWo Prayers for a private Family in the Morning. 127. 134 Two Prayers for a
private Family in the Evening. 140. 146 Two Prayers for the Church Catholic,
and all the Estates thereof. 151. 159 Two Prayers for the Kings Majesty, his
Issue and Family. 164. 170 A Prayer against temptations of the World, the
Flesh, and the Devil. 175 A Prayer for Remission of sins, and all things
necessary thereunto. 180 A Prayer for obtaining of Christian virtues, Faith,
Hope, and Charity. 188 Two Prayers before the receiving of the holy Communion.
194. 200 Two Prayers after the receiving of the holy Communion. 205. 209. A
Prayer for the fruits of the earth, and nourishments of this life. 213 A Prayer
for friends and Benefactors. 218 Two Prayers in time of Wars. 223. 227 Two
Prayers for sick persons. 231. 238 A Prayer before one undertake a journey.
242 A Prayer in time of affliction. 247 A Prayer in time of Plague, or other
extraordinary sickness. 253 The ancient Prayer called O bountiful Jesus,
translated according to the Latin Copy, written by the Author thereof above
100. years agone. 259
The third Part.
QVeene Elizabeth's three Prayers. 267. 271. 274 The Householders two Prayers.
277. 283 The Wives Prayer for her Husband. 288 The Widows Prayer. 292 The
Prayer of Women with child. 297 The Mid-vifes Prayer. 301 A Prayer in the time
of women travel. 303 A Prayer after the woman's deliverance. 308 Two Prayers
for Children in their Parents life time. 312. 316 The Fatherles child, or
Orphans Prayer. 319 The Scholars Prayer. 323 The Soldiers Prayer. 328 Two
Prayers for servants. 333. 338 The Maids Prayer. 342 The Prayer of the
afflicted in Conscience for sin. 346 The sicke-mans Prayer. 352 A Prayer to
be said at the point of death. 358 A general Thanksgiving for all men, and
at all times. 360
FINIS.

