A LAmentable complaynte of Baptista Ma^tuanus, an Italysh poet, wherein he
samylyarly co^moneth with his own mind, that Death is not to be feared.
Paraphrastically translated into our vulgar English tongue by Johan Bale.
(?*?)



To his special good frynde Master Griffine Tyndale, Johan Bale wishes long
and prosperous welfare in Christ.
AT the instau^t request (dear frynde Master Tindale) of an old and familiar
acquaintau^ce of mine, Johan Uogler an Almayne borne, I translated this little
wurke out of Latin into English, and from poesye to prose above iii. years
ago. And now it came in my mind, not only to make it commen unto you, but a so
to dedicate it, and so publysh it fourth in your name The author thereof, called
Baptista Mantuanus, was an excellent Poet in the prouynce of Lumbardye,
brought up in the noble cyt^e of Mantua, where as Uyrgyle the famous Poet was
borne also. And though he were a supersticious fryre of the sect of reformed
Carmelytes, as they there called them, yet was he a man of most excellent
learning in Latin, Greek* and Hebrew, and smelled out more abuses in the
Romysh church, then in those days he durst well utter, Notwithstanding he
spared not in his earnest writtynges, at times, both breuely and sharply to
towche them.

In his fifth Egloge, in declarynge the nature of Avarice, he brings in Rome
for example Rome (says he) rendereth nothing else, but very tryfles. And for
them again she receives good gold. Uayne promyses shall ye have there, and
nothing else* For alas, all that she seeks is money. Covetousness at this
day rewleth all there, and virtue is utterly ba^nyshed. And in the.ix. Egloge
he declares at large, that all kinds of vices are at Rome much made of, and
be had in great honor. Also in Libro.ii. Syluarum, he says: Mars is father to
the Romans, and Lupa their nource, for in lechery and murder spend they all
their lives and study. If ye mind to live well (says he) come not at Rome.
For though ye may at Rome do all other things, yet ye may not there live well,
or lead an honest life.

In his first book de Sacris diebus, as he dare, he holds with the marriage of
Bishops, and says: That in the prymatyue church their lives were much
better, and more holy having wives, then now having none. And that it was a
more sure way a great deal, and more agreeable with gods law, then this
other, considering that God never abhorred marryage, but sanctified it. The
unmarried state is ieopardous (he says) and such a bitter yoke when it is
professed, as Christ would neuercharge any man with. Yea so cruel a burden, as
yet to this day brings fourth many unnatural monsters (abhomynacyons he
would say) and by an horrible presumpcyon was first invented. In the xii* book
of the same wurke he reprehendeth the Schole doctors, for sophistically
contendynge about tryhles, and vanitees, as was the questyon of our Ladies
concepcion among the orders of friars: and the argument of leuended or
vnleuended bread in the sacrament, against ye Greeks. Many great strifes has
been (he says) and brawlyng battles, wise men sumtyme lawghynge both the
parties to scorn, as they have in high seats dysputed the matters. For both
labors has been vain, presumptuouse, rash, and folyshe, their reasons weak
and their matter vnauaylable, more for ostetacyon then any good learning.

In his second book of the life of Nicolas Tolentyne, in speaking of
Bishops and priests, he shows of what ambycyon, tyranny, pride, and
deadly hate they were in his time. They spent all their days (says he) in
banketynge and lechery, yea Rome that is boasted so holy, becommynge a most
execrable brothell house* The popes most holy palace (which is. S. Peter's own
chamber) is now so pestered with whores, that it stynketh to hell gates. Ye the
savor thereof so molesteth heaven, yt it is now become to all the whole world
abhomynable. The great bishops, Ordynaries, Abbottes, Deanes, Prouostes, and
such other, which dailye offer up the vnsau^ry sacryfyces (or sing masses
whether ye will) and eat their unleavened cakes or white waffers, care neither
for Christ nor his doctrine. They think there is no manner of life after this,
for they neither double hell nor dampnacyon. In diverse of his books, he has
many like sentences, which notes him not altogether to be a Papyst, though he
were in the time of most deep papistrye, and a Fryre.

By this we may well perceive, that in all ages and in all congregacyons, some
godly men there were, which having the right sprete of the children of God,
smelled out that fylthie Iakes of the Devil, that malygnaunt synagoge of Rome,
what though they did (...) by the vnpurenesse of the time in many other
things. The world was yet never so sore oppressed with the deep sleep of
darkness and ignorance, but some lively spretes were always vygilaunt, to
wake the multitude. For he that keeps Israel, does neither slu^ber nor sleep.
Psalm. C.xx. And as concerning this present treatise, that death is not to be
feared, which Baptista first wrote to a frynde of his, a peer or senator of
Bononye, called Jason Castelius, he shows him self no less dyuynely then
naturally, no less christenly, then poetycally to handle that matter. But this
I leave to the dyligent reader, because the said treatise does follow here in
course.

In confirmacyon of that Christian rule which he has therein very plenteouslye
persuaded, the scriptures of God has much to utter, if they were thoroughly
searched. If God has enacted it, that all men, ones shall dye. Hebre ix. who
ca^ withstand it? Who can avoid it? If all men have one enteraunce unto life,
and one going out in like manner again. Sap. vii What man will always live,
and never se death? Psalm. lxxxviii. If prosperyte and aduersyte, life and
death, came all of the Lord. Eccle. xi. Why shall we not with pacient* Job
give him thanks for it. Job. i. If by his first appointment, earth must needs
to earth, from whence it was first taken. Gene, iii. Why shall we not
faithfully watch upon the day and hour? Math.xxiiii. He that has in
remembrance the end of that thing which he has to perform, shall never do
amysse. Eccle. vii. though deaths remembrance be bitter to that man which
has pleasure in his riches, Eccle. xiiii. Yet be not thou afraid there of,
which have thy consolacion in Christ Phil. ii. for precyouse in the Lords
sight, is the death of true beleuers. Psalm. C.xv.

And blessed are they which departs in the Lord. Apoca. xiiii. for the
sowles of the ryghteouse are in the hand of god Sap. iii. and now rest from
their labors, Apoca. xiiii. No malycyouse tormente^ hurt them any more.
Neither hunger nor thirst greueth the^, God has wyped away all sorrowful
tears from their eyes. Apoca. vii. Much better is death then a wretched
life, or a life in co^tynuall syeknesse. Eccle. xxx. Yea, the losinge of our
life (Christ says) is the saving thereof. Luce. ix. Death was to. S. Steven
a sweet sleep in the Lord Acto. vii. Saint Paul calls death auau^tage, and
a thing best of all to be lewsed from this flesh, and to be with Christ. Phil
i. He yt hears my wurdes (says Christ) and believes on him that sent me,
has everlasting life, and shall not come in to dampnatyon, but passes from
death to life. Ioa^.v. Why then should a man professinge Christ, fear to dye?

All this have I written to you (my special good frynde master Tyndale)
knoinge you to be, not unlike faithful Simeon, a man fearing the Lord, and of
long time lookynge for the latter consolatyon of Israel. And now beholdinge it
presently in them that rejoice in the wurde of the Lord, and are through
faith ordained to eternal life. Acts. xiii. ye have no more care for this
life transitoriouse* But now from hence fourth with the said Simeon, ye dailye
desire to depart in peace, because ye have s^an^ of salvation, both the light
and the glory in Jesus Christ, for all true beleuers* Luce. ii. to you (I say)
have I dedicated this simple labor of mine to whom I acknowledge my self to
be most hyghlye bond, but yet the veryte more, desyerynge you to accept it
with no less good heart then it is sent, trusting hereafter to send you
much better* Thus ever fare ye well in Christ Jesus. Amen.

A lamentable co^playnt of Baptista Mantuanus an Italysh Poet, wherein he
famyliarlye commoneth with his own mind* that death is not to be feared.
Paraphrastycallye translated into our vulgar English tu^ge by Johan. Bale.
O Folyshe mind or waueryng conscience, whi art thu sorrowful? why desparatlye
fear thu Death, as one of thy self forgetful? O blind soul, and
indiscreet heart, why do thu so much regard this wretched weak bodi? Whiles
thu sore tre^blest, that fearfulness of thine tormenteth my bowels. The
terror thereof slydeth down from my heart, and accombreth my whole body. My
sick face in waxinge pale, confesses thy grefe, and the cold caulme thereof
ouerwhelmeth my feeble stomach. Set a part such heaviness, considering that
deaths power extends not over all. The more part of things created,
fears nothing the darts of Death. For God has graciously given the chief
Empire to life, to death has he in comparyson granted but a very small
power. The water and the earth are subject to corrupcyon, so are the air and
fire with all those things who^ they bring fourth, or yt are made of their
mixtures. For so much as ye high heaven, and the fixed stars therein, were
created of a far other matter, they never change their cou^tenau^ces, but
remain always incorruptible. And although the creator of all things, being
an omnipote^t God, might at his pleasure, reduce them again in to their old
Chaos, or confuse matter without shape. Yet will not his divine goodness so
do, but of most loving fauer he permits those his creatures, both to live
and remain. Yea, he suffers them not only to continue, but also to mynystre
their virtues and properties, each one in his kind, and gives them his daily
strength in perfourmau^ce of the same. The things which he made durable,
persyst still in their strength, and can by no violence be destroyed, but must
for ever endure. The things which he constituted corruptible and mortal, must
be consumed of time, and so have their ends by corrupcion. All that is above
the regyon of the Elements, he has appointed to remain for ever. Under ye
Moan has he placed such works as naturallye must perysh. The florishinge
borders of life, are therefore most large, Death being an enemy, holds
empire under the stars, in places much more narrow. Yet are not all things
under the Moon, subject to corrupcio^. Life wythdraweth sumwhat from Deaths
iurisdiccion. For though the bodies of men be mortal by commixtion of
Elements, yet have their sowles a substance of dyuyne simplicite, whereby they
are immortal. Symplicite without mixture dyschargeth death, for so much as it
can not of it self be divided, neither can it dysseuer one part from an other.
The simple is not compact of the.iiii. Elements, but that noble work God
created of nothing. O foolyshe mind, why art thou than heavy? yea, why fear
you death? as one of thy self forgetful? why do thu so indiscreetly love that
carrian carcas of thine? That feeble body thou fauourest, by whose accombraunce
thou art not only vexed, but also both oppressed, weltered, and made vile in
his filthynesse. So that thou have no power to look toward heaven which is
thy natural ma^sio^ but thou art enforced to neglect yt eternal benefyght.
Thou have pleasure in that wretched body, whose felyshyp violently draws the
into all shame, filthynes, and sin. By a thousand naughty affectes, or ill
mocyons* art thou led, to thy notable infamy, not unlike the ox that is under
a most heavy yoke. Under this great wayght thu lie, as did the Giaunte
Enceladus, whose members the Poets report to be buried under the mighty hyl of
Aethna. The wanton pleasures or entisementes of the body, are thy cruel
enemies, yet wylt thu not so take them, for their property is to overthrow the
vnbewares. By them fell Adam our first parent, from Paradise his first ma^sion,
and became a miserable exyle, by tastynge the forbidden fruit. Look well upon
it, what careful sorrows, and what pain full dyseases that vile and wretched
flesh brings with him? Behold how lyghtlye it is corrupted, and when it
has need of necessary food, how extremelye ever more it calls upon the
for help: Always is it weak untoward, negligent, and has death at hand.
Evermore brings it pensyuenesse, evermore anguysh and trouble. O folysh heart
why sorowest you? Why fear thu death so much, as one of thy self
forgetful: yea, why delyghtest thu so much in that mortal body of thine? God
has made the, ye lady governor thereof, and thu art ready to become a slave to
these stynkynge members and carryage of rott. Awake out of this slomber, and
shake away from the, these unprofitable cares. Leyserly gather thy wits
together, and look to thy natural office, as one of power or in autorite.
Leave these earthely studyes and consider who rules the heavens, who reuolueth
the clear shinynge stars? Tell me hardely, what powers they are that moves
so mighty substau^ces: How comes it to pass, that the spring time the
harvest, the cold winter, and the hot dry summer, returns to us yearly:
what is he that causes these contynuall courses by ye worlds reuolucion:
Bodies are subject to spretes, and life quickneth them. A lively mind is it,
that rules and reuolueth the heavens. A most worthy mind is it (yea, God him
self) which holds resydence in the clear top of the world, or the heaven
imperyall. This mind not only conserueth, but also disposes, and quickneth
forewarde his own large wurke. This eternal mind is it, that created all
things in.vi. days. Alone among all other, have this mind rested ever
se^ce. This worthy mind, uses all other minds as his mynysters, and
tempereth by them, his universal work at his heavenly pleasure. To the lowar
planetes this mind or power adioined the inferyour minds, and taught them the
true offices of their admynystracyons. These stars (says he) shall engender
the clouds, these shall provoke the wyndes. This admixture shall bring forth
increase, this will minister famine. That planete shall move battle, that
planete shall call upon peace. That star enge^dereth a scarsenesse, that
star will bring habundaunce. Some causes men to take thought, some moves
the^ again to rejoice. Some brings men a lost, some again throw them under
foot. Of some of these bodies take virtues their orygynall, of other takes
rote such inordinate love as brings forth all fylthy living. One star
anoyeth, an other prospeareth, in kingdoms being at variau^ce. One will take
away life, an other will give it. All stars which commenlye alter or
change the corruptyble world from time to time, God has made known to the
ethereall spretes. So has his eternal good mind toward man, given rules
and art to move that wayghtye work of his, and by those just laws, the
stars do govern the world. The mind sent into this corruptible bodi,
enters as does a maier into a city, and that body as a little prison,
becomes a subject to the soul.

As a place of exyle to the lively spretes, has god appointed that miserable
body, that they may therein bridle all worldly affeccions by offices of
justice and godly works of faith. This life is like an horse way, and as it
were a great Theater or place where people do assemble to behold so^dry feats,
where every man receives praise or authority according to his fine doings.
Each manne labors for his part. Some there are which seeks to get heaven,
and some run headlynges to the devil, and axe all their fryndes no leave.
Like as the superyour spretes, have a superyour sprete which rules the^, so
has the inferyour mind a governance over the inferior members. In his power
is it, to repress all ire and to assuage both glottenouse and lecherouse
affectes, also to subdue all fylthy couenau^ts To that intent (o my mind) has
God made the master over all these members, that thu should with all speed
subdue faithfully, that his laws has forbidden the. Hyde not the powers which
he has lyberally given the, neither yet withhold them from due exercise,
co^syderynge the charge is left to, thy arbytryment. As the eternal God, and
the great mighty heaven with the elements, is called the greatter world, so
are we here named the lesser world. Yea, we I say again, for in deed we are
many things, who^ a serten copulacyon makes one, and that is called the
lesser world. All that we se done in the greatter world, we may in like
manner behold now in our selves. The heart, the liver, and the head, are in
us as the heavens, the senses are as the stars, the mind joined with reason
and understanding, is in us as God. All other things, if we dylygently
search, will seem within manys body, to do their diverse offices. The four
humors are unto the, as the.iiii. elements, and that comes of them, thou
shalt iustlye call the myxt or componed bodies. Into diverse kinds general,
may these be dyuyded, and into special matters also. Many of them wants
life, yet is there in us all kind of liuelines. The hears ar in manner as a
wode or forest, the uncomely parts may be compared to beasts unreasonable. The
fleume or reume which issues from the ouermost parts of the head, may well
be taken for the rain showers droppyng out of ye sky. As a ragynge floude
shall that moist humor be, which comes fourth of the nosethrylles. The wind
of the stomach, the pauch and bellye evermore retayneth. And as the angels do
mynyster unto God in great number, in the higher world, so have thu always
here bineth much copy of spretes assiste^t ever unto the. Some there be, which
are engendered of the liver, some are created of the heart, some fatche their
oryginal from the ouermour fortress of the head. These be the instruments of
thy bodily powers, and swiftly they ro^ne ye way which thu appointest them Thu
therefore art the god, you art the first power of this thy world, and by yt means
haste you the rule of this lesser world. Be therefore watching, and take upon the
that autorite and laws which are given the. Look up toward heaven, and se how
the stars hold their course without breach of order. O indiscreet mind,
why sorowest thu? yea, why so fear death, as one of thy self forgetful? Thu
ydyote fool, why delightest you so much in that wretched body? Call thy wits
to the, as yet dispersed, or dyuersly affected to things which are
corruptyble. And fall not from God for things so deceytfull and vain. Convert
the unto things which are essencyally good, and shall never perysh, which are
celestyall causes, and let no pains that are to be taken for gods honor
terrify ye. A battayie must be (no questyon) no triumph is obtained without
fight, neither yet any garlande given but to him that manfully stands. God is
the reward of this conflyct, so is heaven the eternal stipend. Let these
gifts provoke ye to esteem this battle so much the lyghter. For cherefully
shall you pass after death, into the plesaunt camps of heaven. Conuenyent is
that place to them which has minded eternal things. The spretes of heaven
will receive the, as a fryndely companyon of theirs, into the portalles of
clerenesse, where as thu shall find very commodyouse dwellynges. Thus shall
thu at ye latter, come from greuouse cares and from long continued troubles,
into a peaceable rest, and mansyon of quietness. In the paradyse above, or
like place of pleasure, among the departed saints, shall be thy cotynuaunce
having evermore all the heavens at thy pleasure. Among other habundaunte
feasts and plenteouse bankettes, thu shalt taste of immortal waters and
delycates vuspeakeable. A celestyall song will be uttered at those
recreacions, and so sweet melodyes as are able to move ye stars. With the
saints departed hence shall thu live, and with them shall thu reign in
heaven, so much glory herafter shall thu have, and so much heavenly honor. In
that place is eternal quiet, in that place is eternal pleasure and a life
replenished with felicityt perpetual. O folysh mind, why waylest thu: why
have thou such a fear to death, and art become as a parsone all wytlesse? Thu
insipient sot, why do thu so much regard that carrayn carkeys, Thu fear
the departure of thy body that latter conflicte troubles thy weakness,
exceeding doubt have thu of the tyckle name of death. Uery certain is it, that
the mortal body shall return to earth, yet will not that sleep be continual. Our
sowles must again return to the bodies, and the members shall be restored to
their right places. Why then doste thu folyshly fear considering that in
death are no doloures? If any sorrow be found therein, it ryseth of a
desperate fear. Do fearfulnes therefore away, and death will be but a sleep Yea,
it will apeare a wonderful quiet, the senses wythdrawe^ from the feeble weak
body. The ignorance of causes, makes death to men rerrible, but he little
knows what he fears, which fears his own death. Where as syckenesse
begins myghtely to invade the feeble heart, in all ye whole body besides, the
senses wax dulle. The battle anon after cease, so soon as nature gives
place to his mortal poison, and the enemy obtayneth vyctory. Then is strength
overthrown, a cold faintness so enters in by force, and wastes away the
aydynge or confortes of life. Anon Death beholdinge a far of, his banner
erected, enters the members quyetlye subdued. For syckenesse first of al
being the wyly wepon bearer of death, secretly seeks destruccio^ by pryuye
assaults. Neither trumpet nor waytes, nor yet brazen horn may give warnyng,
no, neither mouth nor armor may seem to make any manner of dinne, as is heard
in other skyrmishes. That sycknesse as a prompt warrior, should be ready at the
walls with out warning given, which is to destroy the body vnbewares, God
has appointed him to have swyft fete. These are the armies of death, with
these soldiers does bitter syckenesse fight, and is as a messenger sent
fourth before that ungentle Death. And as concernyuge his diffinicion, Death
is a swyft flight or passage from the corruptyble body, rather to be desired,
than to be fled from, of men that are godly. O folysh mind, why sorowest thu
the^? yea, why fear you death as one forgetful of thy self? Whi do thu
vndyscretely love that frail body of thine: Sceuola ye noble Roman contempned
the death, so ded the valiant Greek Achilles, with many other renomed,
worthy, and excellent captyues more, set it all together at naught. Yea, some
which have had no hope of the life to come, neither have they known of our
christen faith, yet have they esteemed the death as nothing. Now to the, which
have rereyued holy baptym, and to whom the clear light of the gospel has been
minystred. Thu have less strengthen the^ a Pagane, for thu unfaithfully
fear the death, yet know it of suertie yt death brings with it a much
more excellent and precyouse kind of life then was the other. Nevertheless if
thu say unto me, yt in death are such signs of dolor, as are able to move
the most mighty and valiant hearts For so much as we behold in daily experyence
both the eyes and the mouths of them that depart at the fearful enteraunce of
death to have most wonderful mouinges, Take this for an earnest warning,
and be not deceived with so doutful similitudes, neither yet faint at them as
does an old dottynge gossyp. For take this of me. If the sick creatures which
are at the point of death, do show such terrible tokens, it may not be
reckened that they come of the extreme pains or grefes of the body. Many vain
fantasies does occupy the imagynacyon of the mind, and they trouble the soul,
and bring the heart in much fear. In proof of this, we have heard it often
reported, that men many times in a rage, have leaped down from high hills
and deep buyldynges to their deadly parell. This has only their deceitful
ymagynacyon wroughte in them, and not the pain which has come of their
grievous sickness When the fire is ones put to the straw and the stock
thoroughly kyndled, thyncke heaviness ryghtly to be represented or sygnyfyed. O
mind, why art thu sorrowful? and wherefore fear thu death, forgetting thy
self, so madly? O imprudent asseheade, why love thu that frayl body of thine
so inordynatly: Why go thu so far out of square, that thu so much
regardest things mortal? and wylt neither regard thy oryginal nor yet whereto
thu were created? whiles you have a spiritual power, and thy first formacion
from heaven, why is it thy desire to dwell still in this earthely prison? What
haste thu to do with stones insensate? why settyst thu so much by vile earth
and by clay? Thu bear the symylytude and true image of god. Leave to brute
beasts this earthly, dwelling, for heaven is thy due heritage. This world is
to us, no country natyue, but a very vncommodyouse exile, I pray the the^ tell
me, why do thu prefer this wild place of thy ba^nishment, to the plesaunt
land thu art borne to? yea, why had thu rather to be locked up in that
dark dongio^, the^ to enjoy the co^modytees of that fredome? A sweet thing
were it for the, from hence to be removed to the plesaunt socyete of the old
holy fathers, and so to behold those men, which have of the scriptures most
worthi praises. What sight in the world can be to us more delectable: the^ in
one place to behold all ages, or men of all generacions sens the worlds
beginning? If it chance to come into thy head to fear ye torments of hell,
or doubtest to be brent in the burning lake thereof? Thu ought first to
co^sydre, that god is no enemy to us mortal creatures. Unsemynge is it that he
be reckened an ungentle or vnmercyful father. As it becomes him of his godly
nature to be pityful, so is he of us to be reckened very pytieful For he that
thinks him to be without merci, does not rightly judge him a father. No, no,
he accounts him to be no father. For what mad man would grant him to be a
God, whom he ca^ justly deny to be merciful? God is our universal goodness.
Al things that are precyouse and hyghlye to our profyt, god ministers. But
what thing ca^nyst thu judge to be more better tha^ mercy? why sorowest thu
then, thu waueringe mind? yea, why fear you death, forgetful of thy self?
How comes it to pass thu dottynge fool, that thu art so careful for that
wretched bodi of thine? The high heaven looks for the, the princes famyly
there does call the by name, and also the holy senate or counsel of the
eternal father, do couete the very much. Tell me ernestly, why do thu love
thine own damage? why do thu desire thine own hurt or decay? Do thu not
think that a want or loss is a great discommodite? Show me by thy faith, O
mind unquiet, why do thu fear to resort to such places, where as non are
but thy fryndes? why do thu doubt pain? why dreadest thu punyshmente? If thy
conscience bear the witness of most greuouse sins, and so accombre the,
repent them with al thy heart. For repentance takes al sin away. We are
certain and sure, what the gentilnesse, the clemency, and the mercy is, of
our heavenly father. Yea, we perfyghtly know it, how swiftly he will bend him
self, to hear our humble prayers. If we do well, we shall give to God our
hearts, and with bitter tears we shall do sacryfyce to him. No offering in
the world, can be more acceptable or plesaunt unto him. If thu bewail or
lament thy sins, such a gentle father have thu, as will clearly remyt them.
God alone requires a contryte heart. He only accepts an humble request. God
does not regard the smoky sacrifices, neither yet is he pacyfyed with aulters
nor with offeringes if the hearts religion be wanting. A young spring will bow
with a western wind, with a string is a bow made crooked. Fire melts stele,
blood breaks an adama^t and god is mollified by lowlines of the heart. Leave
your eartheli care or study, ye most filthy bands or mortal members. Give over
thy possession, you stinking do^gio^, and trouble no more the minds yt are
godly. Worship, pleasure, honor, possessions, with other co^moditees worldly,
are subject to fortune and destenye. These be the things that rauysh those
minds which have no foresyght, and throw them in to hell. These are the snares
that are wont to detayne us, and let us in all good workynge. O my christen
soul, I tell this tale to the. Body and goods with other like, will perysh, as
things corruptyble and mortal. Thu only shall continue as a thing immortal.
Thu art the daughter of the eternal god, my gentyl mind, desire thy fathers
kingedome than with a cherefull countenance. Run to thy lounig father, slide
into his bosom, hold him, embrace him, and kiss him, for he with all his
household, will most lovingly receive the. Garlands prepare they to thy head, a
semely white garment, beutified with stars and fine gold shall reach to thy
very feet. Thu shall wonder to behold the innumerable multitude of saints,
clappynge hands and reioycynge at thy coming. In such peace and concord
agrees the heavenly cytiezens, that their love ouerfloweth, as does a great
mighty sea. The partycular arms or signs of honor, obtained by valeauntnesse
of mannehead, causes one man to be known from an other. But love has an
other propertye. He suffers nothing to be particular. As charity is common,
so makes he al common to all mennys needs. For nothing holds a perfyght
love to his own use only. O indiscreet mind, why sorowest? yea, why fear
death so unwisely? O dottynge fool, why fauourest that vile carrayne of thine
so much? Then with a good heart and wyllyngly, ouerleape ye three sholdes of
death, and fear in no wise the fantastical name thereof.

Thus ends the lamentable song or complayute of Baptista Mantuanus, that
death is not to be feared, familyarly translated into Englysh by John Bale.
(*.)
Imprinted at London by Ihon Day, dwelling over Aldersgate beneth Saint
Martins.

These books are to be sold at his shop in Chepesyde, by the Little Counduit
at the sign of the Resurrection. reversed

Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum solum. Per septe^nium.


