The Articles of Let and Court for the Lyberties of Southwarke.

Imprinted at London by Ihon Cawood, Prynter to the Queen's Majesty.

Cum Priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis.

Anno. M.D.LXI.

ARTICLES.
FIRST, you shall inquire and true presentmente make, by the oaths that ye have
taken of all your Hedboroughes, with there decennaryes and other officers,
with all other persons and resyentes that ought to be here at this Court and
law day, and if any of them make default ye shall present their names.

Also ye shall inquire if any rightefull custom or lawefull duetye, as head
Silver, common fine, or smoke money, as commenlye (men call it) be withholden
or withdrawn from the Lord of this Court and let, how long it has been
withholden, by whom, and in what baylyffes time it seized, and by whose
procurement and in whose defaulte and present their names, that process may be
made out of this court to restore and recover the same again.

Also ye shall further inquire, what ye pay for your common fine, or Sheriffs
yield, in carten, at this day, and whither it has been gathered amongst you
as it has been used and accustomed before this time, and be redye to be paid
in Court.

Also ye shall inquire for Gods part and behalf of all Heretykes, and
Lolleres, and of al them that preach, teach, and keep any erromous and
heretical opinions, contrary to the catholic faith of Christ, and of the
Queen's May sties godly procedynges, and of their adherentes and scoles:
Heretics be they properly that hold any erroneous opinions against the faith
of Christ and ordynaunces lefully used in the church: And Lollers be they that
eat flesh in times of abstenence, and prohibited by the law of holy
Church, that be not Sick or weke or have any license for the same.

Also ye shall inquire of all traitors both by the common law, and by the
statute law: A traitor by the common law, is properly, he that does
counterfeyte and make false money, or does clyppe the Queen's coin, wasshers or
demynyshers of the same coin or any other lawful coin that is permitted and
suffered to be curraunte within this Realm, to the derogacion of the Queen's
prorogatyue royal and indempnitye of her hyghnes Subjects, Treason by the
Statute is where a man does counterfeyte the Queens Seals or any of
them, Sign manuell, stamp or signet for any faulse intent or purpose: Pety
Treason is where the wife apprentys or servant does kill her husband or the
servant or apprentyces his master or any other person that owe the duty,
obedyence, or confydence to them.

Also ye shall inqnyre of all manner of murders, whereof sum be more heinous
then some, as wylfull murder, which is of a malice pretensed or lyinge in
wait to sleye a man, and according to that malycyous intent and purpose,
sleyeth him so that he which is slain make no defense against him, if any
manne do sley any by chance, that is man's slaughter which is felonye: and
therefore if the queen's high nes grant to any man a general pardon, for all
manner of felonyes, except it be contained within the same, this word murder,
he shall dye for the said murder, and of murders by mysfortune, murder in a man's
own defense.

Also ye shall inquyre of all manner of felonyes, Robberyes, and Burgularyes.
Felony is if a man take felonyously or with a felonious intent, any manner of
goods, or Cattels, of any other person above the vale we of twelve pence, as
money, Apparel, Oxen, Horse, or Sheep, and such other like things, for the
which by the law of the Realm, he shall be takenne for a fellon, and suffer
death, and forfeyt his goods, and Lands, Robberye is where a man takes
with force from any person, either by night or by day, any manner of
thing of any valewe by the high way, way and puts him in fear of life,
or lyme for the which he shall lose the benefytte of his cleargye, and shall dye
by the new statute, and forfeit as aforesaid, burgulary, is where a man with
force feloniouslye does break any man's house, wyndowe, or wall, and albeit he
take nothing, yet he shall dye, and lose the benefit of his cleargye, for that
the law gives no man color to break any man's house, for his house is his
castle and sauegarde.

Also ye shall inquire of Rape, Rape is properlye where any man receaueth any
man's Wife, Wydowe, or Maiden, and has carnallye to do with her against her
will: Yet although afterward she consent to the Act, he shall be taken for au
offend our in the same, and shall be judged a rauysher and suffer for the same,
for because it is at the N. suit.

Also, ye shall inquyre of al manner of accessaryes, as well before that felonye
as of accessaryes after the felonye Accessory, before the felony is where any
person procures and causes any man to steal or rob any person
although he which procures this Act, be not at the deed doing, yet he
shall dye for it, as well as he that does the Act in deed: Accessarye after
the felony is where the act is first committed and done, and afterward
receaueth or takes the thing, so stolyn, or helps to convey him, this is
accessarye after their felonye, for the which he shall dye as well as the
accessarye before the felony: And of all them that be goers on message of any
such felons which be of the nature likewise of Accessaryes.

Also, ye shall inquire of Pety Larciny, that is to say, of pety pykers, and
stelers of things of small valewe, as Hens, Pigs, Geese, Capons, sheffes
of Corn in the Field, Pynnes, and Points, under the vale we of twelve pence,
for the which he shall not dye, but otherwise be ponyshed as by Whyppyng, and
by Stocks, orotherwyse as shall seem to the discretion of them that shall have
the Queen's laws in governance and the examination thereof.

Also, ye shall inquyre if any man has taken the pryuylege of the Church for
murder, in his own defense or felonye, and has abiured to the next Sentuary,
according to the Statute last made for abiuration, and returned out of the
same into this Lordeshyp, and has not obtained the Queens pardon for the same.

Also, if any man has been arrested for suspicions of Felony, murder, or
robbery: And has been let at liberty without suffycient bail takenne by two
Justices, one of the Quorum, and another of Peace, according to the law in
that behalf, the which is an escape in the law, in him that so does let
him goo with out bail.

Also ye shall inquire of all Cutpurses, and pickepurses that repair to any
fayres, or markettes or other lefull congregations, of the queen's subjects,
there and at that time, to pick steal and imbesyl any manner of money, or
Iuels contrary to the law, against them ordained and provided.

Also, ye shall inquyre if any man have abiured the realm, for any manner of
offense of murder, felony, or robbery, and is returned and dwelling here with
out the Queen's pardon, which as a man with out the Queens protexcion, and not
meat to dwell among the Queen's subjects by the law.

Also ye shall inquire of al those that cut out men's tounges, put out men's
eyes, contrary to the Statute in that behalf, made and provided.

Also ye shall inquire if any man have made any rescues upon any of the
Queen's officers in serving any process out of this court, or other wise
doing their duetye, or if any distress be withholden that was lefullye
strayned for any of the Queen's duties or otherwise.

Also ye shall inquire of al outecryes, and hues, made in the night, to the
disturbaunce of the Queen's Subjects, being in Gods peace, and hers, whereby
that such offenders may enter into their howses, when they are abroad to do or
commit any murder, felony or Robbery, or any other like offenses contrary to
the law.

Also, ye shall inquire of all assaults, fraes, batteryes, and bloudshedes,
done and committed against the Queen's peace, that is to sai, that he that with
force or other act comes to any man, he makes the assault: And he that
draws the first weapon makes the affray, and he that draws the first blood
is giltye of the bludshed.

Also, ye shall inquyre of all pound and cage berkers, which is an offense, and
fynable by the law, that is to say, the pound brech. v. li. and the cage
breking is finable as in cases of rescus.

Also, you shall inquire of al them that use any unlawful games, as Dyce,
Cards, Tables, Boulles, Clashe, Tennis, and other such like prohybyted by
diverse statutes, and specially by the last statute of Anno. xxxiii. Henr. viii.

Also ye shall inquire if any man have given any Lands into Mortmayne, that is
to say to any spiritual use or perpetuities as Guyides, Fraternities, or any
other like use without the Queen's special license, had and obtained for the
same, the which lands be forfeit by the law. etc

Also ye shall inquire of all treasure troue within the precynte of this
lordeship, that is to say, if any man have found any Gold, and silver, money,
Plate, bullen or any other Jewels, which is called properlye treasure, hydden
and belongs to the lord of every Lordshyp, where any such is found.

Also ye shall inquire if any man use to keep any market in the church. or
churchyard, or any other hallowed place which is prohybyted by the law.

Also ye shall inquire of all home Sokyns that is to say al such that with
fasing and brasyng, come to men's doors or houses, and their brag and threaten
any of the Queen's subjects, putting them in fear and dread that they dare
not come out of their doors, or sit in their shoppes, to ply their handy
crafts and bodily labors.

Also ye shall inquire of al those that be of thage of.xii. years or above, and
have dwelt within this lordship, by the space of a year and a day, and be not
sworn to be the queen's lyege people, and what person does tetaine the^ that
they may be commanded to bring them in to be sworn.

Also ye shall inquire of al weyfes and strayes found and strayed into this
Lordshyp weyfes, is where any man has stolen any thing, and lost it within
this Lordeshoppe and is fiede and in whose hand it is: Strayes, is where any
Cattle or beast comes into this lordeshyppe estraunge, and no man knows
who is the owner.

Also ye shall inquyre of al regrators and forestallers, are grator is he that
biech all the store of any thing in the markette to thintente to have much in
his own hands, to make the price great, Aforestaller is he that lies by the
way, and byeth any thing before it come to the markette, whereby there comes
oftentimes a great scarutie and necessity.

Also ye shall inquire of al those that use to shoot in any Crosbowe, that
may not dyspend one hundredth pound by the year, or shoot in any Handegonne
contrary to the statute, that have not a suffycyent plakette or license, for
thet sauegarde in that behalf, and that use to sheote in them otherwise then
is lymytted in the said Statute.

Also ye shall inquyre of all them that be under thage of three scoore year,
and above the age of seven years, whyther they use there long bows, as by
diverse and sondrye statutes, it is commanded and provided: And that every
man's son, servant, and prentyses, have a bow and three arrows at the
least: According as in the last Statute made the.xxxiii. year of king Henry
the eight, it is mentioned.

Also ye shall inquire if anistrau^ger or alien to shute in any long bow: for
if they do, they be forfeyte: And it is laweful for any of the Queen's
Subjects to take them forfeyte.

Also ye shall inquire if al Vacaboundes and valient Beggars, that come into
this lordeshyp to beg, having not the letters of lymitation of this hundredth.

Also ye shall inquire of the Constables within this Lordeshyp, knows any
Vacaboundes, resortyng or abiding within this lordshyp, and will not put them
in Stocks, thereto abide by the space of three days, and three nyghtes,
gyuynge them no other sustenaunce but bread and water if that vacabounde be
personable to bear such dyate upon pain of.xx. shyllnges for every defaulte.

Also ye shall in quire of al such persons as use to give any of the said
Vacaboundes, being in stocks, and may bear the diate aforesaid, any other
sustenaunce then is before rehearsed for every person forfeyteth to the lord
twelve pence.

Also ye shall inquire of al eues droppers and night walkers, that use to stand
at men's doors, and wyndowes, to herke^ and here tales, what is said in a
man's house, and carry tales from neighbor to neighbor, to set them at
varyaunce.

Also ye shall inquire of all common hasserders, that is to say, of those that
be masterles, and that no man can tell from whence they come and whither they
will, and sit and play at dyce, cards, and wache all night, and sleep all day.

Also ye shall inquire of al petye Hosteryes, and blind alehouses, that is to
say, they that keep any lodging in their houses, and have not a sign at their
door, or sell ale, and be not auctorised by the Justices and other officers.

Also ye shall inquire if there be any man that keeps any Greyhounde, that
may not dispende xl. s. by the year, or if there be any pressed that keeps any
Greyhounde that may not dyspende ten pound by the year.

Also ye shall inquire of all hunters, and Fawkeners, and takers of fesauntes,
and partriges within the precinct of this lordeshyppe.

Also ye shall inquyre of al Fisshers, and Fowlers, within the precinct of this
Lordshyp, and specially of all them, that take Hernes, Culuers, and other
fowls of warren,

Also ye shall inquire if any man have incrochid upon the Queen's high ways,
or other ways in diminyshyng or imparyng the same, or any of them, for the
enlarging of his own ground.

Also ye shall inquire of al Sewers, dyches, mylbers, and gutters, be scoured
and purged so that they be not noyfull to the Queen's subsectes, or stop any
water courses.

Also ye shall inquire of al purpresters, by water and by land, that is to say,
of al them that do ley by water or by land any great tember logges, stone or
donghiles by the which the Queen's liege people are let or grieved of there
common passage.

Also ye shall inquire if any Bridge be broken, or if any house, hedge, or
pale, be cast down and lie in the high way, whereby the Queen's liege people be
let of there common passage to market, or to the church or otherwise.

Also ye shall inquire of al bond brekers and fyllers up of dyches, that is to
say, of them that remoueth any mark or mere stones, that is set between
the Queen's high ways, and other lords ground, abuttyng upon the same.

Also ye shall inquire of all whight tawyers, that sell not good chafer, as they
ought to do reasonable, and byeth their skyunes, in any other places, then in
towns, or markettes.

Also ye shall inquire of al Cordwainers, and Artyffecers, that make not good
ware for the people as they ought to do.

Also ye shall inquire of al Bouchers, and Poulters, and other Vittellers, that
is to say, if any Boucher kill and sell any corrupt bytayle, and sell to
excessyuely in price, that is to say, above a penny gaynes in a shyllyng, for
they ought to have no more by the St^tute: And the Poulter sell any corrupt or
stale pultrye and unwholesome for man's body, and for to excessyue price.

Also ye shall inquyre if the Fyshers, and other Vittelers, do bring to
markette and sell good and holsesome, and seasonable fyshe for man's body, and
likewise sell it not to excessyuelye.

Also ye shall inquire of all Bakers, that bake unwholesome bread, and break
the assile, and make not iiii. loves for a peni two loves for a penny, and one
for a penny, and set not their marks upon the said bread that it may be
known, whose bread it was.

Also ye shall inquire of all Brewers, that brewe not good and holse some Bear
and Ale, of good and sufficient strength, according to the price of malte,
and whither they sell any out of there door before the ale taster have tasted
it, and thereof have set price, and whether it put to sale in vessels marked
with the Antonye Cross or not.

Also ye shall inquire of all Huxsters, and Tapsters that sell Bear, Ale, and
bread, by any unlawful dishes, booles, cups, and measures unsealed whereby
the Queen's liege people are dysceaued, not knowing what they have.

Also ye shall inquire of al them that use to sell by double or false waightes,
and measures, that is to say, to by a great, and sell by a lesser, lacking the
just weight, length, gage, and quantiof the standerd.

Also ye shall inquire if al Brewers, have their vessels marked with the
Anthony Cross, by the artiffycers of the compass, and that the Bear barrel
contain.xxxvi. gallons, the Kylderkyn.xviii. the Ale barrel.xxxii. the
kylderkin xvi. and other vessels after that rate.

Also ye shall inquire of al Myllers, that use to take to excessive tole,
otherwise then they ought to do of right according to the old custom and law.

Also ye shall inquire whither your cage, Stocks, or Cuckyng stole, be well and
suffycyently repared and sufficient for the punishment and save keeping, of
offenders, and whyther your Buttes be well and sufficientlye made for the
mayntenaunce and increase of Artyllarye.

Also ye shall inquyre and present al the^ that does offend in the Statute of
Apparel, made in the first and second years of king Philyp and Queen Mary,
that is to say, such as do wear any Sylke, or velvet, in their hattes,
cappes, sword gyrdells, dagers sheathes, or spur lethers, that be not worth
two hundredth pounds in goods, or may not spend twenty pound by the year.
etc. And whither any persons keep any servant offendyng in the premises, and
do know thereof, and keep him in his service by the space of xiiii. days. etc.

Also ye shall present al those that take any fry or any kind of Fyshe, by any
manner of unlaw full ingine, contrary to the stat^^^^ made in the first year of
our soueraygne Lady he Queen's Majesty that now is, for which offense the
offendour shall lose.xx. s. etc.

Also ye shall present whether there be Surueyours by the high ways,
according to the statute, and whither all persons, according to the statute,
do labor.iiii. days in every year or not, and whyther your highwayes be in
good state and not in decay, upon the pain limited in the same statute or
not. etc.

Also ye shall present that if any Boucher, Bruer, Baker Poulter, Cook, or
Fruterer shall at any time conspire covenant, promise or make (...) oaths,
that they shall not sell their vytalles, but at certain prices, or any
artifficer, workman or labourer, do conspire couenaunte or make any promise
together, that they shall not make or do their works, but at certain prices
and rates, or shall enterprise to fynishe that another has begone or shall do but
certain work in a day or shall not work, but at certain times and hours,
that then every such offendour for the first offense, to lose ten pounds, if
he be able to pay it, and if not.xx. days imprisonment, and have but bread
and water, and for the second offense, to lose.xx. li. if he be able, and if
not, then to be set on the pillary and lose one of his ears.

Also ye shall present whether that all such as be inherytours of any estate
of any lands or Tenementes, do kill or cause to be killed all Crows, Chowes,
Rowkes, that bread upon the possessioners, according to the Statute upon pain
of the penaltye contained in the same.

Also ye shall inquire of al them that law fully by any commissioners of musters
from the Queen shall be commanded to muster and wilfully do absent them selfs
from the said muster, and have no lefull excuse, the same person so offendyng
shall suffer ten days imprisonment without bail etc, except he do agree with
the said commissioners to pay xl. s. for the same offense to the Queen's
Majesty use.

Also ye shall inquire of all Corwayners whither they make good and laweful
shoes and bowtes, and other like ware of lawefull and sufficient leather,
according to the Statute or not.

Also ye shall inquyre if all the officers within this lordeshyp, that is to
say, the baylyfe concerning his office, the constable concerning his office,
the Ale conner concerning his office the Scauengers, concerning his office
have well and truly done the same, without any manner of extortion or other
misdemenure.

Also ye shall inquire if all defaultes, and playntes, that were presented at
the last law day, be amended or not, as they ought to be. And of these points
and all other that ye were wont to be charged with that is worthy to be
presented, ye shall go together and bring in your verdycte.

FINIS.

