THE CHRISTIANS MAP OF THE WORLD: Drawn at the solmne Funerals of Mr. Henry
Chitting Esquire, Chester-Herauld at Arms, interred January 11. Anno Domini
1637.

By EDWARD SPARK Master in Arts, and Preacher at St. Mary Islington.

Sic pulcherim us olim. nunc pulcherim a quondam. skull and crossbones

Fracta licet, laetabuntur: The heart of the wise is in the house of mourning,
but the hear^ of fools is in the house of mirth. Eccles 7 6. LONDON, Printed
by I. N. for RICHARD THRALE. 1637.

TO THE UPRIGHT PATRON both of Laws and Learning, the Right Honorable Thomas
Lord Coventry, Baron of Aylsborough, Lord Keeper of the great Seal of England,
and one of his Majesty's most honorable Privy Council: The Felicity of both
Worlds.
GREAT LORD,
THese are a Widows tears, vouchsafe your wonted eye; Elegies extorted forth
by the sad Relict of Master Henry Chitting: I had else no purpose thus to feed
the surfeter, as little desire as desert for Printing; And therefore here my
pen (as for the most part, man) comes into the dangerous World, first crying,
lamenting common frailty in a private loss, indeed such blackes best suit this
season of Printed in Lent, the Plague not altogether ceased in this Kingdom.
humiliation. For though our bloody waters (thanks be to God) are well abated,
yet still our Rachel mournes, the Prophets rod still cries unto the City,
Micah 6 9.
and to the Country also; both sicknesses of body and security of minds, call
loud enough for cautions of mortality: one, through the wealth and pleasures of
the world, persuading us of Tabernacles here; The other by the downfall of
many round about us, bidding us build on a more firm foundation. None knowing
how soon the lot of Jonah may fall upon their heads, it becomes us all (like
Abraham) to be often sitting in the door of our tents.i. Cogitantes de Egressu,
Genesis 18.1.
thinking of our dissolution and more permanent provision: and in this
Christian-Map you have the means of both, both worlds delineated, compared,
motives and directions for the better choice. I confess, an ordinary, but a
needful subject, dressed like a child of sorrow and my busy charge; plain and
serious, without either descant or embellishment: Such as it is (with the
Author) is your Honors prostrate; Importunity brings it Yet not to travel
far, but 50. printed, visits but some few friends, whose love, J hope, will
cover the Errata.
abroad, Gratitude, to your Lordship; and there is magnanimity in accepting small
things, as well as in conferring great, your Lordship both ways known
innobled. I am not ignorant how that the gravest Paul's and learned Gamaliels of
the times ambiat your Noble Patronage; enough to argue it presumption in the
younger Timothys (to erect such great gates to their little Cities, as your
prefixed Name) but that it is known as well, 1 Timothy 4.12.
your equal goodness (tutored by Saint Paul) countenanceth virtue in all
ages; and for mine own part (I confess) of all ill manners I most decline
ingratitude: Qui ingratum omaia dixerit.
Pardon then well-affected Zaches though they clime a little to have a sight of
virtue, suffer us engaged spectators, to behold your brightness, as well as to
enjoy your influence: stars lose not of their height or luster, for the gazers
meandness; nay, often have I seen an humble Valley grace a stately Mountain:
nor will a Deaths-head spoil a Christian feast, any more than those old
Macedonian Banquets. Yet this I serve up here (Right Honorable) not as a
Philips Monitor (I know your zeal needs no remembrancer) but as the Poets
congratulator, Qui monet ut facias quod jamfacis, etc. ipse monendo laudat, and
h^^tatu comprobat acta suo. Ovid. Matthew. 27.57.
Your exemplary piety, like that noble Arimathaean (building the Sepulcher in
the Garden) ruminates these Novissima, even in the midst of earthly happiness;
and in the throng of all your stately cares, finds opportunities of retird
devotions: among which at any time, if a favorable eye but second the
encouragement of your gracious ear, these Funerals may happily prove my studies
Natalitialls; and future time give the world better Testimony of his
thankfulness, who in the mean while, is at his prayers for your Honors, Stock
and Branches, Vine and Olive-plants; that you may all be happy with the dew of
Heaven, and fatness of the Earth. It Is the daily appreciation of

Your Lordships humble votary and unfeigned Honourer. EDWARD SPARK.
From your Islington Feb. 19. 1637.
THE CHRISTIANS MAP OF THE WORLD: Drawn at the solemn Funerals of Mr. Henry
Chitting Esquire, Chester-Herauld at Arms, interred Ian. 11. Anno Dom. 1637.
OMNIS dies, omnis, hora quam nihil sumus osteudit, etc. Every day, you see,
nay, every hour (says Seneca) shows us what a Nothing we are, Libro d^
brev. vitae.
and by some fresh argument or other puts us in mind of our forgot mortality:
had not each Day enough of its own grief, this could supply the rest, The
occasional Preface.
we could now lend our neighbors tears, but that (I fear) common calamities
have already stord them; stord them with such sad spectacles as lies before
us: such indeed for frailenesse, but seldom (I think) such for goodness: one
that's Text enough for a discourse, Acts 20 7.
were it as long as Saint Paul's Sermon, Act. 20. but that, here, double modesty
prohibits Panegyricks; and you know funeral Sermons are not so much to
glorify the dead, as edify the living: and therefore we will take another
Text, whereof yet He shall be the Comment, while we the Applicatours: and that
is written in the thirteenth Chapter of Saint Paul to the Hebrews and the
fourteenth verse.

We have here no continuing City, Text. Heb. 13. verse 14.
but we seek (or look for) one to come. THat Wise observer of a Time for all
things Eccles. 3. Eccles. 3.
tells us of a tempus nascendi, a time to be borne, and tempus moriendi, of a
time to die, but not so much as mentions tempus vivendi, any time at all to
live; Man having indeed to certainty of that, but passing from his proper to
the common Mother (from the grave of the womb, to the womb of the grave) as
swift as either ship or shuttle, wind or arrow; like Job 9.25.
Jobs Poast, having ever one City to leave, an other to make toward, none to
abide in, (...), etc. For we have here no continuing City.

But ere we enter this same City, let us look a little on the gate of it, this
word The context in the particle For.
For: 't will bring us better acquainted with the context, and, as a Porter
open to us the doors of this building. It is particula rationalis, say the
Schools: For, is commonly a relative particle, wheresoere prefixed, speaking
those words a reason of precedent matter: and so indeed it is here; Saint Vide
Parei praefa in Coment super Hebraeos.
Paul now taking his farewell of the Hebrews (as I may make him the Author with
more Seconds than opponents.) The Apostle, I say, in this last chapter of his
Epistle, legacieth many pious duties to their practice (enforcing all his
documents with reasons.)

As in the first place Hospitality. verse. 2.
Hospitality, (...). verse. 2. be not forgetful to lodge strangers (says
he) For thereby some have entertained Angels.

Next loyalty in Chastity. v. 4
wedlock, inviolation of the nuptial bed, verse. 4. Marriage is honorable,
etc. but whoremongers and adulterers God will judge.

Thirdly, Content v 5
contentedness with any estate, verse. 5. (...), be content with those things
that you have, For God has said it, I will never leave thee nor forsake thee.

Fourthly, Constancy. verse 9.
perseverance in religion, v. 9 be not carried about with diverse and strange
doctrines (says he) For it is a good thing the heart be stablished with grace.

Lastly, Patience. v. 13
patience and humility in the 13. verse, (...). Let us go forth out of the
camp bearing his reproach, for we have here, etc. As much as if he had said,
Christ (like that sin-offering burnt without the camp, Levit. 6 36.
Lev. 6) suffered without the gate (.i.) most ignominiously for place and
manner; let not us Christians therefore wanton out our lives in Tents of
pleasure, but follow such a Master out of the City (.i.) conversationem mundi
exeamus: Ecolampadius in locum.
relinquish we our carnal conversation, not fashioning our selves according to
this world; a world that ascertaines us of nothing but of our uncertainty, a
non habemus, here no continuing City: it is fit then we think of an abode
elsewhere, it becomes discarded Luke 16 8.
Stewards to provide them, each imitate that wise one in the Gospel, purchase
you a perpetuity, (...)
either by such doing good, or patient suffering ill (no matter which way God
bring us to Heaven) and come the worst, we know Christ's Thorns were platted
into a Crown, that 2 Timothy 2 12.
if we suffer we shall also reign with him. Let the world build on sand,
while he is our Rock we cannot want an house shall stand eternal in the
Heavens, a City, whose Builder and Maker is God: and this is it we look for,
That we long for futuram expectamus: Text.
Text.

But because sorrow, I know, is a passion loves no prefacing, I will forthwith
spread my mantle and divide these waters; and then heeres at one side, Mundi
indigentia, Earths inhospitality, Non habemus, here no continuing City: at the
other, Coeli sufficientia, Heavens all sufficiency, futuram expectamus, we
look for one. Which two parts, I may express, as Zeno.
the Philosopher of old his two Sciences Rhetoric and Logic: the world
appears here pugna contracta, as with a clinched fist, readier to give a blow
than a benefit, a very withered Icroboam, whose hand is shortened that it cannot
help, not help us to a continuing City, (...); here we have none. But the
the other is Manus Expansa, Division.
the open hand of Heaven, fuller of assistances and blessings, than all
Rhetoric can delineat, (...). Indeed this Text is the Christians Map of the
World; consisting likewise of that The pair of Globes, Celestial and
Terrestrial.
pair of Globes Celestial and Terrestrial: Globes (I say) not
Cosmographicall, but Theological; one of them not so much discovering the
rarities of Earth, and flourishing Cities of the world, as demonstrating the
vanity and emptiness thereof, and that there is no continuing City in it: The
the other not so much teaching us the motion of the Stars, and walking unto
Heaven with a staff, as how we may one day shine among those Lights, and
really inhabit that same glorious City, which is some Happiness here, but to
hope for Futuram Expectamus, etc.

The first of these (me thinks) the The Terrestrial Globe of the
Christistian Map. Matthew. 4.
lower Globe, deals with us here, somewhat like Satan with our Savior,
Matthew 4. Setting us, as on a Pinnacle of the Temple, shows us all a fair
Prospect of the Earth; yet with a true, not his false glass; not as a lure,
but as a caution, not in the language of the Tempter, telling us of Kingdoms
and the glory thereof, but in the Apostles, Transit Mundus. 1 John 2. The world
passes, and the glory thereof; 1 John 2.17.
passes! I, and must one day in the Parts imitantur Naturam totius.
total pass to nothing, as now in the parts, to no continuing City: which
defect and indigence of the world, results apparently from these three
circumstances of the Text: Quis, Quid, Vbi: Subdivision. in 3. circumstances.
the Plaintifes here condoling, we: we, the general race of Adam, we,
mortals, because we sinners. Secondly, their wants, what they are scanted of,
and that's a place of residence, a continuing City, Non habemus, we have none.
Lastly, the Scene of all these miseries, where we are thus straightened, and
that's Hic here, in this same dirty (...).
prison Earth. (Text) Briefly of them, and with a discourse as fitting as the
subject, no continuing City: and first of the Plaintifes We.

But what? have we no continuing City? First circumstance, Quis.
by your favor (holy Apostle) did not the Creator, so soon as he had built
this great house the world, and furnished it, bring in Man his Tenant there, and
sole possessour? can we complain of wants? did not all creatures then wear
man's livery, a name of servitude, and the very wheels of Time it self, A
reflection on man's Creation and his fall.
appointed to attend him unto immortality? Can they then, whose is the whole
Earth, want Cities? whose Chariot, Immortality; whose Lackquie, Time was; can
they want continuance? is here a non habemus? we no continuance here! Indeed
the World was thus man's Royall-Mannour once (all Creatures holding of him)
Paradise to have been his Continuing City; and all this too, leased out to him
(paying but the Rent, Obedience) for as many lives as he should have
Posterity: But the edge of his ambition cut off this entayled Happiness, he
would be Paramount, Chief Landlord, He: so breaking the conditions,
forfeited his everlasting Tenure: that now he is but a Tenant at will to an
offended Landlord, and scarce an equal sharer in the vivacity of his
brother-animals; but this misery and mortality of Man, is a condition not
imprinted in him by God, who (as He is Himself Immortal) had put a Coal, a
Beam of Immortality into us, which we might have blown into a Flame, but
blew it out by our first sin; we beggered our selves by harkening after
false Riches, and therefore now are driven to our wants, to these complaints
Non habemus. We infatuated our selves by listening after false Knowledge: I,
that Tree of Knowledge bereft us of the Tree of Life, taught us to know evil
only: and left us doubly like the beasts that perish. Psalm. 49.12.
Psalm 49. both for infatuation and corruption: like the beasts indeed for
praecipitation unto death, but not for the protraction of their life; most of
them running man out of breath if we may believe the Virgilii Epigr. de aetat.
animal.
Naturalists (as specially, I think in this particular) the Crow nine times
numbering out his age, the Stagg four times exceeding hers, the Raven again
trebling his, the Phoenix as long lived as all of them. These and others sport
and chant away whole centuries of years, while man sits sighing over his poor
handful, Psalm 39 5.
Dies fecisti palmares meos. Psalm. 39. Thou have made my days but a spanne
long, nay rather a short spanne; Mine age is nothing unto thee, says David,
there to God, that might say here unto the beasts, mine age is nothing unto
these. And yet it would favor but of learned Heathenisme, (...).
to chide at Nature (as some have done) and call her Stepmother to man, and
natural to others; the Aristot. in Histor. Anim.
Philosopher himself takes of that cavil, affirming one day of a life of
reason, above an age of non-intelligence, beyond all their longaevity of senfe:
but Divinity turns this seeming discontent into a comfort, informing us that
this life properly belongs to things of sense, all its chief blandishments
(treasure or pleasure) being but sensual, and no otherwise than imaginarily
good, The good man envies not the bruites vivacity.
much good may it do them, then with the length of this life, that are to have
none other, Non equidem invideo: while nobler souls of reason and religion,
trampling on this, hasten to a better; a life among their Brother-Angels, in
their own Country, Heaven; There to measure real felicities no more by Time
but by eternity.

No longer then let this be a complaint but consolation, non habemus, that we
have here no continuing City.

Thus having brought you acquainted with the Plainteifs (as well as with your
selves) consider now their wants, Transition to the second particle.
(...): we have not a continuing City.

A continuing City] We are not here restrained unto the Letter, as spoken of
material buildings (though even in that sense also it be true enough) Mors
etiam saxis, obeunt and Marmora. Cities have their period and dissolution, The
litterall truth of the Text.
both occasional and natural. Some of them, like goodly Troy, and better
Jerusalem, those Phoenix-Cities of the world (in successive Ages) buried in
fiery Tombs, raked in their own Ashes: Others, too many of them (witness all
Germany) like old Room and Carthage, sacked and demolisht by the bloody hand of
War; so that (you see) the Imperial Cities of the four great Monarchies,
nay, those Monarchies themselves, all as well as Isai. 47.1.
Babylon, now sit in the dust: and 'twas but flattery in that Livius.
Historian, who called Rome, Eterna Civitas, after so many downefalls, and
scarce a feather now of that proud Eagle left: it was not altogether a fiction
the Poets describing of old Saturn, their god of Time, how he devoured his
children, though of stone, (for such they feigned he had) I am sure the (...)
is real, and calls him Tempus edax; for whatsoere Time brings forth, Time
destroys: This I need say no more of, every languishing body, every nodding
structure is a demonstration; and had not pious care, and sudden too,
prevented, that publick-glory of the Mother City, Saint Paul's Church had
preached a non permanentem, the litterall truth of the Text, but happy are they
who build such Tabernacles here, that are not chid by that same Prophet Haggai.
Haggai. 1 4.
1 Is this a time for you to dwell in seiled houses and let mine House lie
waste, etc. Yet alas how wanton now a days is the worlds invention for
superfluous building, Temples are to old fashioned, the zealous Bernard.
Father may still sigh. Men build as though they should continue for ever, and
glut as though to dye to morrow, which indeed they may rather fear, Isai. 5.8.
such a woe being denounced against them. Isa. 5. but to avert it, imitate that
ecclesiastical Centurion, Luke 7.5. (...). Chrysostom. hom. 2.
Luke 7. and, if thou needs wilt build, let Saint Chrysostom be a little thy
surveighour; Would thou erect beauteous and splendid Edifices? I forbid thee
not (says he) yet found them not on earth, it is but an heap of sand, but
situate in those calm Regions that are above the breath of danger, build in
Heaven (...). Here literally, no continuing City: Besides, too many now a
days (God knows) find another sense to verify the Text, by reason of their
tradelesse shops and fickle offices, experience it a failing a discontinuing
City: but we stick not on the bark any longer, Adouble synecdoche.
led further than the letter by a double synecdoche. First, Continentis pro
Contento, Cities here put for the inhabitants, and our want of peaceful
residence, shadowed under their discontinuance (the Text) strongly reflecting
on that pilgrimage of Abraham. Genesis 12. Genesis 12. City for the inhabitants. Genesis
23 18.
where he is called from his own Country and his Fathers house, to divide a
life between variety of strange lands and dangers; so that indeed we read of
none other settled possession that he had but Mackpelah, his only purchase a
place of burial, thus it was with the Father of the Faithful, he had no
continuing City: Nor any thing better with the children: few and evil have
been the days of my Pilgrimage (says old Israel Genesis Chap 49.
49.) long and evil the days of our Pilgrimage, murmr the children of
Israel in the wilderness: Exo. 14. That Journey, Exodus 14.
a true Type of the Saints way to Heaven, per varios casus, etc. who wandered up
and down (says he) destitute and afflicted, Heb. Heb. 11.37.
11. Militant is the Churches name, she is an host upon continual marches
and removes; Our habitations here, so often varied by occasions, either of
some loss, dis-favour, sickness, or of death (I need give no examples) that,
like the traveling Commonwealth of Israel, we have rather so many-severall
stations, than appropriate mansions: Non habemus hic permanentem.

Again, Synec doche partis.
heeres a Synechdoche Partis, whereby this word City, as the prime part and
Master-peice of Earths perfection, is put for the whole glory and happiness
thereof: and so a City is an emblem of Strength, of Unity, of Rest, of Safety:
in neither of which respects (as I Will succinctly show you) have we (...) here
any Continuing City.

First, Prove. 10.^^ Psalm. 60.9.
it is an emblem of strength, Prove. 10. The Rich man's wealth is his strong City:
and Psalm. 60. Who will lead me into the strong City? This is the frequent
Epithet, through the holy book, strong and well fenced Cities: indeed there is
the Vis Vnita, the combination of most Men and Arms, the Storehouse of
Munition, Civitas cor reipub: It Is the heart of the body-publick, A City an
emblem of strength. Man no continuing City.
the seat of most spirit and vigor, deservedly may these be called strong
houlds: Now what a City man has in this sense, soon be your own Judges:
walk but about it, view well the Towers thereof (if you can find any) how
weakly is he fenced about with these thin walls of clay! walls, that every
Ague shakes, every Dropsy drownes, every Fever fires, every Danger batters;
one Fort indeed there is in it, the heart, but that so feeble, as it is in a
continual trembling, a palpitation not more for breath than trouble, Psalm. 38.
Psalm 38.10.
watchmen too it has, eyes placed in a Tower, the Head, but neither foreseeing
or preventing mischief; at best exercises, either dim or drowsy. The
Soldiers of it, the Hands, often treacherous, advantaging the Enemy, and by
sins wounding his own Bosom, while in all this extremity his Carriages the
Feet are unable to convey him from surprisall, or keep him from being captive
to the grave: so weak a City man is, that even worms do conquer it Plinius
Not. Hist.
Pliny tells us, for a wonder, of a City undermined by Conies; but worms
triumph ore this, and scarce ere glory of the victory. What is it trow,
Philosophers call Man a little world for? is it because he has such
Earthquakes in him, so many Cholicks and Palsies? is it because he has such
Thundrings, sudden Noyses in his Head? because such Lightnings, Inflammations
in his veins? He is a little world indeed, himself the earth, and his misery
the sea: nay, (...).
a great world of weaknesses (God knows) borne the most helpelesse of all
creatures, and lives the sport of every least distemper: how seasonable here
for man is Saint Paul's (...) 2 Cor. 2 Cor. 11.29.
11. (...); who is weak, and I am not weak: yet put the case (with David) he
be so strong, he come to eighty years, yet is it no continuing City, but a
doubled misery, labor and sorrow: Psalm 90.10.
Psalm. 90. non habemus, we have here no continuing City, no City of strength.

Secondly, A City a figure of unity. Man no continuing City. Psalm 122 3.
a City is a figure of unity. Psa. 122 Jerusalem is as a City that is at unity
with it self: at unity, I, a City like each building of it is an aggregation
of many into one, the proper place of laws and government, which are the
causes and maintainers of peace, unity and concord. But alas! we have no such
City, no continuing unity, but rather here, continual discord, witness too
many unquiet Families, our clamorous streets, and the revenging Hall: indeed,
so deep root has that envious man's seed taken in the ground of humane hearts,
that the whole world almost (would I could exempt either Church or State) is
become little better than a field of Tares; for the first, what floods, what
Seas can lend us tears enough to bewail this want of unity in matters of
Religion? how is the seamelesse Coat of our blessed Lord now a days, Want of
unity in the Church.
rent and torn by factious novelists, which the bloody Soldiers themselves
spared, that it might prefigure his united Church? how is the Spouse like her
Head and Savior, crucified between two malefactors! at one side the insulting
Papist, at the other the murmuring Praecisian! while I speak of love, I will not
strait wish both cut off that trouble us, but as our charitable Mother Church
has taught us, pray, Lord forgive our Enemies, persecutors and slanderers, and
turn their hearts; for Religion has no such scandal as this want of union:
And for the Commonwealth, how full of jarres and contentions? ^rigida pugnahan
Calid^. Ovid. Met 1.
The Elements, fire and water not at such strife as men, sure that Prophet
spoke of our times, Ephraim against Manasseh, Manasseh against Ephraim, and
both against Judah. Isai. 9.21. Isai 9.21.
all so captious of indignities, so apprehensive of all trespasses, such going
to law for trivialls; Histor.
that what was anciently said of the friars of this Realm (with a little
variation) may be said of the Lawyers, Those lived of the Ignorance, but these
wax fat on the strife of the people: ah, what is become of that sinne-covering
Amity? the (...) and badge of primitive Christianity! Lib. 50. Ecc. Hist.
as Eusebius told a Bishop of his age, that asked him, how he should know the
Christians from the Infidels, in those miscellaneous times, Vide quam invicem
diligunt Christiani, O foelix hominum genus, s^^vestros animos am^r, quo Coelum
regitur, regat: B^et lib. 2. con. John 13.35.
observe but how they love each other, how fast those brethren hold the bands
of Amity: and the same distinction gives the Bishop of our souls: Hereby I
know that you are my Disciples, if you love one another. John 13. But how are
we degenerated into Nabalisme? love fled, and not so much as friendship left:
very Heathens and Jews had both their Amicorum paria, their golden pair of
friends; as David and Jonathan whose souls were knit together: Theseus and
Perithous, who durst exchange their bosoms, and be the mutual sewers of
their flowing Hearts. But hard it is among Christians now to find such Unity
(as the Apostle says) I speak this to our shame; Now love sits on the lips,
and can soon take her flight, frothy Courtship, Humane friendship frail.
Judas kisses, Ehuds embracements are the friendships of this age; or if any be
more real, yet are they often leavened with inconstancy, and like the leagues of
war, hold but for their own hopes and ends; very Mary-golds that follow but
the Sun, and cloze against the clouded Evening: Now for the Cor nescium
tomerare fidem! that Heaven-borne spirit that dares be faithful, in spite of
all the shuffles the rude world puts on him, dic musa virum, that knows not
upon any urgencies to violate devoted friendship (yet to keep words, is a
qualification of a Saint, Psalm 15.4. Prove. 31.10.
Psalm. 15.) but such an one, were as great a rarity as Salomons. Prove. 31. nay
the Text concludes it an impossibility, non habemus, we have here no continuing
City, no City of unity.

Thirdly, A City an emblem of safety. Man no continuing City.
a City is an Emblem of safety, of safety by consequence, as before of
strength, indeed our safety is by Defense, That by strength, and both by such
well-fenced Cities (as isntrumental means:) in the 35 of Numbers you read of
Cities of Refuge, Numb. 35.6.
Cities where very Delinquents might find safety: But we have none such here,
to secure us, even from undeserved Dangers (undeserved I mean particularly by
any such notorious crime) no, of all the Fortifications in the world, I would
feign see that Place, that could wall out a Famine, or a Pestilence, I Am sure
Samaria was a well-fenced City, and yet both these enterd it and wellnigh
unpeopled it. 1 King. 18.
1 Kings 18. nor need we go so far for sad Examples. They have lately enterd
our own Cities, one keeping still Possession, no Fences here are
Iudgm^^t-proofe, not Argob's Cities, let them be wald as high as heaven, Deuteronomy.
3. Dent 3.5.
a shower of vengeance, Saloimus.
Hell out of heaven shall rain down on Sodom, be it nere so well immured.
I^sh 6.20.
and indeed who dares put Confidence in a City-walls that has but ever read or
heard of Ierico. An Arm of flesh is but a bruised Reed, no Safety either in
Horses or Chariotts; Pharaoh found one of them (as David says) a vain thing
to save him, Exodus 14. Exodus 14.25.
where his Charriotts hurried the faster to destruction for their wheels being
off, and what safety in the multitude of an Host Zenacherib will tell you,
whose Confidence was as great as his Army. 2 King 19 one hundred fourscore and
five thousand slain in one night without an enemy: 2 King. 19 35.
Cautior Exemplo Tu. Each one take heed that we do not repeat this Error,
this impious Presumption; as I fear, too many of this Kingdom do, Relying
too much upon Earthly Force; misattributing our long peace and safety to the
populousnes of this Nation, and admired Shipping of our Moated-Island: God is
not in all their thoughts, like the proud Emperor that cut off the heads of
all the Gods in Room, Nero.
and caused the Image of his own be set upon them, We sacrifice to our own
sword and spear, when It Is the Right Hand of the Lord that brings mighty
things to pass: These (I confess, shipping and munition) are means and
instruments, but unless from God, whence are they all? and, without his
assistance, may soon again (as often heretofore) become Ventorum Ludibrium,
a prey to Tyrants, the sport and rattles of the wind and waves; I, may share
in that doom of Tire against the ships of Tarshish Isa. Isai. 23 14.
23. Be still ye that dwell in the Isles, who are called the strength of the
Sea, whose Merchants are as Princes: howl ye ships of Tarshish, for your
strength is laid waste. You can remember, we have been driven to that of David,
Psalm. 60.10.
Thou, O God, wentest not forth with our Armies, till we came to his
acknowledgment there, verse. 11.
vain is the help of man. v. 11. God will have the glory of our welfare, and
fit he should, since he is the author of it, who else live here in a shop of
angry Meteors, violent Elements, each of which (as well as foreign enemies)
would soon destroy us, were not He our Lord Protector: how often therefore
and how justly does David call Him Rock and Refuge, Strength and Tower, Castle
and Fortress: Conclude we then with him. Psalm. 4.8.
Psalm. 4. Thou Lord only make us to dwell in safety, who have else no
continuing City here, no City of safety.

Last of all, A City an emblem of rest. Man no continuing City. Josh. 21.
a City is an Hieroglyphick of rest, and therefore in the 21. chapter of Joshua
it is said, God gave his people Citles which they builded not, and rest round
about them: nay, eternal rest it self borrowes an expression from the name of
City. It Is called The new Jerusalem, Heb. 12.21.
the City of the living God. But man is no Citizen of this, as it is a
representative of rest, his life a giddy-wheele; the Orbs, the Clouds, the
Winds, the Rivers not so full of motion (his Bodies restlesnesse you saw
before) I speak now of the travells of his mind, that busy Spirit hurried
through thousands of the worlds distractions, which yet, if best employed, is
subject to be tired: even Reading is a weariness (says the wise Man) and
there is no end of many books (unless an Eccles 12.12.
end of their Author.) But if this Mill grind empty, have not the mind good
things to work on, and how does it set it self on fire! on fire of hell, by
sinful and cupidinous Revolutions! what mischief leaves it unimagined on
the Bed, unpracticed up! how full of all contemplative uncleanesse! even to the
making up that sinful Climax. Genesis 6. Genesis 6.5.
The Heart of Man, the Thoughts of the Heart, and Imaginations of the Thoughts,
are all evil, evil only and continually no rest from sinning: and thence how
restless, Conscientia sraenum aut slagellum.
(think you) is the guilty Conscience, (only in this particular like to God,
that it never slumbers nor sleeps) the clamor of this shrew, deading the
noise of Ravens or of Thunder; not only audible to us waking, but interrupting
of our best repose: Job 7. Job 7.13.
when I say my Bed shall comfort me, and my Couch shall give me rest, then
thou frightest me with Dreams, and terrifiest me with visions: Enough to make
one wish with David, one's own Metamorphosis, Psa. 55. Quis dabit Pennas
Columbinas! Psalm. 55.6.
Oh that I had wings like a Dove! for then would I fly away and be at rest: at
rest from the distracting cares that follow this vain worlds affairs! at rest
from the impetuous solicits of the flesh! at rest from the importunate
temptations of the Devil! at rest from the refractory impieties of wicked
company! all which make every honest David sigh out here, Vae mihi misero, Psa.
120. Woe is me, Psalm. 120.5.
that I am constrained to dwell in Meseck, etc. Thus is our life a tossed Arc,
tumultuous without, sick within; and the poor soul (like Noah's restless
Dove can find no ground to fix on, Inquietum est cor meum donec requiescat in
te. Reu. 14.13. Job. 14 2.
till she return from whence she flew at first; and then indeed she rests,
rests from her labors, so says the Spirit, Revel. 14. but here, has no
continuing City, no City of rest. Job sums up all my particulars, chap. 14.
v. 2. and the total is, Man borne of a Woman, is but of few days and many
troubles, he comes up like a Flower and is cut down, he never continues in
one stay (there is the Text in Paraphrase) has no continuing City. And having
thus demolished this earthly City, how can we now choose but (with Livius.
Metellus sacking Siracuse) lament the transient vanity thereof, and bewail
our strong desires of so weak an object, as no continuing City.

But least a too long discourse here contradict my Thesis, and prove it a
continuing City, I pass the Plainteifs and their wants, to take a glance, by
way of application, on their place of streights, the Vbi, Text.
where we are so indigent, and that's Hic, Here.

Indeed there is a place, where the woman is clothed with the Sun, Reu. 12.
and the Moon under her feet (.i.) where the Church and every member of it, is
roab'd with glory, and far above the reach of any mutability; Bernard.
but as Saint Bernard says, surrexit, non est hic, this is in the City that's
above, it is not here: This place is the Moons chief Regiment, The Vbi where
we are straightened.
her very exchange (as it were) to vent all her varieties (constat genitum
nihil,) save alteration nothing continues here.

Earth (you see) is the least of Elements, and to the Heavens, no more than is
a single Atome to the Sun; an infinite substance then (such as the soul of
man is) needs must be straightened here: this little circle can never fill the
hearts vast Triangle, that nothing but the Trinity: vain therefore the
continuing here: This again is the lowest, and most dreggish Element, the
sink of all, and so Cladium Officina, the shop of dangers and diseases and
they both so destructive, that no continuing here, statio malefida carinis. It Is
the valley of the world, Earth, the valley of tears, tears indeed, (...).
where we enter life with cries, continuing with sighs, and going out with
groans: This is our music here! here, where mirth is but apparent, grief
is real: where we eat the bread of carfulness, Panis noster lapidosus.
mingling our drink with weeping, all our actions with sinning, this is our
diet here! here where we only taste of joy, but glut in sorrow; we walk in
happiness, but journey in calamity, this is our travel here! here, where
riches are but thorns, honors but pinnacles, and pleasures Habet omnis hoc
voluptas, stimulis agit feuentes, apiumque par valantum, etc. Boet. de Con. Dan
232.
Bees that leave more sting than honey: these are our treasures here! so that
the world (you see) with all its pomp, makes but up a Nebuchadnezars Image,
Dan. 2. though the head be gold, the breast of silver, belly brass, and
legs of iron, yet are the feet of clay: let one be honorable, another rich,
a third beauteous, a fourth nere so vigorous, yet are the foundations of them
all but clay, and a small stone from out the sling of death does break and
liken them to dust: and this the end of all things here.

Now, me thinks, by this time, we should be all of holy Monicas mind, St.
Austins pious Mother, who (as he tells us) having thus discoursed over the
frailty of the world together, melted into this expression: Quantum ad me
attinet, nulla re jam delector in hac vita. Quid hic facio? lib. confess. c.
10. Job. 14 14.
For mine own part (says she) I am now delighted with nothing in this world,
and what do I longer here but practice Jobs attendance? So after all this
colloquie of ours (anatomizing the vain world) what can you find here worthy
your affections? not worthy your disdain? Quid hic facimus? then what do we do
here, here in our unsatisfi'd desires? our eager prosequutions? treasuring for
the Moath and Thief, like Spiders, spending our bowels to catch Flies, Menott.
and (as Menott says of wily Hunters) losing an Horse of price in pursuit of
an Hare worth nothing; here being neither City of Strength (you see) nor City
of Unity, nor City of Rest, nor City of Safety: no continuing City; what do
we then here, Ixion. Alexanders question.
grasping of a Cloud for Juno! It Was a question once debated in the Court of
Alexander, what was the greatest thing in the world? and having many about him
of all Sciences, a Geographer answers him, the Mount Olympus, that hill indeed
being so vast and high, as frequently is took for Heaven it self: an
Astronomer, he answered it was the Sun, that world of light so The Sun bigger
than the earth 166. times according to Eustach. and others. Luke 14 33.
many times bigger than the earth; a Parasite tells him his own victory: but an
honest Moralist that stood by, affirmed the greatest thing in the world, to be
an heart that could contemn the greatest: well said Philosopher, answered as
though he had heard Christ himself preach on that fourteenth of Luke:
Quicunque non reliquerit omnia, who so forsakes not all (in competition (...)
me) is not worthy of me, nor of Heaven, a pair of imitable examples, one of
them, a Heathen, and shall Christians come behind such, in contemning of the
world and greatest things of it, (then let us even change names with them) but
let our souls aspire with Monica's (that glory of (...) sex and copy of the
other) Quid hic facio? what do we do here? like Davia, thirst for better
waters Psalm. 42. Psalm. 42.1.
and yet as it was with Monica, unum erat, etc. one thing there was that made
that female Saint desire a little longer continuance here; sc. her sons
conversion, and to see him baptized a Christian. So one thing must our soul
desire of God, that we may live to see that christened, baptized in the tears
of penitence; and then quid hic facio, away to our continuing City; what do
such Eagles here, when as their Carkeise is in Heaven? indeed what do we so
long, looking on this Terrene-globe? whose Zones are all intemperate (freezing
charity, or scorching envy, avaritious drought, or riotous profuseness) whose
paralels are equal, cares and fears: whose Circumference is vanity, and
Center is corruption.

Respicite jam Coeli Spatium and definite aliquando vilia mirari. Boet. l. 2.
Con.
Hark how the Philosopher calls us off, behold now the beauteous frame of
Heaven, and desist at length to admire base earthly things: Transitus in 2. genesis
let the bodies figure be the souls tutour, and a sursum oculi teach sursum
corda, an elevated eye an upright heart: the heart to seek that (...), the
Continuing City, the eye to look for one to come: and that's the second
General, the Celestial Sphoere of this same Christian-Map. We look for one
to come.

And here the Christian and the Heathen Part, Who have all this while gone
along together in the Non habemus. They likewise undauntedly apprehending their
mortality, and such as dare to hasten it. Mors malorum remedium, miseriarum
finis. Cicero.
Vitae prodigiose prodigi, desperate unthrifts of their Blood, only to period
their Miseries; yet some of Them in general Notions dreamt of the Souls
Immortality: huc Ethnici, says Lorinus, In locum.
thus far shined the dim Light of Nature, here were their Herculean Pillars;
But with any Endeavor of good works to seek, or With the Eye of Faith to
look for one to Come; This is a regenerate Man's Plus Vltra: Haec Fides, haec
Spes est Christiana, This only is a Christians Hope, the Child of propagatiue
Faith: what a strange Close was that of dying Adrian. Animula Vagula blandula,
Auson Epigram.
Hospes Comesque Corporis, Quae nunc abibis in Loca. Little wandering merry
Spirit, Body's Guest, and Wont to cheer it, what Place shall Thou now inherit!
etc. alas! Virtutes Ethnicorum sufficient ad ornandum vitam humanam, non
obtinere vit aeter. Aug.
Heathens find but diminitiue Comfort at their death, treading those unknown
Paths with unprepared Feet, going from one Darkness to another, oh! How may we
ever bless God for our vocation, our double Light of Grace and Knowledge, when
the Most Learned of them go Hence with a Nescio quo Vado: As it is reported of
Aristotle, Ens entium miserere mei, etc Job 19.25.
I know not whither I go: whereas the meanest Christian with a Jobs Faith
Exulteth. Scio quod Redemptor Vivit. I know that my Redeemer lives, and
therefore Egredere Anima. Go forth my cheerful Soul, Hilarions dying speech.
and fear not now to go to Christ, whom Thou so long have Served: Yet is it
not mine here, rigorously to determine all those Lost, whose Exact Virtues, so
out-Morald Christians; We cannot Limit Mercy, God Loves it above Sacrifice,
Math 9. Matthew. 9.23.
and our just Lord requires but according unto what he gives. Luke the 12. Luke
12.48. The fearful state of Heathens.
though indeed the Heathen-people that know not God, in respect at least of
outward Calling, are not within the Pale of the Messiahs Dear; and the Law so
written in their hearts; I Fear, that Suppressing those (...), inhaerent
Evidences of Nature (which Saint Paul Calls withhoulding of the Truth in
Unrighteousness, Romans 1.18. and from thence to the end.
Rom 1.) does (...) render them inexcusable (as the Apostle Saint Paul argues
strongly in that forecited Chapter) Nullum aliud Nomen: Acts. 4.12. there
being no other Name etc. but not to make our selves inexcusable by judging an
other, Sub Iudice lis sit, This we leave to the great Judge of All, Revealed
Things to us; albeit we say not what becomes of Them, Yet to our grateful
Comfort (...) we know (says he) that when this Earthly Tabernacle of ours
shall be dissolved, we have a Building not made with Hands etc. 2 Cor. 5. 2
Cor. 5.1.
Futuram Expectamus, we look for One to Come: And yet our Confidence is too
weak to go alone, It must be accompanied with Diligence, we may not Think to
enjoy that City to Come Only with Looking For. They would not be so Few then
that are Chosen. Matthew. 20. Matthew. 20.16.
All are Baalamites and desire the Death of the Righteous, but vainly, unless
They live the Life of Him; It Is stolid to Expect an End without the Means. To
look for this same City and not seek it: indeed this Expectamus is too slack
a Word, Inquirimus says Beza and the Vulgar, better: and the Original is
neither (...) nor (...) that any Lazy Confidence should think to gain it, as
God Knows that is all the Evidence Many have to show for it, I hope Well; but
for all this Hope (if no endeavor else) the Heart may break: No, nor is it
Faith Can look for it unless operative (we Patronize not Solifidianisme, Our
Adversaries scandal us) our Faith Cries out like Rachel, give me Children,
Iam. 2.20.
or I die: James 2. But such a Faith as works by Love, makes our Hope
infallible, of Finding what we seek (...) we seek one to Come.

Seek then, is a word of Labor: bidding us with the Apostle, Phil 2 12.
Work out our Salvation, Phil 2.12. work, It Is not a Feast or a Feather-Bedd
will bring a Man to Heaven, non sic itur ad astra. Our Jehovah will not as the
Poets Jove did into Danaes Lap, (...) Verbum operandi.
rajne down this goulden Purchase into our Bosoms: no, no Drones shall Ever
taste the Honey of that Hive but those industrous Bees alone that seek it; a
Sharp reproof for Idleness, that Gate of all Impieties, a Whipp of Scorpions
for the Sluggards Back. Pro. 6. who like the Spouse, Pro. 6.10.
in Lectulo quaesivit Quem amavit, Seeks no farther then his Pillow: but she
found not her Beloved there; Cant. 3.1.
as little They stretching on their bedds of Ivory, e're find his Benefits
whose Bed was but a Manger; but Ruin suddenly, Pro. 6.15.
for their not seeking, finds out Them. Pro. 6.15. Idleness you know, it was
denominated those Virgins foolish, and excluded them both the Chamber, and the
knowledge of the Bridegroom, Matthew. 25.10.
Matthew. 25. Thus slothful persons (like Arrows from a feeble bow) fall short
of what they aim at, and with Esau come too late to ^^une the blessing Genesis
27. Genesis 27 30.
Diligence invites ablessing; you see, Moses keeping watch over his flock by
night, is graced with visions, Exodus 3. Exodus 3.4.
a sight of Him whose vision is beatificall, and Saul seeking his Fathers Asses
finds a kingdom 1 Samuel 9. 1 Samuel 9 20.
and David is taken from following the Ewes great with young, and made the
great Shepherd of Israel, Psalm. 78.71. Diligence invites a Blessing. Psalm
78.71. Diligence invites a blessing; Idleness temptation.
whereas on the contrary, Idleness allures temptation, tempts the Tempter;
while David exercised himself in Gods Law day and night, all went well with
him, he feared not what either man or Satan could do to him; but when once he
ascends his wanton prospects, and loosens the reins unto his idler senses; the
Devil soon changes his title, and makes him a man after his own Heart, wraps
him in a double snare of Murder and Adultery; and after these, how justly he
complains, Psalm 6.7.
mine eyes are dim, when there is such a pearl in one and the the other
blood-shod! So ask but the Poet's Egistus and many of his Disciples in these
times, Quaeritur Aegillus quare sit factus adulter? i^ promptu causa est, etc.
Ovid.
what fills their name and bones with early rottenness? and shame (if any
left) will soon write the cause upon each forehead, Desidiosus cram: indeed,
it is the sitting bird that is the Fowlers aim, the envious man sowes his
tares while the Husbandman sleeps; and hell it self is beholding to
Idleness, not only for company, but for a description, being called Stagnum
(.i.) a Lake, Rou 21 8.
a standing water: there is an old Apologue how once the Elements contended for
priority; the Fire most active got supremacy, the Agil-Aire won the next
Regions, the ambitious waters flow to overtake them, An Apologue of the
Elements.
while drowsy Earth sat still the while, and therefore is ere since disgraced
with the lowest room; no sin so unnatural, as Idleness: in a word, the idle
man's the Devils cushion, whereon he sits and takes his ease, while the
well-busied heart is Officina Dei, the Shop or Worke-house of the Almighty:
Then Da vacuae menti quo tencatur opus, Ovid.
let ever some good act or other be as an Anchor to the floating mind;
Sedulity becomes even our civil callings, but for spiritual (...) (says
the Ap.) Give all diligence to make your calling and election sure: Pet. 10.
2 Pet. 1. It Is (...) We seek one to come.

But, because it is necessary a seeker should have eyes as well as feet,
knowledge as well as industry (least, Iam 4.3.
as the perverse Jews, you ask and receive not because you ask amiss)
consider modum quaerendi, Quaerendi modus.
the manner how to seek: and that is Renefaciendo and Patiendo, by doing
good, and suffering evil: Doing good, Facere est Naturae sed benefaccre est
opus gratiae. To be active is the work of Nature, but to do well is an
effect of Grace, and cause of prosperous reward, as holy Moses intimates to
Israel. Deuteronomy. 6.18.
Deuteronomy. 6. Do ye that which is good in the sight of the Lord that you may
prosper: Do you that which is good, and that you may do chiefly with these two
instrument, The two chief instruments of doing good.
Lingua precante and Manu succurrente: by a praying tongue and a relieving
hand: Charity and Prayer are the swiftest wings, on which the soul can mount
to Heaven.

First, Prayer.
Prayer is the Jewel of Gods ear, the Dialogue twixt Heaven and Earth, the
Tongue of Angels, the Souls Ambassador with God, which never, with a
faithful hand, knocked at Heaven-gates and was sent empty away; what though not
presently heard, it is but to double our importunity? what though not straight
way granted, it is but to glorify our patience? yet sometimes (I confess) our
Prayers like exhalations drawn up here, may fall elsewhere in fruitful
showers, may light on our posterity: But fervent prayer never goes un-crownd,
ad sanita^em si non ad voluntatem, still heard in a proportion to our
welfare, though not always answered according to our wills: Prayer is the
sole Phoenix of the Graces, from out the Ashes of whose spicie Nest, revives a
Bird of Paradise; This can make an Arabia petrosa as happy as her other Sister,
for stony hearts can give us hearts of flesh. Ezech. 11. Ezech. 11 19.
There is a kind of an omnipotence in prayer, it locks and opens Heaven O^atio
Clavis Caeli. August. 1 King. 18. c. 5 7. 2 King. 4 33.
1 King. 18. renewes society twixt parted souls and bodies, blows down the
walls of Ierico, stays the Sun makes fire descend; what cannot it not?
vincit invincibilem, it holds that hand which holds all the world, from
striking a very Sodom, God himself can do nothing till praying Lot is gone.
Genesis Gen 19 22.
19. And it is remarkable in that Dialogue 'twixt God and Abraham, Genesis 18. Gen
18.
how God there desisted not from granting, till Abraham first left off
petitioning: and therefore (as the Apostle wishes) Pray continually, (...),
(.i.) 1 These. 5 17.
either (statis temporibus) at constant times of public and retird devotions:
or else continually, sc. per verba aut opera, by good words or works; for
indeed no circumstances can exclude prayer, and besides Quaevis bona actio
quaedam oration, every good action is a kind of supplication: Seek therefore by
doing good, and that first by Prayer.

But because Prayer alone makes a man but like a bird with one wing, or as a
boat with one Oar, somewhat lame and imperfect to perform this duty; 1 Cor.
13.1.
according to that (...): Let any zeal make what noise it will, speak it the
tongue of Men and Angels, yet without charity, it is but (...), a tinckling, not
a weltuned Cymball: Let therefore the praying tongue say to the relieving Hand,
Ruth 1.16.
as Ruth to Naomi, whether thou go I will go, and where thou dwell I
will dwell. Let Charity, I say, and Prayer like linckes of a golden chain,
depend on one another, ut quae non prosunt singula, though like two gloves, one
lost the the other but of little use; yet both together make themselves complete:
For God (like Isaak Genesis Genesis 27.
27.) will feel the hands as well as hear the voice of whom he blesses;
Pliny tells us of the Eagle, Plin. not. Hist.
that she knows her young ones by their eyes, their perspicacy, and unless
they can outface the Sun she rejects them as a bastard-brood: but God
knows his children by their hands, their liberality: and whom he finds (like
Jeroboam) withered-handed close-fisted, he counts them but degenerate sons, and
will disinherit them of his heavenly kingdom, yet will give them a portion,
Eccles. 11.1.
I tremble to say where: cast then thy bread upon the waters (.i.) relieve the
needy, whose multitude and weakness terms them so, and after many days (for
Heaven will never forget it) thou shall find it: I, flowing to thee like rich
merchandise with blessed increase: Miscris suppressa levate Pectora: each one
that that craves an alms, is an arm stretched out from God, who has another
hand as ready to reward, as that was to receive (it is Salomons) who so has
mercy on the poor lends to the Lord, and indeed, but lends, to the best
advantage, for the Lord will recompense him, Pro. 19. God puts us not to the
expense of any costly sacrifices (should he, Pro. 19 17.
how coldly would his altars lie!) the calves of our lips and offerings of our
hands are now all he challenges, and therefore to do good, and to distribute
forget not, these are the pleasing sacrifices. Part with some of that which
long you cannot keep, Quas dederis solas semper habebis opes. Luke 16.9.
to gain that which you can never loose: make you friends of that unrighteous
mammon, Lu. 16. Euthimius tells us God has given men riches non tanquam Dominis
sed dispensatoribus, not as unto treasurers, but stewards, imitate then that
wise one in the Gospel, for to every one it shall be one day said, read
rationem, and believe it, none shall make a better reckoning at the last great
Audit, than the charitable man (...), love covers a multitude of sins, 1 Pet.
4 8.
1 Pet. 4. and this indeed the Judge himself attestates Mat. 25 Christ there
describing his last genral sessions, seems to take notice only of works of
mercy, Works of mercy only inquired of at the day of Judgment. Matthew. 25.30.
there is no talk of your frugallity your temperance, you diligence, or other
virtues; but feeding, clothing, visiting, ministering: these Christ names, and
takes upon his own account, mihi fecistis, you have done it unto me, and
therefore repaies them with eternal happiness, venite benedicti, Come you
blessed, etc. Charity is via ad regnu^ si non causa regnandi, the way unto the
city that we seek, tho not the worth of it. seek therefore by doing good, and
that lingua precante et manu succurrente by Charity and Prayer: (...) Text.

It follows next Patiendo, how by suffering evil we ought to seek: by
suffering, For thereunto are we called (says the Ap.) 1 Pet. 2 21.
Christ also suffered for us leaving us an example, that we should follow his
steps. And two ways likewise must we suffer, sc. Sustinendo and Abstinendo: by
bearing and forbearing in which two things (says Epictetus) the sum of all
Philosophy, E^ictcti Enchirid.
and I may add (almost) of all Christianity consists. First Abstinendo, in
forbearing Intemperance, all luxurious riot and excess: Hippocrates.
Matter virtutum. Abstinentia, it is both the Mother and the Nurse of virtues,
Hippocrates his Aphorism's true on both sides, (...). Diseases both of Body and
Mind, for the most part, owe their original to fulness and redundant numors,
Patiendi modus.
and indeed where Satan tempts one fasting, he tempts a thousand full, and
therefore abstinence is the best cure of both: and oh how well had it been for
their posterity, had but our first parents been acquainted with this virtue in
Paradise! then for ought I know they had still been there, then I Am sure, had
not that same one man's meat proved so all others poison: but ever since we
matrizare (from that first Mother of ours all our vicious longings) we likewise
hunger after superfluities and forbidden fruits, not contented with enough are
too indulgent to our wanton Genius, Abstinentia fraenum vi^iorum.
witness the Plures Crapula quam Gladio, truer now than ever. Intemperance
bringing not only grayhaires but green years with sorrow to the grave! For
how soon do immoderate potions (like much water on a little fire) extinguish
natural heat, and as soon do intemperately devoured-Meats (like much fire, a
little water) drink up the radical moisture? and here that Iudalisme's
seasonable ad quid perditio haec? what need this wast, wast of food, wast of
feeders? Avidis, avidis Natura parum est. Sen. trag.
Naturae parum appetitui nihil satis: a little contents nature, but nothing
satisfies opinion: quantos illa morbos, sighs Boeti^s. Lib. 3. de con.
How fast does luxury consume the vital lamp? ofttimes so captivating the
body to discases, that naught can free it but that (...) that general remedy
of all maladies, an early death: So that the intemperate are of the number of
David's wicked ones, qui vix dimidiabunt dies suos, Psalm. 55.33.
that scarce live out half their days, and how ever not by the laws
politic, yet by the Divine statutes, each of these is felo de se, by double
guilt his own selfe-murderer, be not therefore like that Image of intemperance
(...). Lucian's scoff, behold she- Sardanapalus.
Sardanapalus, whose effeminate luxury bereft him of his Kingdom, least it
bereave you of a better, of the City that you look for: but rather imitate
that pattern of abstinence, the good Emperor Valentinus, who of all the
conquests he had ever won (though many) yet on his deathbed, said he gloried
but of one; and being asked of which, Inimicorum inquit, nequissimum devici,
carnem meam: the greatest victory (says he) that ere I got, was in subduing
that greatest enemy mine own flesh. I close this with Saint Peter's
dehortation, and in his wooing language. I beseech you Brethren abstain from
fleshly lusts which fight against the soul. 1 Pet. 2. 1 Pet. 2 12.
Seek Patiendo by suffering, and that not only Abstinendo, by forbearing, but
likewise Sustinendo by bearing evil.

Bearing evil, I, Affliction is the Coat of a Christian, and the Cross his
cognizance (...), said to every one as well as Constantine, under this Banner
thou shall overcome: are we not all members of that Head which was crowned
with Thorns! the parts then must look to sympathize together with it, Bern.
non per unum foramen caput per aliud membra: the Head enters not by one
passage, the members by an other; but all go into Heaven at the same strait
gate: Porta tribulationis porta Paradisi, the Red Sea is the way to Canaan (hac
itur ad superes) Mount Calvary to Tabor: per varios casus, per tot discrimina.
through many tribulations must we enter into that Kingdom, Act. 14.22.
Act. 14. Affliction (like the Toade) has a precious pearl in the head, how
ever it appear ugly; no affliction is for the present joyous, but etc.
Adversity is Gods knife, wherewith he spares not to lance whom it pleases
him to heal, and those (like precious lems) are most beautiful after cutting:
And albeit our earthly mother, this world, may perhaps for our affliction (with
Raohel) call us Ben-onies sons of her sorrow; yet God our heavenly Father,
will one day for our patient suffering (with Jacob) call us Beniamins, sons of
his right hand; You know that of St. Austin. Deus unicum habuit Filium sine
peccato sine flagello nullum. God had never but one Son, and that his only
Son, without sin, but none without affliction; no not his beloved Son in
whom he was so well pleased, Matthew. 3.17.
Matthew. 3. indeed the rather was he afflicted for that he was beloved, seeing
He chastneth whom he loves, and scourges every son whom he receives,
Hebr. 12. the Rod is the badge of Filiation: H^b 12.6.
and therefore Saint Austin notes in God, crudelis miserecordia, Crudelis
miserecordia.
and misericors crudelitas, a cruel mercy and a merciful cruelty: the first
when he permits the wicked to prosper in this life, as it is Job 21. the wicked
live, Job. 21.
wax fat, and grow in wealth (says he) but what ensues: momento descendunt
(a sad catastrophe) in a moment they go down to hell, v 13. v. 13.
a while they flourish (says the Psalmist) like a green Bay Tree, but anon
(.i.) when their sins are ripe, they are cut down like the grass, and
wither like the green Herb. Psa. 37. Psalm 37.2,
and this indeed is a cruel mercy, no marvel if the Prophet desired rather
Gods merciful cruelty, Ier. 10. Correct me, Ier. 10.14.
O Lord, yet with thy judgment, not in thine anger: The very Heathen could
say, Plus hominibus reor adversam, quam prosperam prodesse fortunam: Boethius.
It Is better to have been afflicted, Job. 5.17.
adverse fortune more profits man than smiling stars: and Job as well as
David had experienced it: Blessed is the man (says he) the man, what man
(think you) the man that's clad in purple and fares deliciously every day? no,
that's not he: is it the man whom the King will honor, with the Ring, and
Steed, and royal Roabe? it is not he neither: what then, is it the man that has
caught this world in a purs-net, and by th'omnipotence of his gold, commands all the felicities that grow in Salomons walk sub Sole under the Sun? no, none of
these, but beatus a Domino castigatus, blessed is the man whom God corrects.
To this purpose St. S. Austins dialogue in Soliloq.
Austin feignes a conference twixt God and himself, God personating a
Merchant, and himself a chapman. Vaenale habeo (says God) I have merchandise
to sell. Quid est? what is it? (says the holy Father) wy Regnum Coelorum
(says God) the Kingdom of Heaven: quo emitur (says Saint Austin) what is the
price ont? Paupertate Regnum, afflictione Requies, Ignominia Gloria: For
poverty (says God) the richest Kingdom; for momentany affliction, eternal
rest, and for reproach, a Crown of Glory: since then our light affliction
which is but for a moment brings us a more excellent eternal weight of glory,
Romans 8.18.
Romans 8. Let us not refuse the chastning of the Lord, but (when he sends it)
patiently suffer evil: and thus you have the duty Seek, Seek by doing good,
do good by Charity and Prayer; and Seek by suffering evil, and suffer by
abstaining all intemperance, and sustaining all afflictions: so run and you
shall obtain, thus seek and you shall find (...) the continuing City that
we look for.

And it is an object worthy all this pains: our best deservings undeserving it:
take but a glimpse on it, 1 Cor. 13.12. The object of our search.
for we can no more, here we see, as in a glass but darkely 1 Cor. 13.
Consider the (...) and the (...) abstractly as a City, then as a concrete, One
to come: First, you see, it is (...) and not (...), a City, not a Wilderness, as
is this world, where we are all in Pilgrimage to the Sepulcher: and behold here
a most exact (...) 'twixt this same and the former City: The (...) of this City
and the former.
the worldly one's (...), built but of clay and stubble, the work of men's
hands, and those that make them are like unto them, of a facile dissolution:
but this celestial City is (...) made by Him who made the hands, whose
Archtectour is the Almighty, these buildings therefore are the (...), John
14.2. 2 Cor. 5.1.
Ioh. 14. the abiding mansions, whereas those earthly ones are (...). 2 Cor. 5.
but Gourds, but fleeting Tabernacles: you remember the other was a City of
Negatives, (...).
(neither of Strength nor Unity, Rest nor Safety) this of all good
affirmatives, wherein are all Those fixed as in their proper Sphere.

1. It Is a City of Strength, ask St. John else Reu. A City of Strength. Reu.
121.
21. the foundation all of Gold, the walls of Adamant, and its twelve Gates of
Pearl, materials of the strongest; Psalm. 103 20.
yet guarded with innumerable Angels that excel in strength, Psalm. 103.
garrisond with an Army of Martyrs, and governed by the Lord of hoasts, indeed
there can want no Strength where dwells omnipotence; here then were that an
opportune desire, quis deducet me in Civitatem munitam? Psalm. 60.9.
who will lead me into this strong city? and that the Text will if thou follow
it.

This too is a City of Unity, A City of Unity Charitas virtus viae and patriae.
the King of Salem's dwelling house; those Stars are the embroyderies of
Peaces Coat, and the gay-beames of Sun and Moon, but the bright smiles of
Love Tryumphant; Coelum charitatis patria: Heaven is the place where she was
bred (Faith and Hope are low borne virtues to her 1 Cor. 13. 1 Cor. 13.8.
here they begin and here they end. But (...) this greater grace of love and
unity (a stray indeed on earth) take up their eternal rest in Heaven, nay
there were no Heaven without it: Concord here, ever flows and knows no ebb:
springing from the undivided Trinity, unto the goodly fellowship of the
Prophets, and communion of all Saints, quibus lux eadem, Cantio unica. who
shining all with the same light of glory, breath all the same incessant
Halilujahs: None envying others happiness (vessels all full though of their
several cises) None know either want or emulation. This Jerusalem is the City
at unity with it self, Psalm. 122.3. A City of Safety.
Psalm. 122.

Thirdly, it is a City of Safety (you see) strengthened beyond all opposition, and
seated above short-armed danger: Altissima venti non perflant, no angry storm
can shake the Cedars of this Libanus, or blast the Ascenders of this holy
Mountain, here only may we cry, Peace, peace, all safety dwelling here; no
enemies being left to interrupt it, Sin and Sorrow, hell and the grave, all
conquered; conculcata pedibus, 1 Cor. 15.27.
by him who has subdued al things: yet were the world let loose against them,
Christ's little flock need fear no ill; they are in such an hand, John. 10.28.
as who shall take them from him? Joh. 10. Etiamsi fractus illabatur orbis,
Impavidos ferient ruinae. Let the world totter into its first Chaos, ruin
should threaten them in vain, whom God makes dwell in safety. Psalm. 4.8.
Psalm. 4. This Canaan's full of secure Vines and Fig Trees; the Prophet
Zachary means this City, sure; when he says Men shall dwell in it, and there
shall be no more destruction, but Jerusalem shall be safely inhabited. Zech.
14.11. A City of Rest
Zech. 14.11.

Lastly, all these speak Heaven a City of rest, where there is such Strength,
and Love, and Safety, needs, must there be true security: I, heaven is the
Center of souls, as is the Earth of bodies, and only there they rest: there
indeed being contentation adequate to the Souls capacity (no further search no
more desire) whereas here, one (...) and (...) sacri, and cordis humani figura:
quae sibi mutuo solum sufficiant. Psalm. 107 9.
corner of the heart or other still is empty: ^ulcimentum innitenti,
plenitudinem continenti sufficientiam Possidenti coelum praebet: Heaven
satisfies the hungriest soul with goodness, Psalm. 107. And yet this heavenly
rest is not to be taken (as some impious Spirits) only privatively, as a
total cessation from all sacred business (for in that sense, Saints have no
rest in Heaven) never ceasing to fall down before the Throne (says S. Ren. 4.8:
John) never silencing their sacred anthems to the King of glory: but as
Philosophy says of the Spheres, sc. motus iste eorvm quies This holy motion is
their endless rest, respect of al molest and wonted troubles (which this world
showers on them) here are they said to rest, Reu. 13.14.
and so says the Spirit, Reu. 13. they rest from their labors.

And now could but divine contemplation transport you with Saint Paul, 2 Cor.
12 2.
but snatch your souls awhile from out their earthly Tenements, and elevate
them to the heaven we speak of! what glorious objects, not to be revealed,
should you there behold? there should you see felicity walk hand in hand with
eternity; and what this world can never show you, glory attended on by safety:
Serenitas sine nube, Saintas sine infirmitate, August. de Civitat. Dei.
iucunditas sine moerore, pulchritudo sine deformitate, Sapientia sine errore,
vita sine morte. There Is light never clouded, health never weakened, pleasure
unmixed with grief, or beauty with deformity, a Moon with out her spots,
wisdom acquainted with no error, and life beyond the reach of death. Deum
sine fine videbimus, sine fastidio amabimus, sine defatigatione laudabimus (as
that Father sweetly warbles.) there shall you see the Eternal eternally, One
whom all shall love without saciety, and unwearied praise him continually:
there likewise should your ears with equal happiness ba^quet themselves on the
true celestial melody (sweeter than that feigned of the Sphaeres) sc. of
Halilujah-singing Saints and Angels: there should you find, co^cursu^ omniu^
bonoru^, as twere an happy Marriage, a conflux of all the Goods united; so that
there is nothing absent that you could wish present, nor any thing present that
you could wish absent, Psalm. 87.3.
here then with David we may lie down in wonder quam gloriosa de te dicta
sunt, what glorious things are spoken of thee thou City of God! and yet (like
as to Sheba's Queen) not the one half can be told you, etc.

But yet this happiness is too much for the present brevior voluptas, in this
life pleasure is the shorter Twinne, Christiani Messis in Herba. (...).
and therefore (as an exercise of our hope and patience) it is (...) we look
for one to come: you see the industrious Husbandman reaps not presently, but
(with a costly confidence) many days, weeks and months, waits at
expectation's gate; Iam 5.
so must we (says Saint James) look for this precious seed, and have long
patience for it; delay whets our desires and multiplieth our estimation: yet
may not violate the rule of patience, Cicero de conso.
or anticipate the call of Nature; like him, that reading Plato's Book of the
souls immortality, made himself away to hasten to it; but such make more haste
than good speed; Christians must wrap up David's sitio, and Saint Paul's cupio,
in Jobs expectabo. Job. 14.14.
all the days of mine appointed time will I wait till my change comes, and
take the Apostles word for it, in due time we shall reap if we faint not. Gal.
6 9.
Gal. 6. The Mariner too that man of hopes, the watery-ploughman (you see)
endures his voyage ere he gains his freight (yet, Patience.
for the most part, somewhat he receives before hand) but his completed
payment, not till he makes his utter Port. So likewise in our passage to the
true Elysium, we patiently must cut through winds and waves, not looking for
our entire wages till our course be finished: yet in mean time, 2 Cor. 1.22.
we are not without that Arra Spiritus, 2 Cor. 1. the carnest of our hopes,
the co-assurance of Gods Spirit with ours; I, we have here Heaven in the
blossom, the fruit not till hereafter; here the harmonious feast of a good
conscience, which is heaven inchoate, but for the consummation, futuram
inquirimus we look for that to come: (...). innuit certitudinem and
durationem.
This (...) one to come, intimates here certitudinem and durationem, both the
certainty and duration of this supernatural City: the certainty, quia habet
rationem promissi because it bears the force of a promise, and so it is Heb.
11. (...) for God has prepared them a City, Heb. 11.16.
the Saints then sure enough shall have it, since He has prepared it, all
whose promises are yea and Amen. 2 Cor. 1. 2 Cor. 1 20. Psalm 89.3. The
certainty of this City.
And if his word were not enough, we have his oath, Juratus sum per
sanctitatem, I have sworn by my holiness (says he) that I will not fail
David for ever, Psalm. 89. Et vae si Deo juranti non credamus, woe be to our
infidelity, if we believe not the oath which he swear in the house of his
servant David, that he would give us, etc. indeed with faithless man, what is
to come may still be so, but promise-keeping is Gods attribute, David describes
him by it Psa. 77. that keeps his promise for ever. Psalm 77.8.
His performance and his promise differ not in essence, 1 Cor. 15.58.
if in time, and therefore as St. Paul exhorts 1 Cor. 15. Brethren, be ye
steadfast, and unmovable, your Hope being not in vain in the Lord: we look
for one to come, and that shall come we look for: I, and not only come, but
ever shall continue; Futuram speaks the permanence, that while it is present,
The duration of it perpetual
it shall be still to come: This Future knows not any preter-perfect-tense,
years eating up days, ages swallowing years, time losing his prius and
posterius, nere so much past, yet nere the less to come: not like our poor
joys here, fluunt and praeterfluunt, no sooner flow^d to us (almost) but
ebbing from us: but a continuing City, stord with fullness of joy and pleasures
for evermore, Psalm. 16.11.
Psalm. 16. evermore! more perennious than the glyding stream or constant
Sun: I, the Sun may be one day darkened, and the Moon pay home her
borrowed light, (...).
the fixed Stars may become Planets and wander headlong from their Spheres,
whole Nature may so forget her office, that heaven and earth may pass away at
hae manebunt in aeternum. but these pleasures (like the right hand they wait
on) remain for evermore: and this is our expected City, whose inhabitants,
you will say (by better title than they of Tarsus) may be called Citizens of no
mean City. Act. 21 39.
Act. 21. This is the Celestial Sphere, whose Zodiac is felicity, whose
Constellations are degrees of glory, whose Poles, Joy and Eternity. And now you
have the pair of Christian Globes, the Map of both worlds spread before you,
that soul which travels them well over (this contempt of earth, and search for
Heaven) shall make a happier voyage Drake, or Cavendish, etc.
than those who Ring the Earth, shall be companions of a brighter Sun:
without either cost or danger may discover fortunate Isles, whence (more then
gainefull) blessed returns.

As this experienced Hero has already: in whom we find our Text again,
with a fresh comment on it: his soul a fair example of the inquirimus, A
Transition to the funeral occasion.
being fled unto the City that we seek for, and his body a demonstration of
the Non habemus, witness this Tenantlesse house of clay, the sad remainder of
our worthy friend and comparishioner Mr. Henry Chitting, who is now come hither
to take his ultimum vale of the world, and tell his good friends that he will
meet them in heaven: yet has he left us somewhat else behind him, than these
shella of a fledged soul; sc. memoria justi, the blessed memorial of the
righteous, which shall be had in everlasting remembrance. Psa. 112. I, Psalm.
112.6.
now this box of ointment's broken, a sweet perfume's defused through this
assembly, nay through the whole place of his abode and knowledge: a good name
is like confections of the Apothecary (faith Solomon) or as music at a
banquet of wine. Eccles. 7.
His then most full of pleasant Odours in the Nostrills of God and man, Vir
vere insignis nec silendus nec dicendus subito. One so full of worth and
goodness, (...)
that Silence may not bury him, Suddenness cannot express him; I wish his
bright virtues here, but such an able Herald as himself was to emblazon them
in their own colors; Nemo Ciceronem nisi Cicero: for my own part inopem me
copia, I must confess, his store of merit tumultuates my expression, and
sorrow is so il a Methodist, I scarce know where to initiate his Encomium, his
just commendations, I^ Epist. ad Eustoch.
unless (as St. Ierom of his virtuous Paula) I begin with his beginning.
Clarus genere Clarior virtute, he was genteild by blood and office, yet more
enobled by his virtue: as will appear sufficiently, if you consider (with me)
according unto Nature and to Grace, and doubtless all of us may (by the way)
find something worth our imitation, his mourning friends matter of consolation.

First, Nature (you know) had been no stepdame to him, whether you look upon
the house or the inhabitant, his body or his soul; one of them a goodly
structure, a proper mansion for so divine a guest: as he was not like Galba,
Plutarch in his life. 2 Samuel 14.25.
who is said to have had a good soul in a deformed body; so was he not like
Abs^lon, who had an il soul within a comely body. But, tanto hospiti aptum
domicilium. He was a Diamond set in gold, Nature.
his body and his mind (like Apples of gold in pictures of silver) each fitly
made for other, and both to praise their Maker: but for that part of him which
chiefly was himself, his soul, so eminently ingenious (what with addition of
industry and education to native dispositions) as long ago preferred him unto
Royal attendance, and a style of honor; He was Chester Herald above 20.
years.
Chester now lamenting her deceased Herald, as we our loving neighbor: we,
whose every tongue is still his ready Orator, acknowledging his deportment
fair and full of sweetness composed of affection and discretion; respective
of superiors, most affable to equals, soft unto inferiors, and lowly toward
all:

But what speak I of Naturalls? Grace.
Grace was the Altar sanctified this gold: I, that made his soul shine like to
the Heaven it came from, with many greater and leffer lights: (virtues of all
magnitudes) lights that shined before men both in his former conversation, and
his latter visitation. His conversation, to Godward full of reverence, a
practiser of public as well as private piety: a man after David's heart, that
Iov'd the place where Gods honor dwells, His Piety.
witness his diligent frecuenting of this House of prayer; and I were somewhat
ungrateful (who had the happiness to be his friend) should I not acknowledge
him a lover of the Church, her government and Ministers: and give me leave to
wish the world fuller of such obedient Spirits.

For himself, he no way had defaced that Tenement where God had housd his
soul, nor yet oppressed the Tenant (.i.) was neither intemperate in body, nor
passionate in mind; a mind gentle, full of soft answers, and (as the Apostle
would have it) slow to anger, Iam. 1.19.
his body a Vessel of sobriety not excess; His Temperance.
not washing out his Makers Image with immoderate drinking (that Deluge of the
Times) no Sacrifiser He, to any of those brutish gods, Bacchus, Venus,
Epicurus. Rom 13.13.
but like a child of light, walking honestly as in the day. Romans 13. And he
that was so pious and so temperate could not be uncompassionate, he that so
loved God whom he had not seen, could not but love his brother whom he had: I,
His Charity.
many poor inhabitants of this Parish, for his charity, call him blessed; and
not many weeks are past since they had a gracious taste on it: Pauper est Altar
Dei. Are Heb. 13.16.
He knew the poor to be Gods Altar, and therefore to distribute forgot not,
but offered the well-pleasing sacrifice. Heb. 13.16.

Thus did a good life approve him (in all the three relations, to God, his
Neighbor and himself) an upright Christian; Act 24.16.
one well versd in Saint Paul's endeavor, Act. 24. To keep in all things a
good Conscience, void of offense to God and man.

And these being the premises, with a little Logic you may guess at the
conclusion, Qualis vita Finis ita.
ex veris possit nil nisi verasequi. None other then a happy end could follow
such a well-led life (for commonly one is tothers Echo.) His latter
visitation, was indeed short and sour; His disease supposed an Apoplexy.
an acute angry malady feeding on his brain, yet for the Senders sake bid
welcome, and entertained with such unmoved patience, as well deserved Jobs own
commendations: in all this languishment he sinned not, nor once charged God
foolishly with his lips. Job. 2. Job. 2.10.
no, as he was my charge, so my comfort to find him still as full of devotion
as affliction, a ready companion of our prayers, making his tongue Gods glory
(and his own as David calls it) till such time as the tyranny of his disease
chaind up the faculties of expression, Psalm. 57.8.
and then reared hands and eyes spoke louder the elevation of his pious heart,
all which petitioned the Churches comfortable absolution, which being
administered, his soul (feeling her self disburdened of a double weight, flesh
and sin) soon after took her blessed flight to Heaven, where is no more
Death or sickness, but all tears wipt away: to give your imitation then a
Charecter of him, The Character of him.
in a word. He was a zealous Christian, a faithful Friend, a comfortable
Neighbor, a loving Husband, a tender Father, an affectionate Brother, a gentle
Master, a sweet Companion: indeed living he was a Common good, and therefore
now a common loss. Yet this may comfort his lamenting friends, that though his
body is gone the way of all flesh, yet his soul the way of all the Saints, his
Time's extended to eternity, his company (for sinful men) the goodly
fellowship of the Prophets, His exchange.
Saints and Angels; and in stead here, of beholding vanity any longer, he
looks upon the face of God himself, which none can see and not be blessed:
thus to him, to dye is gain, Claudite jam rivos.
because to live was Christ. Then shut your sluices all that loved him, and
seem not to bowayle his happiness, do not Reguantem flere (as Saint Jerome
forbids Eustochium) do not you bedew your eyes because God has wiped all
tears from his, Mortui non amissised praemissi sancti.
Planctus and ululatus sint inter saeculi homines. Let such immoderate grief
be among hopeless men, that think their friends lost, and gone to a place of
weeping. (...).
And though (in such cases) we must permit you to be men, yet forget not to
be Christians; Doleamus nostram vicem (as our Savior to the Women) weep not
for him, blessed soul, but for your selves, for envy that your selves are not
so happy. In Epist. ad Eustoch
Non maereamus qaod talem amissimus, sed potius gratias agamus quod habuimus
imo quod habemus, (sweetly Saint Ierom) Let us not mourn as for one lost,
rather be thankful that we have had so good a pattern, nay, that we still
have him (says the Father) Deo enim vivunt omnia. For all still live in God,
yea, though they dye, and whomsoever he thus takes unto himself are still
within the Family of the Church. Hear his last Farewell now, Valete omnes,
omnes Me, suo quisquis Ordine, His Vltimum Vale.
secuturi. Valete. Farewell my friends, Brothermortalls fare you well, that
shortly (each in his own order) all must follow me: Follow him then first in
goodness, fight the good fight, keep the Faith, Finish so your course, as he
did, and henceforth is laid up for you (what he has now received) a Crown of
Righteousness: Though you go along with him in the Non habemus, having here
no continuing City: you shall also accompany him in the Futuram acquirimus, the
finding one to come: Which God, the Builder and Maker of it, grant us all (in
his good time) thorough Jesus Christ. To whom with the Father and the Blessed
Spirit, be all honor and Thankesgivings evermore. Amen.

-- Tibi desinet.

FINIS.
Perlegi concionem hanc Funebrem cui titulus est (The Christians Map) eamque
typis mandari permitto.

SA. BAKER ex aedib. Londinens.
Martii. 3. 1637.

