The su^ of divinity drawn out of the holy scripture very necessary, not
only for Curates and young ^^udentes in divinity: but also for all christen men
and women what so ever age they be of.

Drawn out of Latin into English by Robert Hutten.

.

Anno. 1548.

William Turner to the Reader.
AFter that my scholar su^time, and servant Robert hutte^, had traunslated
this book out of latyne into English, he mystrustynge his own Judgment to
be suffycyent to judge whether the co^piler of this book had in his writing
done al things according to the vein of holy scripture: offered ye book unto
me that I should examen it with the touchestone of the scripture, which thing
I have done as diligentelye as the time that I had to spare would suffer me.
The book, I dare say, is godly and full of wholesome doctrine, and is very
necessary for all stude^tes of divinity, for curates, for young children and
for all them that have any rule over any great houshoulde, ye may have books
that shall promise more the^ this does: but none that entreats of this kind
of matter that performs more then this does It has not so many new french
english blossoms as many books have: but better fruit then this has, I
think ye shall find either none yt writteth of this argument or else very few.
This tra^latour has applied him self as much as he ca^ to find out ye most
plain and used words yt be in england yt men of all shyres of England may the
more eassy perceive the meaning of the book. Some now a days more sekyng
their own glory then the profit of the readers: write so french English
and so latin that no man except he be both a latin man, a french man and
also an english man: shall be able to understand their writing whose example
I would dissuade all men to follow. For ye people if they should have any
profit by such men's labors had need of two dictionaries ever by the^, one
in french and an other in englysh. Which thing because it is to tedious, it
would pluck back all men from the redynge of such good and christen books as
they do translate.

But this book is boeth plain in sentence and easy in style and nothing
swarueinge from the common speech. Therefore read and examyne it with the word
of God and as far as it does agree with the scripture allow it and no farther

The Table of the places contained in this book.
OF a pastor and his office, Of the law power. Of ye gospel Of promises Of
sin Of Justification Of good works Of repentance Of absolution Of fayeth Of
God Of the creation. Of fre will Of predestination Of ye difference between the
old and new testament. Of the abrogation of saints the law Of the Christian
liberty. Of counsels Of reuenginge Of pouertye Of chaystiye Of the church Of
Ecclesiastical. Of offe^sions Of Sacraments Of the Baptising of chylder. Of
the supper of ye lord Of sacrifices Of the cross and aduersityes. Of humility
Of humiliacion Of prayer Of the Lords prayer. Of ye office of rulars Of
matrimony Of Imitatio^ of Of Burial Of the risyge again of the dead. Of the
end of the world Of everlasting life
What is a pastoure of the church?
HE is a person which is called Lawfullye, by the authority and
commau^demente of God, unto the Cure of souls of the congregation, which is
committed unto him: to teach the doctrine of the gospel, unto it, and
minister the sacraments.

What is the office of a pastoure?
It is to rule and govern fayethfullye the church which is committed unto
his charge, with the ministringe of the word and sacraments, and to hold out
and expel false doctrine and offe^sions. Of this office commands. Paulus.
Act. xx.

Take heed to your self and the whole stock, where in the holy ghost has set
you, to feed the church of God.

What is required in a pastoure that he be apt?
First of all that he have vocacion and commandment.

Secondarily that he be ryghtly instituted in the doctrine of the Gospel, and
know a certain form of christen doctrine out of the holy scripture, that he
may teach and set forth it purelye sincerlye, and euidentlye. Like as Paul
commands a bishop to be Didactum, that is to say apt to teach, and he
commands Timotheus to hold a certain form of holsume doctrine.

Thirdly, that in teaching he give credence and wisdom, and knowledge,
according unto the doctrine of Paul to divide perfectly the doctrine of
godlynes.

And that in setting forth the doctrine he wisely show the differences and
ends between the Gospel and other doctrynes, and learnedly know to confirm
the articles and sum of ye doctrine, and to confute false opinions and
doctrines, which be unclean in comparison to the word of God. Also* that in
governing and rullynge of consciences he give all cure and dylygence, that they
which be ignoraunte be instytute, that he teach, and deliver them which be
doubtful from errors, that he confirm them which be weak and correct and
call back the^ which do err, that he rebuke and chastise the^ which be
sinners and that he comforth them which be affrayde and in adversity.

Fourthelye that he rule the people in his living with example of his fayeth and
good worckes Like as Paulle commands Timothe. Be thou an example to the
fayethfull etc. And Peter, Be ye examples unto the congregation.

What is lawful vocacion?
It is when one is admytted unto the office of a pastor by the authority and
commandment of God,

How is vocation?
There be to kinds of vocation One is immediately of God. This is properly the
manner of chosinge prophets and Apostles whereof Paul speaks that he was not
called of men nor yet by me^. The other is of God as by gods commandment,
but yet by men like as they were which the scripture calls the sons and
disciples of prophets which were instituted and learned of the prophets to
the intent they should be apt to teach. So were Bishops and Pastoures of
churches ordained by ye apostles and afterward by ministers chosen and
ordained by the church. Therefore this is also a lawefull vocation and very
godly, when the service of the word is committed, to one by the authority of
the church or of them to whom the church commits judgment,

Is it not lawful to desire the office of a pastor?
I answer: There is difference between peticion or axynge, and ambition. For
ambition is plainly forbidden.

What is peticion?
It is when one proferreth his diligence and labor unto the church, but so
that fre judgment be left unto them which have knowledge, whether he be apt
or no. Therefore he which desires it so, does not ambiciously covet but
signifies only his will, that if he be called of the church, and judged to be
able, he will not refuse to take upon him the labors and ieoperdyes which be
in the office.

Contraye wise, ambition is when one thrusts in him self either by
arrogance, or some other covetousness or forhys belly only not lokyng for
judgment, nor willing to be proved. But conte^deth with money and other
subtyl crafts.

But the true peticion, which is without ambicion, is to be praised. And
virtuous men are to be provoked unto it for it has much goodness.

First of al it is expedient yt there be many instituted unto the mynistery,
that the use of it may be in the church.

Secondarily it is expedient that there be many desirers of the office that the
church may know ye manners of the^ which are to be chose^ and may have choice.

Thirdly therein consists the virtue of modestye, that they which do axe
the office, submytte themself unto the judgment of the church, and be in
doubt of their own existimatio^

Fourthly, that same thing styrreth up and sharpeneth dilygence and study in
them which will be axers of the office, that they prepare them self with more
diligence unto their duity.

By what testimony can they prove that it is lawful so to axe the office?
Paul. 1. Timothe. iii. says If any man require the office of a bishop he
desires a good work Also i. Corinth. xiiii. desire spiritual things, but
rather that ye prophecy.

What is to be propounded unto him which will take upon hand the office of a
pastoure?
First, the dignity and greatness of the minystery. For it is so great an
office so to axe the ministry, that no greater an office ca^ be found and also
very godly, Therefore Paul does greatly auaunce and praise it, and calls
them which teach the Gospel the ministers of god, also godo worckme^, and
helpers.

Therefore great reverence is dew unto this office, and it is co^uenyente to
take it upon hand with great deuoutnesse and diligence.

Secondarily, the will and commandment of God is to be considered, for God
will require a reckoning for the souls, and threateneth horrible pain unto
them which do not fayethfully their dewty, like as the scripture does often
teach Ezech. xxxiii and Christ in the parables of the evil servant etc.

Thirdly, ye promises of reward for god grants great rewards, unto them
which faythfullly execute their office sustain labors, hatred, and peryses
for the word sake as Christ says blessed is that servant, for his master
will make him ruler over all. And Peter, ye shall receive the incorruptyble
crown of glory.

What is the sum of christen Doctrine to be taught in the Church?
Christ has most aptlye showed that, in the last Chapyter of Lucas, where
he says. Gooe preaching in my name repentance and remission of sins.
Therefore the sum of this office in the church consysteth in this, that
penitence and remission of sins be taught.

Which is the most brief partition of the whole scripture?
There be two parts. For it is eithere a doctrine commaundynge what shall be
done, and rebukeyng sin. Or eles it is a doctrine of remission of sins.
And these two parts be called the law and the Gospel.

Of the law.
What is the law?
IT is, a doctrine commaundynge, how we ought to use our self, what we
should do, and what leave undone.

How many kinds of laws be there?
The first division: some be gods laws and other some man's laws.

What is gods law?
That which is instituted of God: and commands not only of external
actions, but requires also inward motions of the heart, and perfect
obedyence toward God, and condempneth all those which do not observe it.

What is man's law?
Which is institute by man's arbitriment, and commands of external actions
and offices.

An other division.
Of laws some be natural, and some positive, and thereof be rehearsed
commonly three kinds, the law of nature. The godly law of Moses, and man's
law

What is the law of nature?
It is the knowledge of gods law, which is infixed in man's nature by God
whereby he understands God to be, that he is the creatoure, and governor,
good, just, merciful to ye rightuousse, and a punysher of the vnrightuouse,
and that obedyence is dew unto him. Also that felowshipe is to be had among
men, that parents ought to be obeyed, that men ought to be loved and helped
and no man to be hurt, according unto this. Do not unto other men, that thou
would not should be done unto thy self.

What is gods law?
This call we the law which was given by Moses.

How many kinds of Moses law be there?
Three, moral, iuditiall, and ceremonial.

What is moral law-
It is a doctrine which commands perfect obedyence toward God, or of
living and good works toward God, and all men.

Where is the moral law set forth?
A brief and perfect description of it is contained in the ten
commandments, given by Moises unto the people of Israel which we call.
Decalogum,

What die^^rence is between the law of nature and the moral law, or the ten
comma^dementes?
Natural laws be Gods laws, and the very same, which be contained in the
ten commandments, that is to say in the written moral law.

Wherefore then was the law delivered unto Moses, seeing the law of nature
was before?
Although that light, and those knoweledges were infyxed in the heart of man before his fall in nature not as yet corrupted they were sure and
perfect, and men could surely consent thereunto but afterward, they wrre
greatly blinded by original sin, and the consenting thereto is very weak,
often times shaken of with doubting and almost blotted out. Therefore God did
give the law written that gods law renewed by the voice of the law of nature
should be made more clear and excellent, also that the word of God should
witness, that this natural knowledge is the law of God.

^ How many natural laws be dystrybuted?
The ten commandments is the most apt sum of all natural laws, and the
self dystribution and declarynge of the laws of nature. Therefore there can no
distributyon be found more apt, then in expoundynge ordinatly the ten
commandments.

Bind the ten commandments al me^ or no?
Although Moses law be abrogated and does not bynd the gentiles, yet because
the ten commandments be nothing eles then ye revelation and declaringe of
the law of nature: therefore ye ten co^mau^deme^ts do remain and bind al me^.
Not because they were delivered unto Moises: but because they be yt
interpretation and seting forth of the everlasting will of god which is the very
law of nature

What is the particion of the ten comma^dementes?
There be two tables. The first conteyneth precepts of a spiritual life, how
we should behave our self toward God, or of those works, wherewyth we
properlye be conuersaunte with God. And they discribe the true and proper
worshippynge of god.

The second conteyneth precepts of politycke lyueynge among men, how we ought
to use our self toward our neighbor.

Resite the ten commandments.
THou shall have no straing gods before me.

Thou shalt not take the name of God thy Lord in vain.

Remember that thou sanctyfye the sabbath day.

Honor thy father and mother, that thou may have long life upon the earth,

Thou shalt not kyl.

Thou shall not commit adultry

Thou shall not steal.

Thou shall not speak false wytnes against thy neighbor.

Thou shall not desire thy neighbors house.

Thou shalt not desire his wife, his servant his ha^dmaid, his ox his ass
or any other thing of his

What do the precepts commau^de us?
The first commands the inward worship of God, that is to say, the true
and perfect fear, the true and perfect faith and the perfect love of god.

The second commands the outward worship, the use of the name of god,
that is to say inuocacion, thanks gyuynge, preachinge of the word of god and
confession, these be sacrifices of praise. The third commands preaching of
the word to be holyly observed, and ceremonies which be given by god to be
kept for the minister sake, that we give some time to hearing the word, and
exercising by ceremonies.

The fourth commands obedience toward parents and officers, and this
precept contains excellent virtues, yt is to say diligence in obeyng, doing
our vocacio^, modestnes, pity toward our pare^tes ye commonwealth and such
like virtues

The fyfte commands to hurt no man, it forbydeth desire of vengeance
hatred, envy, and such like affections, and it conteyneth many virtues, that
is to say justice, mekenes, constaunce patience and clemency.

The syxte allows marriage, and commands to absteyne from whorhuntynge. It
conteyneth these virtues chastitye, temperaunce, continence, sobriety and such
like.

The seventh defe^deth propriety of goods, and commands to abstain from
other men's goods It conteyneth sparynge, liberality, diligence and such like.

The eight defends judgments and requires the truch of couenau^tes and
testymonyes.

The nynth and tenthe do give declaration unto all the other precepts, that
not only external factes are forbidden, but also euel affections and desires
and that the conscience is ever accused

What be the judicial or polytyke laws of Moses?
Which command of the rites of marriages, of successions of punishynge of
offenders and such other polityke things.

Those perteyn not unto christen men unless there be some of them natural, as
when marriage of aliance and kinfsolke is forbidden. For reverence of blood
ought to be observed, among all people and at all times. For the Cananites
were destroyed for unlawful lusts because they married their kynswomen.

Which be ceremonial law?
Which command of the temple, and rites of sacrifices, which rites and
customs do separate the Iues from the Gentiles Christen men be delivered
from these laws. Yet God will this that we use at certain times the
ceremonies which be commanded us of God, and come together unto the
preaching of the word, for nothing is more necessary then the preachinge of
the word of God.

What is the effect of gods law, and how many offices be thereof?
Three, the first, the law does constreine and pluck down all men with a
certain perfect form of living Therefore says Paulle The law is given for
the unjust. And again. The law is a scholemaister unto Christ. For this
form of good life ordained, and officers, the doctrine of the law,
punishmente for man's wretchedness etc.

The second, declares syn accuses, affraieth and conde^neth our conscience
whereupon Paul says: By the law is knowledge of sin. Also, the law
works wrath. Item. By the law is sin excelle^tly giltye: Item the prick of
death is sin, but the might of sin is the law.

The third teaches what works be acceptable before god, and commands
certain works, wherein we may exercise obedience toward god.

For although we be fre from the law in so much as belongs to
justification: yet as concerning our obedience the law remains. For it is
necessary yt we being justified by God, obey him.

May a man by his own power fulfill the law of God or no?
Nothing less. For the law of god is not satysfyed with our external works
as the papists teach, nor yet by the inward endeavor of our will, without faith
and the holy ghost. But Christ is the end of the law, that is to say
without Christ the law avails nothing.

May a man be justified by the law?
No, for Paul wythdraweth justification from the law, in this corrupted
nature. For no-man satiffyeth the law with the power of nature. Therefore they
which be not reconcyled with fayeth, although they fulfill certain works of
the law: yet can they not please god for they be ever accused of the law and
they remain in doubt and desperatio^.

Wherefore then be Moses laws given saying they justify not?
Therefore be they given that the Israelytes should be known from Gentyles,
unto the preaching of Christ. For god would segregate and deuid this people
from other nations, that there should be a certain kind of people* wherein
Christ should be borne and wherein the promises should be kept, and that
there should be certain testimonies of the word of God, therefore was this
people led out of Egypt with so many great and wonderful miracles.
Although then the Israelytes did not deserve remyssion of sins before god for
keeping of these laws: yet god did subject them unto these laws, as unto a
schole master as Paulle says. But they did obtain remission of sins by
the trust of the mercy of god promised unto them for Christ's sake which was
to come, whom the gospel declares now to be come.

Of the Gospel.
What is the Gospel?
IT is the preaching of repentance and remission of sins and justification,
which natural reason can not perceive, but it is godly declared, wherein god
promyseth that he will forgive sins for Christ his sons sake, and
pronownceth us justified, that is to say acceptable, and gives us the holy
gooste and everlasting life. If we believe only, that these do undoubtedly
chance unto us for Christ's sake.

What difference is between the law and the Gospel?
The law requires perfect obedience the true fear of God, true believe, it
affrayeth our hertes and consciences, it forgyueth not sins for nothing, it
pronownceth us not rightuousse unless we fulfill the law. And allthough it
has promises, yet they require the condition of the law fulfilled, that is to
say. He that does these shall live in them, Item, do this and thou shall live.

But the Gospel is the preachinge of repentance, containing the promises of
the benifites of Christ. It comfort the hertes which be affraied, it
forgiueth sin for nothing, and pronounces us justified although we do not
fulfill the law.

Of promissions How many promissions of the holy scripture be there?
TWo, some be added unto the law and have the condition of the law, that is to
say they be given for the fulfillyng of the law. Other sum have not the
condition of the law as the cause, that is to say, they promise not
remission of sins for fulfilling the law, but with out our deseruynge for
Christ's sake as the promyses of the Gospel be.

Which was the first promesinge of the Gospel?
When after the fall of Adam, God spoke unto the serpente, I will put enmity
between the and the woman, between thy seed and her seed for her seed shall
break thy head and thou shalt lie in watch for his footsteps.

By this promise and comforth Adam is set up and knows that god is
merciful unto him although he perceive him self to be unworthy and unclean.

This promise afterward was renewed unto Abraham, then after to Isaac and
Iacobbe. Unto this promise did they believe, and although they did acknowledge
them self to be unworthy yet judged they that god was contented with them for
his mercy sake and ye sede which was promised.

There be moreover in the Psalms and prophets many preachinges of Christ, of
remission of sins, of euerlastig life, which all come unto this purpose, that
they lift up and confort us in the contention and striuinge of our conscience,
and teach us to put our trust in god, to, call truly upon him and worship him.

Is not the promise of ye gospel universal
Yes, like as the promise of the gospel is with out your deserving: even so
is it universal, that is, it offers and promises unto al men reconcilinge
For like as the preaching of repentance is universal: even so is the
preachinge, of remission of sins universal.

Here upon says Christ John iii. So has god loved the world that he gave
his only son, that al which believe in him should not peryshe, So Paul.
Romans xi, god has shytte up al under sin. that he might be merciful unto all.

But that al does not obtain the promises of the gospel is for this cause,
that all do not believe. For the gospel although it promise without our
deseruinges, yet it requires fayeth for with fayeth must the promise be
taken, For this word gratis, does not exclud faith, but the condition of our
worthynes, and requires that we may receive the promise, and that can not be
but with faith.

What is the work of the Gospel?
To comfort troubled and doubtful consciences* and to promise unto them which
believe remissyon of sins and everlasting life.

What is the sum of the Gospel?
He which believes and is baptized, shall be saved. Marce. xvi. Ite^ to believe
that Jesus Christ is the lamb of god, which takes away the sins of the
world, John.i.

Of sin.
What is sin?
IT is not only a certain evil deed, but a perpetual vice, that is to say
corruptyo^ of nature, striuyng against the law of god

Which be the causes of syne?
The will of the deuell and the will of man, not god. Gene. i. god saw all that
he had made and they were all very good. And Psalm.v. Thou art not the god
which wylleth iniquitye Christ calls the deuell the father of liinge. And
Rome.v. By man entered sin into the world, And John. Concupiscence of ye
flesh is not of ye father, but of the world.

If God be not the cause of sin are the contingen^es or changinges to be
granted?
Yes, sin is not necessarily done, with absolute necessity, for our will
before syn was very fre. But fre will is the cause yt our actions do come to
vasse. For god forseeth and determines things which shall chance. Yet so yt
he takes not away the manner of workyng which is infixed in nature but he
determines the actions even as they come to pas. God permits yt ye will of
Saul do so, and does not co^pel it to do other, wise he marketh where he will
repres Saul.

What is contengentes or changinges?
It is whereby things created in their actions subjected unto ceason, sometime
be changed and altered and they fall in such and such actions and chau^ces, by
the choice which is by god granted and the liberty of creation.

How many kinds of necessity be there?
Two. One is absolution or o^ co^sequent: as it is necessary yt there be god,
it is necessary that god be good, just true and wise. And this necessity may be
called vncha^gable.

The other is necessitye of consequenty as Jerusalem must be destroyed. The
kingdom of Israel must perish. These be not naturallye necessary, but they
be made unchangeable when they be once decreed, as ye dead shall live again
either because they follow ye causes which go before: as. There must be hereses
For the deuel enuyeth God, and stirs up the ungodly against the gospel,
which obey him, therefore there must be heresies. These be naturally
contingentes, for neither this being consequente takes a way fre will.

What is to be judged of destenye?
The dotinges of the Stotio^s desteny, is not to be brought into the church of
god, for they have no truth or effect, but they be very iugelynges and
Sophistical fallations, and they annoy godlynes very much and good manners,
if men judge so as the servant of zeno, which said that he ought not to be
punyshed, because he was compelled to sin by the Stoical desteny.

How many kinds of sin be there?
Two, origynall and Actual.

What is original sin?
It is not only the reputing of offense (as papists have taught) whereby for
the fall of Adam all men be borne giltye, but it is also corruption of man's
nature, which followed Adams fall, which causes, yt he can not give true
obedience to the law of God but has fault and concupiscens against the law
of god.

This same is the sentence of Anselmus diffinityon. Origynal sin is lack or
defaut of origynal ryghtuousnes which ought to be, for he calls original
ryghtuousnes not only the reputing and approbation or allowaunce of God, but
the very perfection of nature, and all the powers of man, of understanding
and will whereby man might perform perfect obedience toward god,

What is the cause of original sin?
Disobedience or the fall of our first parents. For boeth Adam and Eve lost
the perfection of nature after their fall, and so followed corruption. And
afterward did they Engender such chylder as their nature, so corrupted was.
And so the world to come was infected boeth for Adames fall and for their own
corruption

What is the matter of original sin?
The matter or foundatyon of origynall sin is corruption of man's nature. But
corruption signifies both the defaut or lack of gifts of god, and
concupiscence. This call the papists an intycement or provocation, when it is
in deed horrible corruption and sin, which ingendereth afterward viciouse
motions.

What is the formal cause of original sin.
Gods reputing of giltynes or accusation.

What is co^cup^scence?
It is an horrible inordinate motion or violence in all the powers of man
against the law of God.

Which be the effects of sin?
Effects be the punishment of sin. But there be.iii. degrees. The first
punishmente is the very corruption of nature, whereof we have spoken, that is
to say concupiscence, which afterward engendereth all actual sins,
wherefore they be also motions of the corruption of nature.

The second punyshemente is death and all wrechednes of mankind.

The third is tirranny of the deuell, to whom man's nature is subjected
which labors boeth to destroy men with bodily eueles, and provoke them
to all kind of sin, to Idolatrye the despite of God, heresies* unjust man
slaughter, curssed lusts, and other mischief.

Remains not original sin in holy me^? Or how is original syn forgiven in
baptism?
When it is said that original sin is forgiven in the sacrament of Baptysme,
it must not be so understood, that no vicious thing remains after baptism
which is worthy damnacyon. But so is to be understood, that in baptism the
giltines is forgyuen, that is to say it is not reputed for sin, although
corruption or concupiscence remain as yet in nature, which remains also in
holy men, and is a thing by it own nature worthy damnation, but it is not
reputed or ascribed for Christ's sake, when we receive him with faith.

Therefore the formality of sin, that is to say the reputyng or accusation of
it is taken away in baptism, in the^ which be sa^ctifyed, but the natural
cause, that is the very affection an corruption of nature, remains as yet in
nature, and yet when the holy ghost is given unto them which have fayeth they
conceive new and godly motions, whereby the euel is somthynge mitygate.

After the same manner teaches us Saint Austen, of the remission of origynall
sin in baptysme, when he says. Sin is forgyuen, not to the intent that
it shall remain no more, but that it shall not be ascribed or laid unto our
charge. Item. Sin passes away as concerning accusation, but it remains in
act.

Wherefore remains punishment, that is to say bodily death and other
miseries saying sin is forgyuen?
Because syn or corruption remains in nature, therefore remains death also
as it is said Romans viii. The body is mortifyed for sin, that is to say,
being present and remaining as yet in nature. For this corruption must
vtterli be abolyshed, that afterward we may be clothed with a new and
perfect nature. But the corruptyon of this nature can not be abolished and put
away but by death.

What is actual sin?
It is every motion, every thought, every word and deed, against the law
of GOD, and without doubt, what so ever is done without faith.

Or more briefelye. Actual sin is the fruits of nature corrupted, like as
evil motyons be, thoughts, words and deades done against gods law. But we
must intertayne boeth the person and the work together, for although the
ungodly have honest worckes, yet nevertheless because the persons be viciouse
the works be not acceptable to god.

What makes the person viciouse?
Infydelity, to doubt of God, to lack fear and trust in God. For although
Pomponius and Cicero where excellent men, I put the case that they had a
certain knowledge of the law that is to say, that God is rightuouse and good.
etc. Yet they do not know and Gospel that God remytteth syn without our
deseruinges. And therefore in great aduersytyes and troubles they judge their
self to be rejected of God. Wherefore seeing they have evil effections
inwardelye, their external acts be so polluted, according unto this of
Paulle, what so ever is not of fayeth it is sin. Romans.xiiii. The stoutnes
of mind in Achilles was an excellent virtue and the very gift of God but it
is by chance viciouse, that is to say, by the person which is euel which
doubts whether God have respect of men or no. Also he lacks the fear and
trust of God.

What Makes the person acceptable unto God?
Fayeth. For if fayeth be joined with virtuous living and good works, ye
person is acceptable unto God.

How many kinds of affections be in the nature of man?
Two, some do playnelye resist the law of God, to desire the gooddes or the
wife of an other man, to be sorye that other men have the benifites of God, to
dystruste in god, to hate God, to desire praise which is not dew, to exalt
ones self above other men to be angry with the judgment of god. These
mocions be properly the fruit of original syn. And they be manifestely evil
viciouse and to be rejected out of man's nature.

There be other affections which do not resyste the law of god, as for a man
to love his wife his children, and friends. Also to be angry with vices. If
any man go about to take these affections from nature, he destroieth motyon
and life. And although they be defiled also by original sin yet of them self
they be not evil or vicyouse, but they must be keped in nature, and we must
labor to make them more pure and clean.

How be sins known?
By the preaching of the law Romans vii. By the law is sin known. For I
should not know that concupiscence were sin unless the law said. Thou shalt
not carnally desire.

What iudgest thou of mortal sin and venial sin?
Mortal sin, that is to say which is worthy death everlasting, is not
only a certain action but it is the evil which is infixed in nature, which
is called original sin. This motion condempneth the unbelieving and ungodly
according unto this saying. John.iii. He that believes not he is alredi iuged.
But this affection is forgyuen them which receive remission of sins by
faith, according unto that Romans viii. No condempnation is now unto the^, which
be in christ.

From whence come venial sins then?
The original sin is not idle but it engendereth vicyouse desires and
lusts, even in holy men according unto this sayeinge, The flesh lusts
against the spirit. But because such affections be foregyuen them which be
godly, they be made venial.

For the godly does not allow those affections, but does resyste them.
Therefore because fayeth is in them which do resyste, yet be they pronownced
ryghtuousse never the less.

What is mortal sin?
It is a kind of actyon, which is such, that they which do commit it, fall
from the grace of God, and be no more reputed righteousse, and be condemned
unless they do amend. These actions be called mortal, sins, for an example.
To allow or do any thing against conscience yt is to say ungodly opinions,
misbeleuing not to resist viciouse affections, also to commit bodily syn
against the commandment of god. Of this speaks Paul.i. Cor. vi. Neither
whoremu^ger, nor Idolater, nor adulterers, nor the effeminat, nor buggers, nor
thieves, nor ye defaitfull, nor drunkardes, nor slaunderers, nor robberes, nor
rauishers, shall possess the kingdom of God. So. Ephese. v. and Gala. v.

The works of the flesh be open, adultery, whore hunting, vncleanlynes,
uncleanness of living, Idolatry, impoisoning or sorcery hatred, chidiges, and
brauilinges, desire of glory, strife sects, enui murder, dru^cknes unmeasurable
eati^g and drinkyng, whereof I show unto you, that they which do commit such
shall not possess the kingdom of god.

What thynkest thou of the division of actual sins which old writers used,
that is, inward actual sin, and outward?
This diuisyo^ is not so ieopardouse, If thou say, some actual sins be
inward, like, as affectyo^s and thoughts be, which may be called venyall in
them which resyste with fayeth, and therefore be as yet reputed just, Some be
outward, as evil doings and sayeinges wherein they which fall be destitute
of grace nor be no more reputed just.

Yet shalt thou know that as well inward as outward sins be mortal in
them which lack fayeth, nor do not resist such euel motyons. For because
they lack faith they have no remission of sins. Therefore in such can no
venial sins be.

What say thou of the sins of omission and wylful ignorance?
They be also mortal sins. For this same wylfull ignorance is against
conscience, as if a man will not know the gospel, or will not perceive his
duty, or doet^ it negligently. Such be the fai^tes of many men now a days
which dispyse to here and know the gospel, although they know that this is
commanded of god: hear him. Such like was the ignorance of the Jews,
which did persecute Christ Even so is the Idolatrye of the Gentyles, deadly
sin.

What is to be required in them which be converted?
That they may repair to have a clear conscience, and they being sorry for
their sins, shall not contynewe in them, which they judge in them self to
have committed against the will of God. As it is written: I will not ye death of
a sinner, but rather that he be converted. And again: if I shall say unto the
ungodly thou shall dye, and if it shall repent him of his sins, and if he do
judgment and justice, he shall live. And yet let the^ know in the mean time
the said obedience, which they perform, not to be perfect. And therefore in
the judgment of god let them not trust in the dignity or worthiness of their
works, but let them believe the person to be accepted for Christ's sake. Then
let the^ observe this which Paul says. Make not sorye the holy spirit of
God, wherwyth we be marked unto the day of redemption, that is let us not
cast away the benifite of Christ, and so perish.

Of Grace.
What signifies this word Gratia?
THis word gratia in scripturs, and especially in Paull when he disputes of
iustyfication: signifies not a quality or state which is poured into the soul
(as the Papists do teach of gratia, and abuse the word for charity or love
which is in us) But it must be taken incomparyng with an other, and it
signyfyeth the undeserved receyuynge into favor or reconsiliation of God
toward us.

What is Gratia then?
Gratia properly is remission of sins, and reconcilyng or reputyng of
righteousness, or acceptacion or allowaunce of the person, which is by mercy
for Christ's sake, undeserved, with the which allowaunce the gift of the holy
ghost is conjoined, whereby our hertes in repentance be lyfted up with faith
and receive comforth, whereby new motions are created and agreeable unto the
law of god.

How shall this be understood, when it is sared we be justified by grace?
It must not be understood as the papists do Imagine, that it should
signyfy yt we purchase remission of sins or be justified for any state or
qualitye which is in us, that is to say, for our love or new obedyence, for
that is the very way to opresse the doctrye of fayeth, and to take away
Christ our mediator. But it must be so understood, that we obtain remissyon
of sins or rekeninge to be justified, when god accepts us without any of
our deseruinges by his mercy, for an other thing which is without us. yt is to
say for Christ's sake. And yet is it to be known that the giuyng of the holy
ghost is conjoined with remission of sins, yt is to say when we be lyfted up with
fayeth, which makes in us the performed obedience.

Therefore in, the stryuynge of our conscience, when it seeks for remission of
sins, and disputes of ye will of god toward it, we ought not to have respect
unto our qualities, or our own worthiness, but we must behold the promise of
Christ and accordig unto yt shall we judge of the will of god toward us and we
shall receive the self mediator by fayeth. This done, the holy ghost is given,
which brings comfort and takes effect, that new motions be created.
Therefore both these se^tences must be hold, both ye new motions ought to be
made in us by ye holigost, and that our conscience never the less ought to
have respect without our self to be justified by him, yt is to say, that we
have remission of sins, and be accepted unto everlasting life.

Which be the causes of grace?
The efficient cause is the will of God, which would that Christ should be a
sacrifice for us, and for his sake to be merciful unto us.

Therefore only the merit of Christ is ye cause, for the which grace is
given.

How chances grace unto us.
The instrument all cause is the preaching of the gospel and mynistringe of
the sacraments. For god will be effectual by his word if so be we receive it in
faith.

For our will must come thereto also which may receive the word. For he will not
take effect in the^ which do resyst, and in the^ which obtain not grace in
heareynge the word, the cause is their own will which resysteth the word.

So then obtain we grace, when by the word or promysse declared and set forth
in the gospel our hertes conceive comforth, and overcome fear, and lift up
them self with fayeth undoubtedly iudgyng that they have remission of sins,
and are accounted to be justified, according unto the promise, for Christ's
sake.

Therefore says Paul Galath. iii. that we should take the promission in
spirit by fayeth, that is, when we affraied for the judgment of God, do
lift up our self with faith, which leans upon the promise of Christ.

Here are fantastical and mad spirits to be condemned, as the Anabaptists,
which look to be lightened by the holy ghost without the word of God. Also
they which do imagyne the holy ghost to rune before the word, and when they
perceive that they have those new lightninges they feign that they will believe.

Also disputatio^s of predestination are to be casten away here. For like as
the doctrine of repentance which rebukes sin, is universal, and there is an
universal commandment of Christ: even so is the promysse of the Gospel
universal, commau^ding that we shall al believe in him and that we shall judge
this to be the everlasting and unchangeable will of god, that for Christ's sake
al these things are undoubtedly granted unto us which the gospel promises.

Have we then merit in reconciliation?
We have no merit whereby we ca^ obtain grace yt is remission of sins, and
reputacion of righteousness but it is the undeserved reward, as Paul says, it
is the gift of god, not of you lest any man should glory. Also. To. vi. The gift
of god is everlasting life.

Therefore this mean is taken away in reconciliatio^, not because we should do
nothing and be idle, but because ye promis is a reward, to the intent it may
be certain that is to aye, not having ought of ye condition of our worthiness,
and yet we in the mean season must receive and not reiecte, the promise

Which be the effects of grace?
The effects be motions of the holy ghost, which be when we receive, the
Gospel. And the first and princypall effect is fayeth, whereby we lift up
our self and judge God to be mercyefull unto us for Christ's sake.

This motion is called a reviving, for with fayeth, the threateninges and
fears of sin and death be overcome. And this trust is deliverance from
sin and everlasting death and the very beginning of everlasting life

Then after follow other motions yt is to say, a new obedyence toward god,
invocation, fear, love patience and other virtues. There be also other effects
of grace, the help of god against the devil and death, comfort in
adversities. Also delyueraunce from the law.

The last effect is, which solowyth the final cause. Renewing of hole nature
and everlasting life.

By what menanes does grace deliver us from syn and death, saying syn remains
as yet infixed in our flesh, and also bodily death?
I answer. Although in this life the flesh abides as yet viciouse, yet this
present infirmitye is not imputed unto them which believe, although this euel
by it own nature is sin, or a thing which deserves dampnatyon, moreover,
new motyons and a new life is begune in us, which shall be made perfect, when
this flesh mortified shall be renewed.

And so grace delivers from sin after two sorts. For it is remission of
sins which be past, and forgyuenes, or not reputing of the present evil
which is in us and remains infixed in our flesh.

Secondarily we be delivered from death. For now is everlasting death taken
away to the^ which believe.

Then remains as yet bodilye death and other aduerlityes in this life, but
yet is death robbed of his darte, and only bodily death does remain, for this
purpose that this vicyouse and corrupted flesh should be abolyshed. Afterward
shall this bodelie death be also abolyshed, and a new glorified nature shall
come after in ye resurrection of ye dead.

Wherefore makes Paul difference between Grace and the reward?
Paul calls grace remission of sins, or reconcilynge, or the undeserved
acceptinge for Christ's sake.

He calls the reward the gyuing of the holy gooste, and everlasting life.
Therefore this word reward, signifies ye very effects of grace whereof I have
spoken.

But although these two be so co^ioyned, yet Paul lernedly makes difference
between them for a necessari cause.

And this is the manner of dyfference as is above said. For although it be
necessary that new spiritual motions be begun in us, yet our conscience is
stryuynge, and before the judgment of god, must not have respect to the
renuinge of it which is done by the holy gooste, nor yet to seek if it have
virtues inowe or no, whether it believe and love enough. For so can it never be
certified of remission of sins, but it must plainly behold ye promise of
the gospel, and judge yt it has undoubtedly remission of sins undeserved for
Christ's sake not for any dignity or virtues which it has.

What signifies the spirit of grace and prayer in the prophet zachary?
zacharias Chapi. xii. has most pleasa^tly described ye benifytes of the new
testament in these words

I will pour out upon the house of Dauyde the spirit of grace and prayers, He
calls the spirit of grace, whereby we know that God is mercyful unto us,
and forgyueth our sins. The spirit of prayers conteyneth all inward
worship, invocation and all exercisynges of fayeth which the holy ghost
performs, after we have received confort and believe that we have remissyon of
sins for Christ's sake.

Of Justification.
What signifye these two words, to be justified and justification?
TO be justified signifies properly in the hebrew Phrases to be quyte from
sin and to be pronounted just that is to say, acceptable, as if thou would
say, he is absolved and reconciled or received into favor. So says Paul Romans
iiii. To him which believes in him which iustifyeth the ungodly, that is to
say delyuereth and pronounces ryghtuouse.

Eue^ so Justification signifies the reco^cilyng or acceptance of god. For
although it be necessary that new motions be in them which be reconciled, yet
iustifycatio^ must not be understood in this proposition, we be justified by
faith, of the diuicyon of qualityes or new virtues. But it must be
understood in referrynge to an other thing that is to say the will of God
accepting and allowynge us, even with the remission of sins and pacifiynge
of conscience. So also this word Iustus signifies in comparison of an other,
not one having new qualities, but one reconciled or accepted, having remission
of sins

What does justification conteyne?
It conteyneth three members remission of sins, acceptance unto everlasting
life and giuyng of the holy gooste. Although the rest be contained in
remission of sins, yet for the cause of teachinge it is expediente to
discern these three that we may perceive all these to be given unto us not for
our worthiness, but only by mercy for Christ. And not to be Imagined, that
although we obtain remissyon of sins by mercy: yet after that we be
justified by our own qualityes or virtues.

How is justification?
It is said above, in the gospel these two to be taught repentance and
remission of sins in my name. Therefore we must begin with the same
preaching which rebukes sin and sets forth the benifites of Christ.

Therefore this is the way of justification. Contrition is necessary, which
may esteem that God is angrye with sin, and may ernestlye be sorye for it.
In such fears, the conscience must be lyfted up with fayeth, which takes
the promise of the gospel of Christ, and according unto it determyneth our
sins to be forgyuen us, and that we be reputed just and inheriters of ever
lasting life for Christ's sake by his mercy, of our part undeserved.

When we be so comforted in repentance or contrition we be just or acceptable
unto god, that is to say, we have remission of sins, and acceptatyon unto
everlasting life, not for our dygnitye but for Christ, whom never the less
we must receive with fayeth. And when we take co^forth after this sort, we
receive also undoubtedly the holy ghost which stirs up our hertes, that they
begin to have new motions, as fear of God, faith, love. etc.

Which be the causes of justification.
The first and principal is the holy gooste, hereunto is an other to be joined,
that is to say ye word whereby the holy ghost does move and it takes effect.

Thyrdly our will when it is moved of ye holy ghost by the word it ought not to
resist, but to consent and receive the word, according unto this, if ye will
hear his voice harden not your hertes

Does not our will somthinge?
When we say men to be justified not for their deseruinges, and the merit is
wythdrawen from works, that must not be so taken, as our will should do nothing
at all, and be as a very stone or Image. But seeing we must begin of the
word, as I have said, man's will does certainelye somthyng. It, moved of the
holy ghost, agrees or conse^teth and receives the word and does sustain or
uphold it self therewyth, for it ought not to cast away or resyst ye word.
Also it must esteem that christ does unfeignedly keep his promyses, that is to
say, that he will give unto them which believe, the holy gooste, that he will
take effect by his word,

What is the meaning of this saying, we be justified by faith?
This sentence is dyuersly depraved. Some do expound it, with fayeth, that is
to say, with the whole doctrine of religyon, or with obseruinge of Christen
profession, or obedyence of al virtues

These do playnelye deprave the word fayeth, and call it a knowledge or
professyon of doctrine, and they speak nothing of Christ, nothing of
trust, which lyfteth up and comfort consciences. And they stycke only in
the doctrine of the law.

Other some, all though they be somethynge wyser, and grant that by the
word. Fides, not only the knowledge of the hystorye is signyfyed, but also
trust: yet do they imagyne a Sinecdoch to be in this word (we be iustyfyed by
fayeth) because it is the most excellent virtue, and begins godlynes,
therefore may iustyficatyon be attrybuted unto it yet not so, that other
virtues should be excluded from iustyfycation, that is to say, love etc.

But these do also err from the sentence of Paul and do lean to much upon
their own quallities, they think yt they be justified for the dignitye of ye
or other virtues which must be in holy me^

But the true interpretatyon is: we be justified by fayeth, that is to say, by
the trust of mercy for Christ's sake be we justified, or acceptable before
God. Therefore this word must be understood in a comparynge with an other. We
be justified with faith that is without our deserving by mercy be we counted
ryghtuouse. But this mercy must be taken with faith. Therefore ye mind of Paulle
is, that we be justified by fayeth, that is to say not for the dignity of our
qualities or virtues, or for any thing which is in us, but for an other thing
which is without us that is to say for Christ be we reputed rightuous.

What does this word Gratis except?
It does not except repentance or co^trition and good works: but it
excepteth the condition of our worthynes, and it attributes the cause of ye
benifite (that is to say of remission of sins, and giuynge of everlasting
life) only unto mercy

Wherefore is it necessary to make this exception
This doctrine is all together to be referred unto the very contentyon of the
conscience before the judgment of God, nor it can not be understood, unless
the mind be referred unto the said contention or stryuynge. For in so great
fears our conscience has experience, that we cannot set our virtues and
merits before the judgment and wrath of God, nor it can not be quyete, or
overcome doubting and despare, so long as it seeks it own virtues and good
works.

David although he had many excellent virtues and merits, yet ca^ he not
certainly esteem that he obteyneth remyssyon of sins for them, but all these
virtues be oppressed with one sin.

Therefore to obtain a quiet conscience and to overcome fear and
desperatyon, he is compelled to seek the undeserved mercy, nor he can not rest
before he obtain the voice of the gospel with fayeth that his sin is forgyuen
him with out his deseruinges.

Therefore then is this sentence to be holden that we be justified without
deseruyng by mercy for Christ's sake yt the benyfyt may be certain, and that
consciences may have a sure co^forth and that desperatyon may be over come
with faith.

And this same word Gratis properly makes difference between ye law and the
gospel For ye law has also promyses, but it grants not remission of
sins for naught but it requires the condityon of our fulfyllynge the law
or obedience.

This then is the princypall cause, wherefore it is necessary to defend this
excepcion, that is to say, that the promysse may be certain.

The second cause is that dew honor be attrybuted unto christ that is to
say yt we esteem verily that we have the benifytes of the gospel for his sake,
and that we may learn to use him for our medyator. For they which hold not
this doctrine, do rob Christ of his dew honor, nor they can not take him for
their mediator.

Show the testimonies of this exceptyon.
Romay.iii. They be justified freely by this grace, by redemption in Jesus
christ. etc. Ite^ Ga. iiii. Therefore by faith freely. etc. Ephe.ii.

Through grace be ye saited by fayeth, not of your self.

For it is the gift of God, not by works. Galat. ii. knowing that a man is
not justified by the works of the law. but by fayeth in Jesus Christ Ad
Titum.iii. Not by the worckes of righteousness which we have done, but by his
mercy has he saved us.

Is not this proposition true, we be justified only by faith.
I answer: it is true for it is al one to say we be justified freely for
nothing, and to say we be justified by faith. And the sentence shall be better
understand if it be changed into a co^paryson to an other. We be justified,
only by mercy. For it is so much, only by faith that is by the trust of mercy
only be we pronounced just.

But although this particle, alone, be not added, yet this proposition, we be
justified by faith is plainly an exception. Because to say, we be justified
by fayeth is for the same purpose, that is to say, because faith leans
only upon mercy, not of our dygnytye and it signifies trust of mercy only,
and it is set against the trust or confydence of our own dignitye and
works. Therefore it is a contrary saying, to say, we be justified with faith,
and then to imagyne that we be iustyfyed for our worckes or deserve remyssion
of sins and everlasting life.

I argue contrary?
Thou saydest before, that contrition and repentance were necessary. Therefore
faith alone does not justify.

I answer this particle (alone) does not except repentance or contrition
nor it is not so to be taken, that faith a lone is in them which be renewed,
and no other virtues. But it excepteth the condition of our worthynes and
merits, as the cause of reco^siliatio^, that is to say that we be reputed just
for none of our works. And the cause of iustifycatio^, that is ye price of
remission of sins, does not atribute the merit of everlasting life, unto
us: but that repentance and beginning of new obedyence be in us, yet have we
not therefore remission of sins An other argument?

We be justified with fayeth
Faith is a work.

Therefore be we justified by works
Here does the answer of the^ not avail which say, fayeth is the work of
god, because love also and other virtues be the works of god, yet are we not
justified by them. The mayor is not so to be understood, we be iustyfyed with
fayeth, because it is a work or qualitye in us, but because it leans upon
mercy and receives mercy. And this saying, we be justified with fayeth must
be understood by the way of a comparison, that is to say, by mercy be we
pronounced just but it must be received with faith Although then fayeth be a
work or new qualitye in us yet be we not justified by ye worthiness thereof,
for this faith is as yet imperfect, like as other virtues be, but we be
justified by that thing, whereupon faith leans, and the which faith
receives that is to say for Christ's sake.

If we be not justified with good works What need we then to do good works?
I answer, The benefit of justification is wholly atributed to Christ nor it
hangs not of our dignity, to ye intent it should be certain. And yet new
obedience is necessary as the effect necessarily following. For when we receive
remission of sines by faieth and be rekened just, a renewing is also created
with in us which is the beginning of a new and everlasting life, but the
beginning of ye said new everlasting life, is in deed this said new
obedience. Therefore this said new obedience is necessary in the^ which be
justified.

I axe of Paul now converted or renewed is Paul justified after his
conversion with fayeth only or with faith and works, or new obedience also?
I answer. He is iustyfyed only by fayeth. For although he have now a new
obedyence, and excellent virtues, yet ca^ he not judge his person to be
accepted for those virtues. For he perceives yt the said new obedience begun
now in him does not satysfy the law, nor he can not set up his virtues against
the judgment ogod, like as his self says. I know no evil yt I have done, yet
am I not therefore justified. Therefore it is necessari that he judge ye person
to be acceptable for an other thing that is to say for Christ. Then after
because faith begins upon mercy, and judges it self, therefore to be
accepted before God, it cannot be said that we be justified with fayeth and
worckes together. For it should be a contrary saying to put our trust in mercy
and in our own dignytye also.

Of good works
What is to be holden in the doctriee of works?
i. What works be required? ii. How they be done? iii. Whether they satisfye
the law or no? iiii. How be they acceptable? v. Of the merit and cause of
good works, What works be required? and which be Good works
GOd requires not only out ward works which be a certain civil form of
living and carnal justice, which is in hypocrites and ye ungodly. For that
may man's will in a manner perform, without the holy ghost, and God requires it
also of the^ which be not sanctified. But he requires also inward motyons of
the heart that is to sayethe fear of God, trust, invocation, love, patience
and such like, accordig unto this se^te^ce, I will give my law in their
hertes. And Christ says unless your righteousness abound more then the
righteousness of the Scrybes and Pharyses, ye shall not enter into the kingdom
of heaven.

Therefore good works, be not only outward works but also inward and
spiritual motyons. But I call those only good works which be commanded of god
and be taught in the ten commandments, Wherefore when inquiry is made of
good works we must have respect unto ye x. commandments, and it is to be
known yt only they are to be called good works which ar taught in the.x.
co^mau^deme^ts. For there must be a testimony of ye word of God, what works god
requires, and which be acceptable unto God. But it is not to be judged yt
those works do please God which have no testymony of his word, like as the
works of traditions, and kinds of worshipping of our own election be, but ye
scripture does rather refuse those works, and denies the^ to please god as
Christ says. They worship me in vain with man's commandments.

Says regester of good works contained in the ten commandments.
Unto the first belongs repentance or fear, faith or trust of mercy promised
for Christ, and love, also obedience in aduersityes or patience Unto the
second precepte perteyneth invocation thanks giuyng acknowledgyng of the
doctrine, and preaching of the word of God if thy vocacio^ require it. Unto
the iii. belongs obseruyng of common ceremonies which be ordened of god
reverence toward the mynysteryng of the word.

Unto the fourth, the deutyes perteining toward lyuyuge, obedience toward
parents diligence in our vocation.

Unto the sixth, Chastity, faythfulnes in marriage temperaunce and sobernes.

Unto the seventh justice in couenauntes and using of our goods, liberalitye,
alms deeds.

Unto the Eight truth in all our living to hate dyssemblynge and lyinges.

Unto the nyneth and the tenth belongs resystyng of concupiscence and euel
affections.

The.ii. question.
How are good works done?

Here must this rule first of al be observed yt it is impossible to fulfill
the law without fayeth. For seeing it is not sufficient to accomplish
external works or the fantasy of the law, but inward motions of the hertes
are required. This true obedience can me^ not accomplish without fayeth or
without the understanding of the Gospel of Christ.

But by this rule, without faith the law is impossible to be understood, two
ways. First of spiritual obedyence, as it is said. For although men fulfill
in a manner external works, yet in the agonye or striuinge of conscience when
their hertes perceive the wrath and judgment of God, then doubt they, they fle
God, they despair, they love not God, they call not upon him, therefore they
fulfill not true obedience.

Secondarily it is to be understood also of acception, that is, the self
thing also which man does without fayeth, does not please God, because it is
not done in the trust of Christ ye mediator. For without Christ nothing can be
acceptable. Therefore says Christ his self: without me can ye do nothing.

Therefore it is necessary that the gospel of Christ be added unto the doctrine
of the law, and faith is necessary for the accomplishinge of the law. So then
be good works done, when our hertes be lifted up with the Gospel, the holy
ghost moving and we also consentinge then is the holy ghost received also, and
new spiritual motions are begun in us

Our hertes after they judge by faith that God is merciful unto us for
Christ's sake, that God takes care for us and will here us, the^ acknowledge we
God the father and we delivered from doubt and desperation, do begin to love
God unfeignedly, to call upon him and to put our trust in his help against al
ieoperdies and periles, we take adversities in good worth and fulfill our
obedience, for the glory of god we help our neighbors, we do the duetye of
our vocation more diligently, and we accomplish the exercisyng of godliness,
chastity, diligence in repressing our affections and such like.

Therefore this is the benifite of the doctrine of the gospel when it teaches
of faith, it learneth how the holy gooste shall be received which stirs up in
us new motions, and we understand how the law is possible as Paul says, the
law is stablyshed by fayeth.

The third Question.
Whether new obedience do fulfill the law and be without sin or no.
Although new obedience be in the^ which believe, as it is said, yet is it to
be known, ye said obedience to be imperfect and not to be without syn but
that much infirmity and vice does remain as yet, even in them which be
santifyed Wherefore this new begun obedience (so much as pertains unto it
self) does not satisfy the law, nor can not be set against the judgment
of God. For there is as yet in holy me^ concupiscence which is by the own
nature sin, and deserves death, nor it is not idle but engendereth perpetual
viciouse affections. Therefore holy men can not judge or esteem them self to
be just and please God for new obedience sake. But they are compelled to seek
mercy, and believe, that they please God only for Christ's sake. So perceive
they yt continual repentance is required of them and that they have ever need
of remission of sins, like as christ requires repentance of all men lest
they should be to proud of the confidence of their own dignity, when he
says. There is joy with the angels for one sinner which does repentance
more, the^ for nine and ninety just.

Therefore the doctrine of our adversaries is to be condemned, which fayneth
that Saints be without sin, and concupiscence (which they call an enticemente
not to be by it own nature sin and they judge those which be renewed to be
justified by their own obedience. So take they Christ utterly away, and blind
the doctrine of the Gospel.

Testimonies, that sin remains as yet in saints?
i. John i. If we shall say that we have no sin, we deceive our self, and
the truth is not in us Romay: vii. In my flesh I serve the law of sin. etc.
Rome.x. he has shitte up all under sin to the intent he might be merciful
to al Psalm. Clxii. Enter not in to iudgmente with thy servant for no man
shall be justified in thy sight. Psalm.Cxxxix. If thou shall abserue iniquities
O Lord who can continue.

Psalm.xviii. Who understands trespases. etc?

Psalm.xxxi. Blessed is the man to whom the Lord has not imputed sin.
Therefore syn might be imputed unto all men, no not the saints, be without syn,
as it follows in the Psalm. For this shall every Saint pray unto the in
dew season. Also the saints do acknoweledge these sins when they pray:
forgive us our fautes etc.

The fourth Question.
Seeing that sin remains also in Saints how can the new obedience be
acceptable?
Hereof is it specially necessary consciences to be instructed in the church by
what means our new obedience is acceptable, seeing it is imperfect and
falls much from the perfection of the law? So then is it to be answered.

This new obedience pleases not for ye own dignity or perfection: but for
Christ, so also the obedience which follows or good worckes, although they
be defiled with sin, which remains as yet in nature yet be they accepted
for Christ, and that which is viciouse is forgyuen them which believe for Christ
the mediators sake. So is it to be known that as well the person as the
work is accepted for Christ, and that this new obedience, by mercy for his
sake is allowed, and reputed as though the law were satisfied, and it is
called fulfyliynge of the law or righteousness because we be now children and
in^e^iters with Christ.

Testimonies that this new obedience is acceptable.
Romans viii Now is there no condempnatio^ unto them which walk in Jesus
Christ etc.

Also if ye shall mortify the works of the flesh with the spirit, ye shall
live.

Gala. v. In Christ neither circumcision is of any valor. But fayeth by love
takes effect, our love then is acceptable, but so that fayeth be knytte with
it, which receives before, Christ the mediator.

Rome. xiii. He which in these things serves Christ, he pleases God and is
allowed of men.

i. Peter.ii. That ye may offer spiritual sacrifices, acceptable unto God for
Christ. etc,

i. John.iii. Because we keep his commandments, and do these things
before him which be acceptable.

The fifte Question.
Of the dignity and causes of good works?
This doctrine does greatly adorn and commend ye endless greatness of the
mercy of god, when we perceive our obedyence to please God for Christ's sake,
and to be reputed for the accomplishinge of the law, and to be adorned with
great praise, and to be called rightuoussenes, worship, sacrifices wherewyth
God is honored, also to deserve great rewards. Wherefore the dignitye of
good works is not to be dimynished, but rather amplified, that it may inflame
in us the desire of well workynge.

Which be the causes then, which should provoke us unto good works?
Five. Necessitye, dignytye the rewards which are promised, exercising of
fayeth, and the help of the holy ghost.

Which is the first cause?
The necessity of good works

For faith must increase in us with continual exercises in invocation
repentance and perils according unto, this do the worthy fruits of
repentance. etc.

For fayeth can not consiste with an evil conscience, because it is the trust
that God is merciful unto us, an euel conscience judges the contrary. Also
they which do repent, but give them self to viciouse lusts and desires do not
keep their faith. For faith seeks for remission of sins, it is not delited
with syn nor the holy ghost does not remain in them which give the^sefe to
vicious affections according unto this. He that works sin, is of the deuel.
Peter monisheth ye same, Endeavor your self says he, that ye make sure your
vocation and election.

Which is the second cause?
The dignitye of good works. For although in our great infirmitye we ought not
to judge arrogantly of our self yet our vocation is much to be made of and
although our virtues and good works be not pure and clean enough, yet belong
they unto ye glory of christ. Therefore their dignity is great and that we shall
know that they do greatly please, god adourneth them with honorable titles: for
they be called sacrifices ye is true worshipinges and honors wherwt god is
delited. Christ says ye the father is glorified with our good works. Peter
fayeth that we be a holy priesthod, ordained to offer spiritual sacrifices and
acceptable unto ye father by christ Moreover saying good deeds and good works
be ye gifts of the holy ghost it were an unthankful and an ungodly heart which
would not know ye author. Also good works be sacraments yt is to say,
tokens admonishing us of ye will of god, and testifiyng ye we have remission of
sins and other godly benifites according unto this.

For give ye, and ye shall be forgeuen: Which is the third cause?
Rewards as well bodily as spiritual, which good works deserve. But
although even in this life rewards are given unto many, yet because the
church is subjected unto the cross, the most special and excellent rewards,
shall be given after this life like as Christ says: your reward, is
ple^tiouse in heaven. And Paul says, godliness has promises of this present
life and of the life to come.

Which is the fourth cause?
Exercisinge of faith for therefore does God add promises unto the works,
that we should exercise our fayeth by such occasions, we should think that
therefore we ought to give alms, because that duetye pleases God, and we
should believe that God will in like manner be benificiall and good unto us.
Like as the example of the widow of Sarepta teaches, us.iii. Regum.xvii.

Which is the fyfte cause?
That they which gooe delygently about to do good works be helped of the
holy gooste and preserved, lest the deuell should draw and entice them into
daingerousse errors and vngraciousse mischieffes. Therefore christ says. I
will not leave you fatherles.

This benifit of god ca^ no man's mouth praise inoughe. For the crafts and
wyles of the deuel ca^ no man's wisdom eschew without the help of the holy
ghost.

Therefore let these causes stir up and provoke us unto good works.

But what of euel works. Do they hurt us or no?
Yes. First of all they deserve the wrath of god and everlasting dampnation.

Secondarely they deforme the Gospel and the glory of God as he says. For
your sake is the name of god evil spoken of among the gentiles.

Thirdlye they have present punishmente, the tyranny of the deuel, which has
the ungodly in his power, and does drive the^ to al kinds of errors and
myschefe.

There follows also vodely punyshme^te, war and other wrechednes and miseries.

Moreover all spiritual exercises be hindered, faith is dead in the^ which
give the^ self unto vices Finally, that which is most horrible, sins deserve
hardening of the heart, and si^nes be punished with more mischeuous sins.
These causes are diligently to be considered to ye intent we should cast out
of our hertes fleshly surenes or co^fide^ce and that we should learn to fear
the wrath of God, and stire up our self unto good works*

Do good works deserve everlasting life?
I answer Some although they grant ye good works do not deserve remission
of sins, yet afterward they Imagine that good works deserve ye everlasting
life, in the^ which be renewed, but it is not to be judged ye everlasting life
is given for ye cle^lines and dignity of those works but it is ye undeserved
benifit or reward, and it is given by mercy for Christ's sake. And ye cause is
ye our obedience is ever as yet unclean or it pleases not for it own sake
but by Christ does it please. And there is no man which is so mad or impude^te,
if he search his own conscience, that dare be so bold as to affirm, that his
good deeds be worthy everlasting life for them. So says Paul I am nothing
gilty in my conscience, and yet am I not justified therefore. If Paul now holy
and full of good worckes denies him self to be Justified with them, he judges
much less that they deserve everlasting life.

Also Christ says: when ye have done all which be commanded you: say yet
ye be unprofitable servants. Romans x. He has shyt up all under syn, that he
might be merciful unto all.

Nor we may not suffer this to be mocked with the subtle cauillacyons,
whereby they feign Sinecdochine, yt is to say, although good works be not the
whole merit yet be they partly and less principal merit. For so should
faith lean upon that said parciall merit, which is impossible.

For it is a contrary saying to esteem that we receive everlasting life for
nothing by mercy for Christ's sake, and then to Imagine that our obedyence
deserves everlasting life.

And that same partyall (if so be there were any such (yet should it be vtterli
shaken of, of us, in the battle of conscience, when we should perceive our
obedyence not to be such, as it ought to be. To be short none of our merits
can be set against the judgment of god for the law does ever accuse us
and condemn us of sin. As Paul says.

The power of sin is the law But thanks be unto god which gave us the
victory by Christ. etc.

Therefore so is it to be judged although our obedience be not the merit of
everlasting life, nor we are not saved by it, but for Christ's sake without our
deseruinges, yet it is our deuty, which must necessarily follow, and it
deserves rewards boeth bodily and gostly, which shall be given us partly in
this life, and partly after this life as Christ says

Give and it shall be given unto you.

Wherefore then is everlasting life called a reward, as it is said, he shall
give unto every one according unto his works. etc,*
I answer: it is a phrase of the law, which descrybeth in what state they
shall be, to whom everlasting life is given and it says that everlasting
life is given to them which be justified For when the law speaks of works,
it means the ryghtuousnes or unrighteous of Every one. So speaks the
law as though we had fulfilled the law with our obedyence and were so
rekened iustyfyed and it promyseth everlasting life unto them which be
justified.

But in the mean time we must learn in ye Gospel, that by fayeth freely we
receive imputi^g of ryghtuousnes for christ's sake, and that even so as we our
self had fulfilled the law. Therefore because ryghtuousnes or fulfyllynge of
the law is imputed unto us: therefore is everlasting life promised unto us, as
justified, not because our obedience is worthy so great a benifite, but because
for Christ's sake we be now reputed just? and the reward is due unto us, not
for our worthynes, but because it is promised us for Christ's sake. And this
reward is not the recompense of the due office but it is of an undeserved
gift or benifytte, and yet not for the obedience which is not due, but which
is due, yet in us it is imperfect, and does not satysfye the law.

Some were wont to speak also in this place, of the difference of mortal sin
and venial. For because sin remains as yet in holy me^ it is necessary
that dyfference be made between sins, which remains as yet in the
sanctified, and which may stand with fayeth and good conscience and which can
not stand with fayeth, but be such, that they which do commytte them, fall
from the grace and favor of God and be no more counted holy, like as the
adultrye of Dauyd was. But of this dyfference it is above said.

Of Repentance.
What is repentance?
IT is whereby we be mortifyed from syn with true co^trition, and raise up our
selves with faieth, to receive remission of our sins,

How many things be necessary to them which do repent.
Two Contrition and fayeth

What is contrition.
It is fear and sorines of conscience which perceives ye god is angry with
syn, and is sorye that it has sinned. Hereof be many testimonies in the
scriptures. Do repentance, and believe the Gopell. Marci.i.

Cut your hertes. Ioell.ii, Where shall the Lord dwell? In a contryte and
humble spirit. Esaye.lxvi. Cease to do frowardly And this contrytyon must
encrese Unto yt we acknowledge not only our outward sins, but al so our
inward fylthynes. Wherefore repentance is not in hypocrytes which be
afflyeted with no sorrow, yet in the mean seasonne stand they in their own
conceyte, as though they were clean from al sin. And Christ does often
most ernestlye rebuke this carnal surenes. Unless, says he, ye will do
repentance ye shall altogether perish.

From whence come these sorrows and fears in us?
By the word of god which rebukes syn Romans i. The wrath of God is declared
upon all ungodliness. And John: xvi. The holy ghost shall rebuke the world of
sin. etc.

What then is fayeth necessary to them which do repent?
Yes, for it is the trust wherehy every one believes that his sins be
forgyuen for Christ's sake undeserved. This fayeth must esteem that the sins
be forgyuen the.

Thereof be many testymonies in scriptures. Acts.x. unto him give all the
prophets witness that they which believe in him, shall have remyssion of their
sins for his names sake. Romans v. We justified by says have peace with god,
that is to say, appeased and quiet consciences.

And that sins be forgyuen for nothing, unto the the unworthy, these places
testify. Rom, iii We justified without our deseruinges by his grace. Ephesians.
iii.

Ye be saved by grace, it is the gyf^e of God, not of you. Item. Romans v. By him
have we entrance unto the father.

And Psalm.xxxi. I have said, I will acknowledge my vnryghtuousnesse against
my self unto the Lord, and thou forgyuest the ungodliness of my sin* Rome.viii.
When it was impossible unto the law God sent his son in flesh. etc. Romans
iiii. Therefore by faith without deseruynge etc.

This faith makes difference between the contrycion of Peter and Judas, of
David and Saul

The contricion of Peter and David was profitable, because it had fayeth.
Whereby they did receive the mercy promised and were comforted. But the
contrityo^ of Judas and Saul auayled nothing, because they did not ioin this
fayeth with it. This faieth also makes dyfference between servile fear and
childelye fear.

Servile fear
Is fear without faith.

Childly fear.
Is fear where unto comes fayeth which lifts up and comfortethe the heart
among such fears.

But what seye ye of confession and satisfaction?
These be come of an ecclesiastical ryte of an open repentance For in old
time they which were accused of open sins were excommunicate, nor they were
not received unless they would first make confession, and testyfye before the
pastores that they would amend their manners, and unless they did axe
absolution. After that was satisfaction added, that is to say, a certain open
chastifynge.

But this custom of confession is abrogated long ago in the greek church,
because a woman so confessyng was defiled in the temple of a certain deacon.

Therefore such custom is not of gods law.

What is the common confession, which is done unto the priest.
It is a numbringe of sins yet not commanded by gods law. It is yet
expedient to be kept in the church, for the cause of absolucion and
learneynge. For by that occasion the unlearned may be heard and more
commodiously instructed of the whole doctrine and it is an uncomely thing that
a man should come unto the communion being nothing at all serched. But yet it
is to be known that consciences are not to be laden or ouercharged with
numberynge of sins. For they may without that, are counsel and absolution.
For this numbringe of sins impossible, according unto this. Who
understands his sins. etc.

I reason against you.
The judge does not absolve before he know the matter. In this confession is
absolution, therefore the numbering and acknoweledging of sines is necessari to
be I answer unto the mayor: there is difference between Iudicyal power or of
jurisdiction, and the power of ministering the word. In this confession is
only power of ministeryng the word.

For the pastor absolueth not as a judge, but as a minister having no
commandment to call for a rekening of other men's sines, but only to give
absolutio^. etc. But there is besid this an other power of jurisdiction which is
a certain outeward judgment of ye church which pertains only unto open
crimes whereby open si^ners be excomunicat and they which be excommunicate
received again. etc.

What is fatisfaction?
It is a certain polityke and outward order in ye church instytute by man's
authority, or for an example, to affray other from syn, or for to search ye
minds of them which did return unto ye church, whether they did ernestly
repent or no For in old time open sinners were not received without a certain
open chastisyng, and they called it satisfaction.

How many kinds of satisfaction is there?
Two The one in time past of open repe^ta^ce, ye other of ye papists.

What is satisfaction of repentance?
It is a punyshement, which was appointed of ye pastor, unto the^ which did
repent for their open sines to prove the^ if they would ernestly amend or no,
wherein when they had exercysed their self for the time prescribed of the
bishop, they were admytted again unto the Supper of the Lord.

Of this satisfaction were diverse parts according unto the condition or
greatenes of the fault, and according unto their sins, so had they their
rules or canonnes.

What is satisfaction after the papystes?
It is to do certain works prescribed to redeem pains out of purgatory, or
other temporal pains. For the papists say, that sin is not forgyuen by
absolution, but the everlasting pain that was due, for the sins, to be
changed into temporal pain of purgatory. Then after say they, that some of
those sins be forgyuen by the power of the keys, and some to be redeemed with
our satisfactions, that is with those appointed works. So then do they teach,
that satisfactions deserve remission and to be a recompense of everlasting
pains

From whence comes satisfactyon of the papists?
In old time famous sinners were not received into the church without open
chastysynge for a certain time, this was called open repentance and
satisfaction, and it was a certain outward and polityke order, instituted by
men, not that it was satisfaction before God or that sins were therefore
forgyuen. Afterward, that order being abolyshed, the word only of
satisfaction remained. Whereupon unlearned men afterward made of a politic
order a spiritual order, as a thing necessary for remission of sins.

What is to be judged of remission of pain, and whether the keys can charg one
with punishment or take it away or no?
First of all it is to be known that remission as well of sin as punishment
is of our part the undeserved benifit of Christ, and that we are delivered
both from sin and everlasting death.

The^ is dyfference to be made between everlasting pain and temporal pain
for although remission of everlasting pain, be joined with the remissyo^ of ye
syn yet nevertheless, holy me^ in this life suffer common miseres of mankind,
as corporal death and other miseries whereof Paul says, the body is mortified
for sin* And god sometime punishes for certain sins like as david suffered
punishment for his adultry. But yt is not universal, for sins be forgiven
with out the due punyshme^t. Thyrdly The punishment which god does join, can
no power of keys remitte, nor they have no commandment of remittynge or
enioining any such punishmente.

Fourthlye, it is to be known, that such punishments be often mytigated, or
eles taken altogyther away by our repentance. Like as many times boeth
common and pryuate myseries were mitygated by repentance, as Paul says: if
we would judge our self we should not be judged of the Lord.

Fifthly, aduersityes of me^ be not always punyshmentes for certain sins, as
the aduersytyes of Job, and other saints

Also ye punishment of ye Apostles and martyrs but they be synguler works of
god wherewyth the faith of holy me^ is exercised, and the glory of God is set
forth.

Moreover virtuous men must judge also this to be the end and purpose of such
pains and aduersityes, that they be not tokens of the wrath of god, but of
gods good will, that is to say, that god will them to be exercyses, wherewyth
sin may be abolyshed out of us, and ye spiritual newenes may grow. Nor
godly men ought not to esteem yt they be cast away of God, as Paul says.
We be corrected of the Lord, lest we should be condemned with this world.

Of absolucion
What is absolution?
IT is a certification of remissyon of sins, and of the mercy of God toward
sinners. For so says Christ. Math. xviii. what so ever ye louse upon earth,
it shall be loused in heaven. And. John xx. whose sins ye shall forgive they
shall be forgiven.

May a man have ofter then once remission of sins?
Yes, when Peter axed Christ how often shall I forgive my brothere? He
answered, seuentye times seven times, and Paul says If a man be possessed
with any syn, ye that be spiritual correct him in the spirit of gentilnes.
And the church prays daily forgive us our faults.

And Christ says Luke.xv. There is Joy among the Angeles of god for one
sinner which does repent.

Do the Nouatians and Catharines rightly deny, that they which fall after
Baptism do not obtain remissyon of sins?
Those heretics do mischeuously err. For many examples may be showed boeth
of the old testament and the new, where they which were fallen did purches
remission of sins and absolucion of Christ and the church.

For an example by David, manasses and Peter. The church of the Galathya^s was
fallen, and called again to repe^tau^ce by Paul. And Paul him self
commands the lecherouse man of the Corrinthians to be received after
repentance. The Lord speaks also by Ezechiel. xxxiii, I live says the Lord
I will not the death of a sinner but rather that he be converted and live. Here
does god make an oath, ye co^scie^ces this may be comforted and lifted up,
when they here not only the promis, but also that it is established with an
oath.

But what say ye to the places of the Epistel to the Hebrews.vi. It is
impossible yt they which be once lightened etc. And.x. the which sin
voluntarily. etc.
These places do not deny them which be fallen to return unto grace and
the benifit of Christ For the first place entreats of ye cursed blasphemars
and obstinate persons, which against their own conscience do persecute the
word of god, and do so sore despise admonicio^ and repentance, that they
supposinge them self sure do triumph and do greatly rejoice in the^
self for their wisdom, because they were so bold as to mock the word of
God.

These can not be renewed so long as they continue, and crucyfye Christ, and do
not obey the gospel. The, other place commands to keep the favor and
benifit of Christ, and to be ware that it be not lost.

For he which loses the benifit of Christ, is accused of judgment

Is there a sin which can not be forgyuen
Christ Math. xii. makes distinction between the syn which may be forgyuen,
and that which cannot be forgyuen.

Who so ever speaks a word against the son of man, it shall be forgeuen
him. But he which speaks a word against the holy ghost, shall not be
forgyuen neythere in this world nor in the world to come.

And John says. He which knows his brothere to commytte a sin, which is
not deadelye let him pray for him and it shall be forgyuen him.

But there is a sin unto death I say not that any manne shall pray for it.

Which is syn against the holy gooste?
Saint Austyne understands sin against the holy ghost either in them
which continually do never repent, and which receive not the Gospel, or eles
desperation. For these sins be plainly contrary unto grace, and do reiecte
it. Other sins when we fleye unto grace, be forgeuen. Therefore. S. Augustine
does so interpret the saying of Christ. He that speaks a word against
the holy ghost that is to say, he which finally does forsake and cast a way
the word of grace which is preached and confyrmed with gostely testimonies,
he commits syn against the holy ghost.

Is not every fall, after the truth be once known, sin which can not be
forgyuen?
No. For there be many examples, and witnesses which teach that such fallynges
be forgyuen. And every persecution of the Gospel is not to be judged sin
vnforgyueable. Because Manasses, Pauli and other persecuted the word of god
yet purchassed they forgeuenes. Wherefore boeth the sentences are to be holden.

First, that all sins be forgyuen them, which believe, because the promysse
is universal according unto this, he has concluded all under sin, that he
might be merciful unto all. Also i. John.i. He is a sacrifice, not only for
our sins, but for the sins of the whole world,

Secondarelye this is also to be holden, that there is a sin which can not be
forgiven, or a sin unto death. But who commits that, ye cannot be forgiven
it is not our deutye to judge, it is sufficient to judge of ye which follows
yt there is no such sin in the^ which come to repe^tau^ce and faith. And
vnforgiuable sin pertains only unto the^ which continewe unto ye very end in
infidelity and do no repe^tau^ce for they which do repent, have no vnforgiuable
sins

What is the effect of repentance
The effects and fruits of repe^tau^ce be together newenes of life and manners.
For in the^ which be received into grace, ye righteousness of good conscience
must follow, whereof Iho^ says do ye worthi works of repe^tau^ce and of ye
necessity of this new obedience have we entreted.

Of faith
What is faith?
Faith is not only a knoledg of ye history of christ but it is ye unfeigned
trust of ye heart, which conse^teth unto ye promis of ye gospel but specially it
signifies ye trust of merci promised for christ. For altough there be many
kinds of promises and diverse purposes where about faith is occupied, like as ye
business and pereles of diverse me^ be as ye business of Moises, of David of Paul
be diverse yet this is ye pricipal purpos of faith, and which i al business is
ever ye first and most special yt is to say, trust of merci wherwt ye heart
iugeth, yt it has remission of si^nes, and pleases god for christ This faith
must go before and give light in every inuocacio^, and ye heart lifted up there
with desires and looks for ye help of god in all manner of te^tatio^s. Again,
without this fayeth or trust of mercy there is no invocation, nor no ieoperdies
can be over come For unless their be such faith in ye heart the mind is oppres
led we douti^g and indignation against god in ye sore striui^ges of ye co^cie^ce

How stands this faith in our heart?
The holy ghost moves our herts by ye gospel, which teaches ye sin is forgeuen
us for christ, which was made an offering for us. So the^ stands this when we
hear this promise, and behold Christ our mediator, we believe for his sake
that we be forgyuen and acceptable before god, and to be, heard nor we sufferre
not this trust to be shaken of us. This fayeth is the self reuiueing of heart,
and overcomes fears of sin and death and it brings a sure comfort it
vpholdeth in all periles and it axeth and obtains things of God.

Prove ye faith signifies trust of mercy
In this time also certain learned men do contend, this word Fayeth to
sygnifye only the knoweledge of the historye or profession of ye Articles,
which may be also in the ungodly, and they deny trust of mercy to be
signisyed by this word Fides. Therefore strong arguments must be hold, that
Fides. in this proposition signifies trust of mercy.i. Paul confirms the
promise. and faith which takes the promise. Rome. iiii. when he says
therefore by faith without deseruynge, that the promise may be sure, for he
means that the promise is of none effect unless it be taken with fayeth.

Therefore saying faith is compared unto the promise as to a thing about
which fayeth does exercise his office, it is necessary Paul to speak of
such a fayeth which is a conseniynge wherewith we consent and agree unto to
the promis. But this fayeth agreing unto the promise, is the very trust of
mercy, not only the knoweledge of the hostorye For so Galla. iii. says he,
that the promise by faith may be given unto them which believe. etc.

ii. Rome. v. speaks he of Abrahamme. He doubted not with distruste, but he
was confyrmed in faith here speaks he playnelye of faith, which resists,
douting despair, and recouereth the promis. For he speaks manifestly of ye
trust of the promis. He did not doubt of the promise of God by mystruste..iii.
Paul speaks of such a faith, which is not an idle knowledge of the history:
but which works for remission of sins and he attributes unto it lively
causes, ye is to say, yt it comforts our hertes in fears, makes our
consciences quiet, and overcomes syn and death Romans iiii We justified by
faith be pacified. Ite^ Ephesians. i. By who^ we have trust and enterau^ce by iayth.
Therefore it is necessari yt faith be taken for ye trust which comforts and
lifts up our hertes. Also Christ, which says unto the sinful woman, thy
faieth has made the safe, speaks surely of such a faith which believes and
knowledgeth yt her sins be remitted according to the word of Christ: Thy
sins be forgiven the, So also in such like places when he speaks after the
same sort unto the woman of Cananie and to her which was affected with the flux
of blood, he understands the trust which did look for help upon him, nor it
was no idle knowledge of the history. iiii Peter in ye Acts says, our hertes
to be purified with faith to have remission of sins and quietness of conscience.
But it is manifest. that our hertes be not cleansed with the bare knowledge,
which is also in the ungodly. Therefore it is necessari, yt faith signifies
here trust, which receives merci and remission of sins v, In ye se^te^ces of
prayer it is manifest, this word faith to signifye nothing else but a trust,
which believes with favor as Jacob. i If any man need wys^om, let him axe it in
fayeth doubtinge nothing.

So says Christ also: what so ever ye praienge, do axe: believe

So also in the old testament for ye shall receive it. etc.

this word fides and Credere signify trust of mercy as. Abraham believed God
etc. Also Iosaphat.ii. Paralip. xx. Believe. in god.

What is the meaning of this sentence, the ryghtuouse shall live by his faith.
It attributes unto faith two things that is to say justification and
lyuelines, that is deliverance from sin and death It teaches yt by faith we be
just or accepted unto god and that by faith we be revived and quikned yt is
that we receive co^forth wherbi everlasting death is overcome, and everlasting
life is purchessed. Therefore in this sentence also, it is necessary that faith
be not taken for the naked knoledg of ye history, but for the true trust of
mercy, which purchesseth remission of sins. and comforts our hertes, and
delivers us from fear, and certifyeth us of everlasting life.

What then? Is the knowledge of the history to be wythdrawen from faith?
No, but it is necessary to believe all the Articles of faith. Yet it is not
sufficyent to know the historye only, but the hystorye is to be referred unto
the final cause which is the Creed, that is to say, I believe remission of
sins For this is the use of the history. That thou believe Christ the son of
God, therefore to be borne in flesh, to have suffered, and, risen up again,
that thou should obtain remissyon of sins and everlasting life.

What is the profession of the Christen fayeth?
There be three Symboles, Credes or professions of the Articles of our fayeth,
the common creed of the Apostles, that which was made in the counsel at
Nicene. And the third of Athanasius.

Rehearse the apostles Creed?
i. I believe in God the father allmighti, maker of heaven and earth

ii. And in Jesus Christ his only son our Lord.

iii. Which was conceived by the holy ghost, borne of ye vyrgyn Mari.

iiii. Suffered under ponce Pilat crucified dead and buried,

v. He descended into hell the third day. he rose from death.

vi. He ascended unto heaven, he sytteth at the right hand of god the father
almighty.

vii. From these he shall come to judge the quick and the dead.

viii. A believe in the holy ghost.

ix. The holy catholic church, the communion of Saints.

x. Remission of sins.

xi. Resurrection of the flesh.

xii. And everlasting life.

Say the creed of ye counsel at Nicenum.
I believe in one god, father al mighty, maker of heaven and earth al things
visible and unvisible And in one lord Jesus christ ye only be gotten son of
god, and borne of his father before ye worlds, god of god light of very light,
god of very god begotten not made, like in substance unto his father, by whom
he created althings. Which for us men and for our health came down from heaven
and is incarnate by ye holy ghost, of the virgin Marye, and made man, and
crucified also under po^ce Pilat, suffered and rose the.iii. day according to
the scriptures and he ascended into heaven. He sytteth at ye right hand of god
the father and shall come again with glory to judge the quick and the dead,
whose kingdom is without end, And in yt holy ghost the lord which gives life
which proceeds from the father and the son, which also with the father and the
son is worshypped and like glorified which has spoken by the Prophets. And
one holy catholic and apostolycal church I acknowledge one Baptysme in
remission of sins, and I look for the resurrection of the dead and the life
of the world to come So be it

Say the creed of Athanasius?
Who so ever will be saved, before al things it is necessari, that he keep the
general faith.

Which unless every man observe perfect and undefiled, he shall without doubt
everlastingly perish But this is the catholic fayeth that we worshipe one god
in trinite and the Trinite in unite.

Neither confoundynge the persons, nor seperatyng the substance For the
person of the father is one, of the son an other, and of the holy ghost an
other.

But of the father and the son and the holy ghost: is one diuinitye, equalle
glory, like everlasting majesty.

Like as their be not three uncreated, nor three unmeasurable, but one uncreated
and one unmeasurable.

Likewise the father is almighty, the son almyghtye, and the holy ghost
almyghtye

And yet be there not three almightyes, but there is one almightye. Even so the
father is god, the son is god, and the holy ghost is god. And yet be there not
three gods but one god.

So the father is lord, the son is Lord, and the holy ghost is lord. And yet
be their not three Lords but there is one Lord.

For like as we be compelled by christen veritye to acknowledge every person
one after an other to be god or Lord: so be we forbidden with catholyke
religyon to say that there be three gods or three lords.

The father is made of none other neither created nor yet begotten The son is
of the father only not made, nor created, but begotten. The holy ghost is of the
father and the son, not made nor created nor begotten but procedyng.

Therefore there is one father, not.iii. fathers, one son not iii. sons, on
holy ghost, not three holy gostes And in this trinite their is nothing before
nor after, nothing greater nor less.

But the whole three persons, be like everlasting with their self and like
equal.

So that in all things, as it is now above said, and that the trinity is to
be worshipped in unity and the unity in ye Trinity. Wherefore he which wylbe
saved let him so judge of the Trinity. But it is necessary for everlasting
health that he believe faithfully also the incarnacion of our Lord Jesus Christ.

Therefore it is right faieth that we believe and confess, that our lord Jesus
Christ the son of god is god and man.

He is god, of the substance of his father gotten before the worlds. and he
is man of his mother borne in the world.

Perfect God and perfect man of a reasonable soul and man's flesh subsistyng.

Equal unto his father according unto his dyuynytye less then his father
according unto his humanity.

Which althought he be god and man, yet be their not two, but there is one
Christ.

But one not in conversion of the godheade into flesh, but in takeyng of
manhead in god,

One altogether, not in confusion of substance, but in unity of person.

For like as a reasonable soul and flesh is one man, so Christ is one God and
man.

Which suffered for our salvation, went down unto hell, and the third day
rose from the dead He went unto heaven, sits at the right hand of god the
father almighty.

From thense he shall come to judge the quick and the dead.

Unto whose coming all men shall rise with their bodies

And they shall give a count of their own deeds.

And they which have done well shall enter into everlasting life, but they
which have done evil into everlasting fire.

This is ye catholyke faith which unless every man do faythfullye believe, he
can not be saved.

Of God
What is God?
GOd is a spiritual understanding substance, the everlasting maker, keeper
and defender of al things, of one endless wisdom, goodness, ryghtuousnes and
mercy.

Show wytnes of the unite of God.
Deuteronomy.vi. Hear Israel. Thy Lord god is one Lord, Esai. xliiii I am the first
and the last, and beside me is there no god.

And xlv. I am god, nor there is no more beside me.

i. Corinthy.viii. We know that an Idol is nothing in the world, and there is
none other God but one.

Ephesians. iiii. One God and father of all, above al and by all.

i. Timothe.ii. There is one God and one medyatoure of God and man.

How many persons of the godhead be there?
There is only one godly substance, but it is attributed unto three persons,
that is ta say the father, the son and the holy ghost, which be Homousii, or
of one substance, like unmeasurable, and like everlasting.

What signifies a person here?
A person is an vndeuidable substance in understanding.

How prouest you that their be three persons
Christ commands al people to be baptized in ye name of the father, of the
son, and of the holy ghost. Here by name we these persons rehearsed like in
substance or homousii.

Al^o the profession of the creed testifies the same. Where we confess our
self to believe in the father, the son and the holy ghost. Math iii. be the
persons manifestlye perceived, when the holy ghost appears in the similitud
of a dove, and the voice of the father is herd testifieng of the son? This is
my well-beloved son. etc. Item Joan.xv. When the holy gooste shall come whom I
will send you from my father. Hear be three persons joined together the holy
ghost coming or sent, the son sendyng, and the father.i. John.v. There be three
which bear wytnes, the father the son and the holy ghost. And these three be
one.

What is the father?
He is the first person of the godhead, everlasting unmeasurable vnbegotte^
and having his being of no man.

Who is the son?
He is a person of the godhead. gotten of his father before the world
homousius, or like in substance unto his father, and like everlasting.

What signifies, in the beginning was the word.
Logos, or the word, is called of John the son of god, which is the fecond
person.

Therefore this is the signification, in the beginning was the word, that is to
say, the son of god was in the beginning, and from ever.

Wherefore is he called logos or the word?
Because he is the person which speaks, which has ever spoken from the
beginning unto the fathers.

Prove that logos or the word signifies a person, which is by it own nature
God.
John speakethe of the word that it was in the beginning that is to say, that
it is everlasting. Now if the word were in the beginning before the
creatynge of althinges: Therefore it is no creature, but like everlasting unto
the father,

Then when he says: the word was with God, Hear does he plainly make
difference between the persons, that the person of the father is one, and the
person of the word an other.

A Thirdly he says, and god was the word Hear testifies he clearlye that the
wordeis God. For this partycle Logos or Verbum is put here in the place of
subiectum, like as the greek article added thereunto does show. But the
particle Deus, is put in the place of predicatum.

After that the said John shows of the word, that he was in the world, and
the world was made by him, These be the words which must be necessarilye
understood of a parson, wherein is godly nature. So the other places also,
which say that all was created by the son, testifye the word to be a
person, which is by it own nature God. For it is certain that the world was
not builded by his manhead. Coloss, i. All be builded by him and in him, and he
is before althyng and al things do consiste by him Item Coliss ii. In him
dwells the fulness of the godheade corporally. Hebru. i. by whom he made also
the worlds, which is the bryghtnes of shining, and the Image of his
substance beryng al things in ye word of his power. etc i. John.i. That which
was from the beginning, yt we have heard and that we have seen, that our
hands have touched the word of life, that do we show. John vi. What if ye
shall se ye son of a man ascendynge where he was before? John, xvii. Glorifye me
O father with the glory, which I had before the world with the. John. viii. I
was before Abraham was borne. John.v. Like as the father rayseth up and
quyckeneth the dead: so quickneth the same also whom he will. Also what so
ever he does, that does the son also. John.x. I give everlasting life unto
them, etc. John.xv. He says that he sends the holy ghost. When the holy
ghost comforter shall come, whom I will send you from my father. And a littel
after: if I shall not depart: the holy ghost co^forter shall not come. But if I
shall go, I will send him unto you. Joan.xx. Thomas calls openly my Lord and my
God.

Romans ix. Which is above al a blessed God. etc.

What is the holy ghost?
It is a godly person, like everlasting, and like in substance unto the
father and the son, procedynge from the^ boeth.

Show witnesses, which prove that the holy ghost is a person and by nature
God.
I have said before that the persons be manyfestelye divided, when Christ
says: baptisynge them in the name of the father and the son, and the holy
ghost So Matthew.iii. and Luke.iii. The persons be divided. The voice of the
fathere speaks, of Christ, this is my well beloved son. Here be two
distinct persons, of the father speking and testifiyng Christ to be his
son. Thirdly beside that also the holy ghost is described to appear in the
lykenes of a dove which is neither the father, nor the son. John xiiii. I will
pray my father, and the other conforter yt he shall give it you Also the
comforter, whom the father will send in mi name he shall teach you al things
Also he shall not speak of him self, but he shall speak yt which he shall hear.

John.xv. When the comforter shall come, whom I will send you from mi father, he
shall bear witness of me. To. viii. Ye be not in flesh but in spirit, If so be
yt the spirit of god inhabit you. But if any man have not the spirit of
Christ, he is not his. Also, if the spirit of him which raised Jesus from the
dead do dwell in you. etc.

These places do manyfestelye declare and decerne the holy ghost from the
father and the son, and testifye him to be the spirit of the father and the
son. In the same place. This spirit gives witness, unto our spirit etc.

i. Peter.i. of the which health the prophets have sought and searched,
inquirynge in or at what time the spirit of Christ showing before would
signify unto them those aduersityes which be in Christ.

Hear does he clearelye testifye that the holy ghost was, before the son of
God did take flesh upon him, and he calls him the spirit of Christ.

Also in the same places, which now be showed unto you by the^ which have
preached the Gospel unto you, the holy ghost sent from heaven. etc.

Actu. ii. out of Ioell, I will pour out of my spirit upon all flesh. Gear
testifyeth he the holy ghost, which is poured out not to be the person of
the father and yet when he says. Of my spirit, he signifies that spirit to
have a godly nature.

How proueste thou that the holy gooste does proced equally from the father
and the son?
John.xiiii. the holy gooste which the father will send in my name. Then
after says Christ. The holy ghost whom I will send you from my father Hear
testifyeth he the holy ghost to be sent as well from the son as the father.

Of the creation
What is the creation?
IT is the mankyng where with God created spirits, and al bodily natures of
nothing by his word, for the kepeynge and preserving of them. Gene. i. In
the beginning God created heaven and earth, that is to say, all creatures. In
the beginning, that is, when their were as yet no creatures.

What is a creature?
It is all this worckema^ship as well of spirits created, as of other things
and bodily natures for this purpose made of God, that they should declare a
God to be, not alone to be plainly god but everlasting almighty which can
create, govern and keep althynges. Which known God the creator and keeper
might be glorified, and have thanckes therefore.

Who does keep things created?
In the article of creation we must understand the perpetual gouernynge,
vpholdynge and keeping of things. So that god has not forsaken or departed
from his worckemanshippe, like as the kerpender departs from the house which
he has made But God does always govern uphold, keep, and defend the natures
of things, he does yearly make the earth plentiful, he brings forth corn
out of the earth he does perpetually minister unto things haueynge life, life
and motion. Act. xviii. In him do we live, move and have our being. Colos. i.
All things consiste in him. All things look forth, that thou may give the^
meat in due season Psalm. xxxv. O Lord thou shall save man and beast.

How is God known in his creatures as creator of things?
The universal generalnes of thing, is a certain sacrament and witness,
that there is a god that he is good, just, wise. Also the mouynges of the
elements and heavenly bodies, sun moan and sterres by certain courses from
time to time, preseruacyon of the kinds of all things, does sufficiently
declare, the world and natures of things not to have their being by chance,
but to be created, with the assured counsel of God, to be ruled and preserved.
Moreover the souls of men be the Images and as it were glasses wherein the
godhead does appear, wherein we ought to mark and behold the godhead Also the
polityke felowshyppe of mankind declares manyfestely the presence of God. We
se also quellers and tirantes to be violently drawn unto punishment by the
certain counsel of God.

How ought the things created to be used?
It is great godlynes so to use things created that by them we may glorifye
God, and declare and set furthe his goodness and presence, and give thanks and
praise unto him therefore. And they which do not this be very Epicures, but
rather godles perso^nes

Of the strength and power of man, or of fre will.
What is fre will?
IT is the will aggreinge with reasone. For in manne be these two, Reasonne or
the mind which judges, and will, which either obeieth or resists the
judgment, and rules the inferior powers that is to say, the affeccyons of
senses or wits.

Now is it to be axed, how our will is fre, and how it can obey the law
of God.
Of this question can no Judgment be given unless we consider the greatenes
of original sin. Also unless we know that the law of God does not only
require outward civil works, but perpetual and perfect obedience of the
whole nature. For if the nature of man were not corrupted with sin, it should
have more assured and manifest knoweledge of God, it should not doubt of the
will of God, it should have true fear, true trust, to be short it should
perform and accomplish perfect obedience unto the law that is to say in
our nature should all motyons be agreeable with the law of God even like as
it is in godly angels. But now is the nature of man oppressed with ye
original sickness, it is full of doubting and despair, of blyndenes, of
errous, nor it does not truly fear God nor put confidence in him. To
conclude, it is ^all of vitiouse affections.

Considering this infirmity and weakness if is to be enquired, how much
man's will can accomplish.
I answer: seeing there is in the nature of man a certain choice of things
which be set before reason or the senses and out ward ciuyle works, man's
will may by it own power, without renuynge in a manner, do the outward worckes
of the law.

This grant the Philosophers and holy scripture also. For the scripture
teaches that there is a certain fleshly righteousness and certain works of
the law even in them which be not renewed. But this liberty is often overcome
with natural infirmitye and hyndered also often by the deuel. For when nature
is full of evil affectyons, men obey, for the most part, desires and iustes,
not with right judgment, as Medea says in the poet. I se better things, and
allow the^ to be good, yet follow I the^ which be worsse. ii. The gospel
teaches one horible corruptyon to be in nature which resysteth and stryueth
against the law of God, that is to say, it works so that we can not give
true obedyence. But this corruption can nature not take away, like as it can
not avoid death, but rather there is so great blyndnes of nature that we can
not perceive the said corruption, therefore also can we not mark how great ye
infirmity of man's power is, which if we could perceive, then at length should
we understand that man is not able to satisfye the law of God.

Wherefore then can men not satisfy the law of god?
The will of man without the holy ghost cannot make spiritual affections, which
God requires that is to say, the true fear of god, the trust of mercy,
sufferau^ce aduersitye, love of God, and like motions.

Show scripture,
Romans viii. They which be led with the spirit of god, they be the chylder of
god. Also if any man have not the spirit of Christ, he is none of his.

i. Corinthy. ii. All natural men perceive not those things, which be of the
spirit of God John.iii. unless a man be renewed by water and the holy ghost, he
can not enter into ye kingdom of god. Also no man can come unto me, unless my
father draw him Also, they were all taught of the Lord Also John.v. without
me can ye do nothing.

If ye teach so, men will be affrayd from the desire of obeynge, beleuynge, and
doing good works?
So great is the frowardnes of man's judgment that when our infirmyty is
showed unto us, and the help of the holy ghost promised, men be made more slow
unto the study of good works when this doctrine of ye gospel should rather
provoke stir up and in flame us to call upon god and pray for the help of
god.

In this battle the mind must be exhorted, that with all diligence it keep the
word, it may not be councelled that it shall not labor and enduour it self,
but it must be taught, that she promise is universal, and that it ought to
believe the promise, For Paul says: the holy ghost healpeth our
infirmitye. And Saint Basilius says: God does preuente us he calls us, but
we must take heed that we do not resyste. For we must not give our selves
unto natural mistruste or stowethfulnes.

Can a man do something by his own power?
Although there be great infirmity in the godly holimen, yet is there a
certain lyberty of will When it is then helped of the holy gooste it can do
somthynge in auoidynge of outward fautes and crimes, therefore the help of the
holy ghost must be amplyfied, and sharpened with our delige^ce. So Paul
commands us to beware lest we shall receive the grace of god in vain, and
Christ promises to give the holy ghost, not unto them which be idle, not unto
them which despise it, not unto them which resist it, not unto them which
pray for it.

Luke.xi. And god increases the gifts in them which use them rightly, as the
similitude of them which exercise marchaundyse does teach.

But what iudgest thou of the opinion of the manicheis?
I do not allow the dotynge of the Maniche is which attrybute no actio^ at al
unto the will, no not when the holy gooste helps it, as there were no
difference between a stock and our will. Ecclesiasticus says. God left man
in the power of his counsel. Here say I that our will in godly actions and
dilige^tnes, is not idle, but yet that it must be helped of the holy ghost,
and so is it verily more fre.

Saint Hierome, did teach two sentences of the which the one does interpret
ye other, these be they. Accurssed be he, which says, God has commanded
impossible things. And again he which says that we can fulfill the
commandments of god without the grace of God, accurssed be he.

Of the division of fre will
SOme deuid fre will, in to fre will before the fall, and fre will after the
falie.

What is fre will before the fale
It was perfect and at full liberty of chosinge as well good things as evil,
of keeping the commandments of god as not keeping them according unto fre
will godly infired and imprynted in ye creacion. So Ecclesisti. xv. He sets
fire and water before the, reach thy hand unto which thou wylt. That fre will
was before the fall of man such, as is yet in holy angels. Now by reason of
syn the liberty of chosinge good things spiritual, is abolished according
unto this: a natural man does not perceive those things which be of the
spirit of God.

Adam might by that liberty have done as well good as evil, loved God as
hated him. And even so the Angels, which when they chosed the evil they did
fall.

What is fre will after the fall?
In nature corrupted remains as yet a certain judgment of the law,
understanding what ought to be done, which nevertheless our will can not
bring to pass, unless the holy gooste come and help our will and
endeuores, in outewarde things. Our will has power of outward things, without
the reneweynge of the holy gooste, which nevertheless may be hyndered of
the deuell.

What then is left unto our arbitr^mente in spiritual thing?
A certain judgment of those things to be done, which is the law of
nature, will, endeavor, study, course, thinking, which all be nothing
unless the holy gooste come thereto, wherefore the Apostle prays eeuerye
where for the churches, whereunto he writes: that God would vouchsafe to make
perfect that Good thing, that he had begone in them.

Of predestination.
What is predestination?
IT is a certain fore ordeynyng of god, whereby al things come to pass, as
well inward as outward works and thoughts, in all creatures, according
unto the decre of the will of god

Election or choice, whereby God has chosen us in him self before the ground
works of the world were laid, that we should be unreprovable before him by
charity, that he might by election chose us to be his chylder by Jesus Christ
in him self, according unto the pleasure of his will Ephe. v. And Mathe. x. of
the two sparowes. etc.

Whereupon must predestination begin*
Not of the law nor yet of reason, but of the gospel, whereby the promise is
vniuersalle. If any man search for the cause of election without the gospel,
he must needs err. Beside that if any man go about to make a pertycular
promise, of the universal promise: he shall make the promise plainly
uncertain and take away faith. Wherefore predestinacion must be esteemed by ye
universal promise. That done, no other occasion shall remain of troublynge of
mind with any particularnes.

How many manners of predestination be there?
Two. One of obligation or necessity, and the other of condition. Obligacio^
is ye necessytye of present things as if a thing apeare to be present by the
provision of god ye of necessite, must come to pass, although it have no
natural necessity, as it is necessary that al men be mortal. God so prouidynge.

Condition is, as if Adam shall eat of the apple, he shall dye. If Israel shall
walk in the way of ye lord and keep his commandments it shall be saved, if you
shall receive the gospel and beleueinge stycke unto it unto the end of thy
life thou shallt be saved, but if thou will not receive it thou shall be
condemned.

So Saint Austyne, God made predestination with man* that if he would be
obedyente unto him, and abstain from the tasting of the forbiden apple, he
should remain in life, but if he would be disobedient, he should be in
danger of death.

For we be predestinate under a condicyon, that if we will receive the word,
we shall be the chylder of God, if not, we shall be condemned.

ii. Timothe.ii. Paul says. If any man will pourge himself from these,
that is to say, from false and ungodly doctrines, he shall be a vessel
sanctified into the honor applied unto the use of the Lord prepared unto every
good work.

Show places of the scripture which declare the promise to be universal.
Paul. Romans.iii. The ryghtuousnesse of God by the fayeth of Jesus Christ,
which is in all and upon al.

And Rome.x. The same is Lord of al, rich toward al which call upon him.

Also, God will all men to be saved God will not the death of a sinner, but
rather that he be converted and live.

Ezech. xviii. Mathewe.xi.

Comme unto me al ye which labor and are Laden, and I shall refreshe you.
John the iii. Chapter.

That all which believe in him should not peryshe, but have everlasting life.

Also. Acts.x. With god is no difference of persons. With these and such
sentences must consciences be vpholde^ against natural mistruste and
desperation. But because the euel comes of us, we must take heed that we
give not our self wyllingly unto natural mystruste, and resyste the promise,
but we amendynge our life must believe the promise.

Of the difference between ye new and old Testament.
What is the difference between the new testament and old?
THE old testamente was properlye the law, and all the polytyke ruelynge of
Moses which had promises given unto the people of Israel concerning their
kyngedome and outward policy.

The new testamente is, not the ministerynge of the law, but of the gospel,
taht is to say, a couenaunte of the spiritual and everlasting kingdom of
Christ, and it has the promise of justification and everlasting life, to be
given for Christ.

Wherefore is that called the old Testament and this the new Testament?
Not for the order and succession of times, as though the new testamente did
not belong unto the fathers: but for the difference of the office and promises.

For the old testamente was the ministrynge of the law, and obseruyng of the
leuiticall rytes, and of the commune wealth of the people of Israel, and it had
promises concerning their kingdom.

But thoffice of the new testament is an other thing, an other promise, that
is to say, of everlasting things nor it does not consiste in outward
obseruynges but it requires spiritual worshipynges, that is true motions of
the heart.

Indureth the old Testament no more?
Although the law of Moses and that polytyke order appointed for a certain
time, does now cease after ye Christ is come nor it is not necessary to
observe those rites of Moses polytyke law: yet because the doctrine of the
moral law is written in nature, and is common to al men, in so much belong
they unto the old testamente, which has only the knoweledge of the law, nor
has not the knowledge of the Gospel; nor be not renewed of the holy ghost.

Contrarily the new testament, that is to say, the promise of remission of
sins and renuyng by the holy ghost, pertayneth not only unto one time, but
unto all ages, like as the promise of Christ was made unto the fathers in the
old testamente.

What signify these two words in Saynct Paul. The letter and spirit?
By the letter he understands all thoughts and obseruynges, and as they call
them, good intencions or endeuoringes of reason, without the holy ghost, that
is to say, without the true fear and true faith of Christ.

By the spirit he understands spiritual motions, which the holy ghost does
stir up in our hertes. Therefore the law is the letter when we follow it with
good entencions or outward manners. without ye holy ghost, yt is without true
fear and true faith. And the gospel is the letter also, when it is not
received in spirit, that is when we do not, truly fear God and steadfastly
believe in him.

Moreover the law is the ministeryng of death, because it promyseth not
remission of sins unless it be deserved nor it brings not the holy ghost.
But the gospel is the ministrynge of the spirit and life, because it
promises remission of sins freely, and gives the holy ghost and everlasting
life. Therefore the interpretation of Origin is to be rejected, which calls
the letter the grammatical sense, and the spirit the allegory.

Of abrogation of the law.
What is the abrogation of the law?
IT is the abolishing of ye curse or malediction of the law, done by Christ,
that now al which believe in Christ, be delivered from the power of the law
ever accusynge the conscience and condemnynge it, for imperfect obedience
before god, Gala. iii. Christ redeemed us from the curse of the law, whiles he
was made accurssed for us. And Romans.viii.

No condempnation is now unto them, which be grafted in Jesus Christ. etc.

Be the ungodly delivered from the law?
No. For Paul says: the law is ordained for the unjust, that is for
infideles, and them which are not as yet under grace, or which have not
received Christ with faith, nor have not taken the holy ghost, by whom they
should be governed. In these the law does as yet to this day no less
exercise the power and deutie in accusynge and condempnynge their consciences
then in old time under Moses.

For the law is our schole master unto Christ.

Which be the causes of the abrogation of the law?
i. The promises of God, for God promised that this abrogation of the law
should be in Christ.

Hieremie.xxxi. I will make with the house of Israel a new bond not according
unto the covenant that I have made with your fathers.

ii. Our infirmitye did give occasion of abrogatynge the law. Actu. xv which
neither our fathers nor we were able to bear.

Is the whole law abrogated?
The whole law is abrogated unto him which believes, that is to say that the
law can have no power of accusynge and condemnynge him. For he has an other
thing whereby he is justified, then the law.

Wherefore then it is not lawefull to omytte the ten commandments?
I answer. The Gospel brings spiritual and everlasting life, therefore it
keeps that part of the law, which teaches, what that new life is, and it
consents with ye law of nature which is the said knowledge of ye te^
commandments. Wherefore the ten commandments may not be so understood
to be abrogat that they ought not to be observed no more, as the other parts
of the law, that is to say the ceremonies and the iudiciales of Moses be
abrogated, which be only outward ordeininges and customs perteining unto
the bodily life.

But in them which be justified, and receive the holy gooste is now a new
spiritual obedyence begone which is required in the ten commandments or
moral law.

Of Christen liberty, which is the effect of the law abrogated.
What is Christen liberty.
IT is the fre setting at liberty in a spiritual kyngedome by Jesus Christ,
whereby we be fre from bondage, and from the cursfe of the law, from the
power of sin and death, and from all outward observations also, so much as
perteyneth unto justification before God, which freely without deseruyng is
given unto them which believe. Or more briefly so: it is a doctrine showing
wherein christen ryghtuousnesse does properly consist, and what is to be
judged of ceremonies, of the which things, in all ages infinite disputations
and co^tentions have been.

How many degrees of christian liberty be there?
Four The first, that remission of sins and reputing of justice is given not
for the law, but for nothing by Christ. This is the must special and
principal degree perteyning nothing unto civil life, but only unto the
striving of the conscience in the judgment of God wherein this comfort is
necessary Of this degree says Christ, John. viii. If the son shall
deliver you, ye shall be free in deed.

The second is gyuyng of the holy ghost, whereby the beleuers be justified and
governed and defended against the tyranny of the devil. Here of speaks
Paul.ii. Corhinthi. iii. Where the spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty.

The third. That the Gospel delyuereth us from the ceremonies and Judicial
laws of Moses. This decree perteyneth in a manner unto outward life, but it
has the cause of these which be above said.

For the Gospel does not require Leuiticall ceremonies because it teaches us
to purchaise remission of sins freely and pronounces us justified by mercy
for Christ's sake, not for any service or our works.

The fourth teaches what is to be judged of ecclesiastical ceremonies, which
the bishops or other men have instituted. For because in this life certain
rites, places and times be necessary, the gospel permytteth customs to be
made in the church without uproar and contention.

Therefore be certain days appointed that the people may know, when they
ought to come together, to hear the word of god

These tradicions be tolerable, yet justification is notto be sought in them.

Unto what thing is this doctrine of Christen liberty profitable?
Unto many things. For if this doctrine be not in the church there ensue many
disco^modites.

First the justification of faith is blinded and blotted out that is to say,
when the benifyte of Christ is attrybuted unto tradicions, that is when men
esteem them selves to deserve remission of sins, and be pronounced
ryghtuousse for such rites and customs by the which persuasions consciences
do fall into desperation, and they lose the true knowledge of faith and of
Christ.

The second, the unlearned fainynge such outward observations and rites to be
true worshipping and and service of God, and true perfection, when perfection
is never the less, fear, faith, love, and the works of our vocation.

The third the concord of churches is confounded as it is of the easter.

The fourth. If consciences esteem those rites to be necessary they ca^ never
rest. For who ever has observed al men's traditions, whereof such sums, so
many books have been written that they can not well be numbered.

But thou say, obedience is necessary, although the powers do abuse the
right. For Christ says: upon the chair of Moses sit the Scribes and
Phariseis etc. What soever they shall command you, do it.
In things which perteyne unto gods law, the conscience must necessarily
obey the Pastors according unto this: he which hears you, hears me. But
in Ecclesiastical traditions, it ought so to obey, that it avoid offensions,
and that justification be not sought in the^, nor the opinion of necessity be
added thereto. But when ungodly things be commanded or taught, the^ is the
rule of the Apostles to be followed, God must rather be obeyed then men.

But what say ye of the ceremonies, which be instituted of Christ?
They must be observed, because they have the commandment of God. And yet
the liberty of the gospel teaches, that we be not justified with ceremonies
without faith, also that necessity does excuse us if we have impediment
whereby we can not use them, as if by some chance a certain man could not
obtain baptism, yet if he should believe steadfastly in Christ he should be
saved without the ceremony.

Of Councels.
Be councels taught in the Gospel by Christ or no?
SOme have feyned councelles to be in the Gospel of not reue^ging, of
poverty, of virginity, of chastity. Then after said they that those works
were perfectnes. But these opinions be full of errors and superstition. For
the law of God is one which conteyneth nothing but precepts, and Christ's
long sermon, Matthew, v. is nothing else then the enterpretyng of the awe. For
Christ's purpose is, to declare the perfect obedience that is required in the
law Wherefore when he forbids hatred, concupiscence desire of vengeance,
he brings in no new counceles, but he expounds the very law of God and
does teach the precepts. He threateneth also euerlasteing punishmente. He
which is angrye (says he) with his brother, he is accused of judgment. Also
who so ever sees a woman, for to desire her, he has committed adultrye already
in his heart.

Of Revenging:
What commands he of reuengynge?
HE forbyddeth private reuengynge, that is desire of reuengynge, and that
which is without the authority of the officers, he does not inhibite common
reuengynge which is exercised by the officers. For the Gospel does not
abolyshe rulars or magistrates. But rather confirm them. Rome. xiii. Therefore
this sediouse opinion which teaches that there is a counsel of revenging, is to
be rejected.

And we must wisely make difference between open and private reuengynge: for
the Lord says give me the vengeance and I shall recompense.

But what of this sentence? is it lawful to resist force with force?
The Gospel does not resist this sayeing. For to resist force with force
belongs unto the law of nature, if it be rightly understood, for it must
be applied unto the common reuengyng, that is unto the office of the rulers.

So the rulers do resist force by force when they drive away theft and
robbery with harnais and sweard For wherefore should rulars be necessary if we
should privately every one exercise reuenginge?

Of Poverty.
What commands it of pouertye?
THe Gospel does neither commmaund, nor yet counsel any man to forsake his
goods or confer and use all things communely, but rather allows politic
ordeynynges, and division or propriety of goods.

But the Gospel commands to help them which be pore and needy, leberally
and it promises great rewards boeth bodily and gostli for such liberality, as
Christ says: Give and it shall be given unto you. And* ii. Corhint. ix. He
which sows scarsli, he shall reap scarsly. etc. Solomon Proverbs.v. does
excellently set forth and describe a great part of house rulynge, drink (says
he) water out of thine own fountaynes, and thy fountaynes shall be derived,
and the ryuers shall run into the streets. Be thou alone the master of
the^, and none other with the. Solomon will, that every one give unto the
needful of the fruits of his farm hold, but so that he keep still his farm
hold, lest he be brought unto beggerry. So Paul commands to give, so that
we make not our self pore and that slogardes shall not misuse our
liberality. To be short, many testimonies do confirm propriety of goods.
For it is lawful to possess riches, as Christ and Paul testify.

What is poverty?
Poverty is not beggerie. For that in them which be Idle and strong is
sin.ii. Thessa. iii. He which labors not, shall not eat. But the
poverty of the gospel is spiritual, that is to keep our goods which god
has lent us without covetousness, without pride, that is to say, without
confidence of our riches, without ungodliness, that is when we be in ieopardie
for the gospel sake, that we will rather leese our goods, the^ forsake the
gospel, so was Abraham, Job, David and many other mo pore in spirit, although
they did possess great riches. Poverty co^teineth patience, that is to say,
when our riches be wythdrawen from us, or perish by any chance, yt we be not
angry with god, nor yet do any thing against his commandment, but that we
suffer this injury or chance with an equal mind for the love of god.

How many kinds of forsakynge of riches be there?
Two. The one is by our election without the commandment of God, and without
vocation. This forsakinge of riches is not the worshyppyng of God. Mathewe xv.
They worship me in vain with the commandments of men. The other is which
is commanded of God and is our vocation, as when tirantes compel us either to
leese our goods or to forsake the Gospel. This does Christ praise He that
will forsake, faieth he, his field, house. etc. for the gospel sake, that is
for the acknowledgeinge of the Gospel, he shall receive an hundredth fold. etc.
Mark.x. To be short, like as he does not praise them, which forsake their
wife and childer, or which kylle them self, even so does he not praise them
which forsake their patrimony, without the commandment of God.

Of Chastity.
What commands it of chastity?
THe Gospel commands not only the chastity of virgins, but also of them
which be married. For matrimony is the commandment of God, and al they
which have not the gift of chastity are commanded to mary. i Corhinthians.
vii For the auoydyng of fornication let every man have his wife.

What is chastity?
Chastity is not only virginity, but also moderate use of them which be
married. Hebr. xiii. marriage is honorable with all men and an undefiled bed,
but whoremongers and adulters will the Lord judge.

Yet Paul says, as concerning virgins I have no commandment of the Lord
but I give council. etc
Paulle judges not any man rather to deserve justification for virginitye,
then for marriage. For boeth they which be married, and virgins must esteem
that they be justified by the mercy of God and accepted for Christ's sake, not
for the dignitye of marriage or virginite.

Wherefore then do papists prefer single life?
There has ever been deuelyshe and fantasticalle spirits, which have denied
that marriage was lawefull unto Christen men as Tatinus and Hierax. Although
papists will not be thought to condemn marriage yet do they deforme it
very much, for they dream yt they do rather deserve remission of sins and
iustyfication with their single life, then other men. Afterward feign they
that single life is perfection of the Gospel, wherein they do greatly err.
For there have been many which were married that were as perfect (As Abrahame,
Isaacke, Iacobe, David etc) as mani virgins. Single life is no perfection, but
the perfection of the gospel is to acknoweledge the in firmite of mankind, and
to be affrayed, and again to be vpholden with faith. In such exercises
stands the perfection of the Gospel, if there be any so to be called,

Wherefore then does Paul praise and council virginity and singlenes?
For a polyticke purpose that is to say, yt we may be more ready to learn, to
teach and execute the ecclesiastical offices. So Christ praises the^ which
be single when he says. Mat. xix. There be also Eunuchs, which have gelded
the^ self for ye gospel sake, yt is, for the cause of learning and teaching.
For it is true that Paul says. He which is single, goes about those
things which perteyne unto the Lord, that they may please the Lord.
Therefore, let virgins search their powers, and labor to live purely and
sincereli, let them auoyed idleness and ryote, and let them be abstinente, that
their heart may be occupied with virtue. But they which fall into lusts
contrary unto the commandment of God, let them know that god will punish
the^. For fornicatours and adulterers shall not enter into the kingdom of god.
Many times for the cause of such: whole common wealths be punished, like as
the History of the sodomites and the floude of Noe testifies. Also god says
that he would destroy the Cananites, for their unsearchable and unclean
lusts. Paul says also the punishmente of lusts, to be blyndnes and dotynge
madness. To. i. And careless fleshlines, Ephesia.iiii. And Oseas says:
fornicaon, wine and drunckennes take away the heart. Therefore these feigned
and forged virgins be occasion of sin unto many, and the authors of fylthy
example.

Of the church
What is the church?
IT is the congregation of all the^ which profess the gospel, and be not
excommunicate, where be one with the other, as well good as evil, like as the
parable of the net cast into the sea teaches. Math. xiii. Here upon be also
tow bodies of the church described in the scripture, the one is the body of
the true church the other of the church of hypocrites

When did the church begin?
It is certain that the church did begin in the time of Adam and after Adam,
among al them which do profess the Gospel to have remained unto this day and
as yet to be with the^ which profes it

How many kinds of churches be there?
Two. The false hypocritical church and the true church.

Which is the hipocriticall church?
That which fights and warreth against the true church like as ye Jews did
pursewe, the prophets, then after, Christ. This calls David the church of
ye maliciouse or envious. And Esaias discribeth it in these words. Cap xxix.
This people drawyth nigh unto me with their mouth an honors me with their
lips: but the heart of them is far from me, but they worship me in vain,
teaching the doctrines and precepts of me^. This church is set before thy
eyes, because all the works, all the service where with it believes it self to
worship god is external, it is ye similitude and vision of ye true church, with
man's tradicions in the stead of sincere doctrine worshippyng god with mouth and
lips only, without the affections of the heart.

What is the true church?
It is the congregation of the righteouse, which believe truly in Christ and
be saynctified by the spirit of Christ. Of this speaks Paul.i. Timoth. iii.
The church is a pillar or the seat of verity.

This is called catholyke or universal, because it is no man's politic
ordinance, appointed unto one place, or certain tradicions of men: but it is
the spiritual company of the godly, which be dispersed thorowout all the
world, and yet do they agree at all times in the doctrine of the gospel.

This church does Paul declare in these words. Ephesi. v. Christ loved his
church or congregation so greatly, that he delivered up him own self for it,
that he might sa^ctifie it, cleansed with the lauer of water by his word that
he might make it gloriouse unto him self, without spot or wrincle, and that it
should be holy and unreprovable. This church is not visible, but it is
believed according unto the article of the creed: I believe the holy catholyke
church, the communion of saints. Yet has it certain tokens whereby it is
known, that is to say the true word of god, and the lawefull use of
sacraments, and the keys which it uses in the ministringe of the word and
sacraments.

But what is to be iuged of them which be excomunicate?
They which be excommunicate be rekened no more members of the church,
according unto this. Math. viii. And if he will not hear the church, take
thou him for an Ethnike, and publican

What difference is between the hypocritical church, and the true church?
How much difference is between the truth and falsehead, between the likeness
of truth and the truth it self, between feigned and forged color, and true
natural color, so much difference is between the hypocritical church and the
true.

It is certain that Hypocrites have the same Gospel and same sacraments. But
they be not therewyth content, but bring in man's traditions, which they
compare with the Gospel, and make them equalle with the gospel, and many
times do praise it above the Gospel, they do not receive the gospel puerly
and sincerelye. These believe not in their heart nor yet stand steadfast, but
when tempests do rise they fall back and can not stand. Also the Hypocrites
do use the sacraments vnpurely, making an other head then Christ, whereof they
are their ryghtuousnes, sanctifiyng and help. They use the holy ghost none
other wise the^ a cloak wherwyth they cover their unclean doctrine, which
thing disperseth and troubles consciences, which in deed is not the work of
the holy ghost, which does gather together and comfort consciences. To be
short, the Hypocritical church is a visour, an outward lykenes or shadow,
faulse and deceitful, pretended, foleyshe, yet never the less enuiouse and
without the knoweledge of the true church.

Of ecclesiastical pouer.
What is the keye or power of ye church?
Which consists in teachinge the gospel ministering of the sacraments, and
in excommunicatynge them which be accused of open sins, and absoluynge them
again, when they are absolution. Or it is a certain rule of an howseholde
which is not by bodily force, but by the word only.

For ye kingdom of Christ is spiritual, which is not ruled with the sword,
wepons, and other things perteining unto a civil kingdom. For Christ ye
author of this power of ye church and institutor has delivered all ciuyle
governance both from himself because he would not be chose^ for a king but he
conueieth himself away. From his Apostles, when he says, the princes of the
people shall have dominion over them, but so shall not ye.

How many kinds of ecclesiastical power be there?
Two, of order, and of jurisdiction.

What is the power of order?
It is a commandment of teaching the gospel, and of showing remission of
sins, and of ministryng the sacraments to one or mo. Here is it not lawful
to bring in any new doctrine, but the doctrine which was taught of Christ
must be set forth like as he commands in the last Chapter of Mathewe:
teaching them to observe all things, what soever I have commanded you.

And Paul says, Galath. i. If an angel come from heaven and shall teach
you any other gospel then we have taught you, curssed be it.

What is power of jurisdiction?
It is the power of excommunicatynge them which be accused of open crimes, and
again of absoluynge them, if they being converted, do require absolution. This
power ought not to be tira^nical, but as christ has taught Math. xviii. If he
will not hear the church, take thou him for an Ethnik. And Paul.ii. Cor. i. We
have no dominion over your faith but we be healpers of your reioycynge.

What difference is between Ecclesiastical power, and politic power?
Politic or civil power makes laws for the defe^tion of bodies, of the
division of dominions, of couenau^tes, and of crimes, and it co^streineth me^
with bodily strength. Again, ecclesiastical power does minister everlasting
and spiritual things, that is to say, it has an heavenly doctrine, and it
co^streineth men with the word of God.

Wherefore it does not disalowe nor abolishe civil power, but it does rather
allow it, and subiecteth the bodies of holy me^ unto it.

When has the church received the keys?
When Christ said unto Peter. Matthew. xvi To the will I give the keys of the
kingdom of heaven. And Mathewe.xviii. What so ever thou shalt bind upon
earth, it shall be bound also in heaven. etc. And John.xx. Take ye the holy
ghost whose sins so ever ye shall forgive. etc.

Avails not the ministrynge of evil ministers?
Yes it avails. For the word and sacraments be no ministers, but they
belong unto Christ, which if they be ryghtly ministered, the malice of the
minister cannot hurt us. And it is a common saying. The life of ye minister
does not change the virtue of ye sacraments, the administering of the
sacraments is not of no valor although the manners of the ministers be
viciouse. But this must be understood of them which be evil not of them
which be open blasphemers, none other wise then if they were Jews or Turks,
unto such ought the church to commit no office.

Is not obedience due unto ministers of the church?
Like as obedience is dew unto the word of God: even so is it dew unto them
which do ministre it, in so much as belongs unto the office, as the
scripture does command, he which hears you, hears me. Luke.x.

What so ever they shall say, do it. Matthew xxiii. Also obey your rulers.
Hebrews xiii.

These sentences speak of the ministering and they require dew obedience unto
the gospel. But they do not co^stitute a kingdom unto the teachers without
thauthoritie of the gospel. Also obedience is dew unto them in jurisdiction,
which they have by the authority of the Gospel, that is to say, in knowing
crimes, in hearing the witnesses, in lawful exco^municatio^. etc.

Of offension.
What is offension?
IT is when one gives occasion of sin or evil exe^ple to other men, whereby
their minds be troubled, ye is to say, affraied or else enticed unto such like
sin. Or it is the deprauing or perverting of doctrine, or ye good living or
the faith and charity of any man.

How many kinds of offension be there?
Two, taken, and given.

What is offension taken?
It is when pharisees and hypocrites be offended either with true doctrine or
some necessary good work, and they conceive hatered against the gospel, and
godly me^, like as the Phariseis did hate both the Gospel and the teachers
thereof. This pharisaicall offense is not to be eschewed, for the commandment
does excuse us. But it must be vndertake^ that the doctrine is true, certain
and profitable unto the church. For it is the most grievous syn, to trouble the
church of god with evil, uncertain and unprofitable disputations:

Give exemples?
The Phariseis and scribes were offended when Christ did heal sick men upon
the sabbath, when his disciples did not wash their hands, when they did
pluck of ears of corn. Even so be our hypocrites offended because we will
not suffer them to conjure water salt, wyllowe vows, herbs and such like
trifles etc. Here does Gods commandment excuse the Godly, for they be
commanded of God, to teach wholesome and true doctrine. Also necessary works of
mercy, whereby they which need may be helped. This commandment must be
plainly obeyed, nor hypocritical fellows are not to be regarded according
unto this: we must rather obey God then men.

What is offense given?
It is ungodly doctrine or evil exemple which annoyeth other, either because
they do follow it, or because men be affrayed from the gospel. All ungodly
doctrines, men's traditions, which can not be observed without sin: be of
this kind of offensions. Christ does threaten the author of such
offensions.

Mathewe.xviii. Woe be unto the man by whom offe^sion does come. Therefore
these offensions ought with all diligence to ve eschewed lest we be either
authors or maintainers of ungodly doctrine or followers of ungodly service or
worshippynges.

But what is to be done in indifferent things?
Here is the rule of Paul to be observed, as concerning the use of liberty
(for so co^mmau^deth he them which be learned, To. xiiii. Receive ye him
which is weak in faith. Ite^, let al be done for the edification. For we must
not use our liberty among the^ which have not as yet heard the gospel, or
among the brethren which be not as yet well confirmed, but the exemple of
Paul must be followed. I am made weak says he to them which be weak.
Item. If meat offend my brother, I will never eat flesh. But where the
Gospel is declared, and the church metely well confirmed, the paynefull
observing of unprofitable traditions is not to be required. For Paul, because
he would show an exe^ple of liberty: would not circumcise Titus.

works whereunto Godly promises be made, then may many sacraments be found,
as prayer shall be a sacrament, for it is a certain work of ours, and it has
excellent promises. John.xvi.

What so ever ye shall axe the father in my name, he will give it you. But
adversities and alms deeds shall also be sacraments because they be works
annorned with Godly promises. As, give and it shall be given unto you. Also by
much tribulation must we enter into the kingdom of heaven. So the office of
rulers, and marriage be eternal things anourned with the word of God and
promises.

But if we call sacraments, ceremonies or customs instituted in the Gospel,
properly belongyng unto the chief promise in the Gospel, that is remission
of sins: there be two sacraments only, baptism, and the supper of the
Lord.

Be there not diverse opinions concerning the sacraments?
Yes. For there be three opinions.

First scholemen do feign that men vsinge the Sacraments of the new Testament
be justified by the work which is wrought. This opinion is to be hissed out,
for it is against justification of fayeth. For they judge a man to be
justified by the use of the said ceremony, although he do not believe, nor
yet have so much as one good intention of the heart, so that he be not let
with this hindrau^ce, that is to say, the actual purpose of mortal sin.

Second, other some do hold that the sacraments be not tokens of the will of
God toward us, but only tokens of our profession, for we must have certain
tokens, whereby we may be known from other people which be no christians,
like as a cowle makes a monk to be known from other men.

Thyrdly therefore, the true sentence and meaning of the scripture is that the
Sacraments of the new testament be visible tokens of the will of God toward
us, appearing before our eyes: to the intent they should admonish us to
believe the promise which is set forth in the Gospel. Saint Austen says.
Sacramentum is a visible word, that is to say, like as the word is a
certain token, which is received in the ears, so is the Sacrament a show
or picture which is set before the eyes. Like as the word is an instrumente
whereby the holy ghost takes effect as Paul says. Roma.i. So by the
sacraments the holy ghost takes effect, when they be received with faith, for
they do admonish and move us to believe, like as the word does.

Wherefore has Christ instituted sacraments?
For our infirmity. For the mind of man after Adams fall is so weak and
feeble that it can not believe the plain word. Therefore Christ moved with our
infirmity, did give unto his word tokens, whereby he might heal our
infirmity, and that by a certain mutual agreinge of the word and tokens, we
should be led unto fayeth toward the promises of God, as saint Austen
witnesses where he says: man before his sin did se God, under stand him
and believe him. After his sin committed man ca^ not se nor perceive God
unless he be helped with a certain mean.

For these causes is the word of God given according unto this sentence: let
the word and the element come together and so let the sacrament be made.

Of Baptism.
What is Baptism?
IT is a token or ceremony instituted of Christ, that is to say, to be
washed with water and pronouncynge of the words which be ordained for the
same purpose, that it may testify us to be received of God and reconciled
unto God.

Where is Baptism instituted?
Mathewe, and Marcke the last Chapter. Ye goinge into all the world, teach al
people baptising them in the name of the father and the son and the holy
ghost. He which will believe and is baptized, he shall be saved.

For what purpose is it instituted?
That we may steadfastly believe our sins to be forgeuen us. For baptism is
a testimony and token of remission of sins and geuyng of the holy ghost. For
this cause old authors called sacraments also tokens of grace or favor,
that is to say tokens of the will of God toward us. For when we be baptized,
the promise of God is written in our bodies.

What does baptism signify?
Repentance and remission of sins, or as saint Paul says a regeneration
or new birth, for the dippyng into the water, signieth the old man to be
mortified with sin, the coming up again or deliverance out of the water,
signifies the new man to be washed and cleansed and reconciled unto God the
father, the son and the holy ghost.

For the father receives the for his sons sake and does promise unto the,
the holy ghost, wherewyth he will give the life and sanctify the.

What is the use of Baptism?
That we may judge thorowout aloure life, that remission of sins and
reconcilynge is set forth and given unto us. For although we do fall, yet
unto them which do amend their living, the covenant which we promised unto
God in time paste avails and lowseth not the virtue, because the Gospel
testifies that they which do amend be forgeuen.

May baptism be received again or no?
The token ought not to be received or taken again for the receyuynge of the
ceremony again avails nothing. And the token once received is a perpetual
note, and a perpetual testimony. Like as circumcision once done, was a
perpetual witness of the bond of God, written in the bodies of them which
were circumcised. Moreover we ought to exercise the faith of this couenaunte
with often calling it to remembrance and keep it so long as we live.
Therefore it is said, that repentance is nothing else, but remembrance of
our Baptism.

What difference is between the baptism of John and of the Apostles?
Goes the Baptisms be the office and ministry of the new testamente, and
require faith in Christ. The baptism of John did testify that Christ should
come.

The Baptism of the Apostles testified that he was come, and by that fayeth
were as well they which John Baptized, as they which were baptized of the
Apostles, sanctified and saved.

But that John says I baptize in water unto repentance, but he which shall
come after me will baptize with the holy ghost. etc. He makes no difference
between the offices or ceremonies but between the persons of the ministers
and the person of Christ. For he testifies that Christ is the Lord, whereby
that baptism is virtuous, which would give the holy ghost and everlasting
life, and he professes him self to be a ministre which gives only the
outward sign, and preaches the word.

Of the baptism of Infantes proving that children ought to be baptized.
First Christ says John.iii. Unless a man be renewed by water and the holy
ghost he can not enter into the kingdom of God. This sentence is universal,
and it testifies that al which shall be saved ought to be renewed with water, yt
is to say, to be baptized therefore chylder must be baptized also, that they may
be saved.

Second, of the tradicion of the Apostles. For so writes Origin upon the
sixte Chapter unto the Romans The church received a tradition of the apostles,
to ministre baptism also unto chylder. For they, unto whom the secrets of the
mysteries of God was committed, did know, that there was natural filthiness of
sin in all men which ought to be abolished by water and the spirit. So does
Ciprian and Austen prove the baptisynge of chylder.

Third by the reason which is brought out of the scripture. It is certain
the kingdom of God and promise of the Gospel to perteyne unto chylder. But
without the church is no salvation. Therefore chylder must be grafted and
planted into the church, and the token must be ministered unto the^ which
may testify that the promise belongs unto the^. The mayor is certain for
Christ says: let the childer come unto me for unto such belongethe the
kyngedome of heaven. Also it is not my fathers will which is in heaven that one
of these litel ons shall perysh Also, the angels of them do ever see the face
of the father The minor is manyfeste. For there is no salvation without the
church, where neither the word nor yet the sacraments be ministered. For the
church is the kyngedome of Christ, in the which christ is effectually by his
word and sacraments. Therefore the conclusion follows, that chylder ought to
be baptized, that they receyuynge the sign, may be made members of the
church, and that God may give unto them his promise.

But the Anabaptists object, saying. Seeing childer do not understand the
word they can not believe, wherefore the Sacraments do not profects them.
Against this argument first of all must we set the example of the Infantes
which were circumcised, which also did not understand the word and yet auayled
the couenaunte, or bond, and God did receive them for his promise sake.

Secondarilye, we must answer, although they do not understand the word,
yet is it certain that God takes effect in them, according unto this:
unless a man be renewed by water etc. Nor it belongs not to us, to search
how God does work in the^. It is enough to know, that the kingdom of God
does certaynely perteyne unto chylder. Whereupon it follows, that God takes
effect in them.

Of the Supper of the Lord.
What is the Lords supper?
THe supper of the Lord is a sacrament of Christ's body and blood, wherein
is called into remembrance, the offering up of Christ's body, and the
shedynge of his blood for us, wherein also Christen men give thanks to all
mighty God for their redemption.

By how many names is this sacrament named?
The scripture calls it the supper of the Lord, the communion, a Testamente
and it is called of the doctors Eucharistia and Sinaris.

Wherefore is it called the supper of the lord?
Because like as in an other common suppers, bread and wine do norishe and
strenghten men's bodies: so Christ which is the heavenly bread in this his
supper norisheth, comfort, strenghtheneth and cherishes our souls.

Why is it called a Testamente?
Because remission of all our sins is promised unto us in it through the
blood of Christ.

Why is it called communion?
Because it teaches us that we ought al to be in love and charity, and
members of one body whereof Christ is the head.

Why is it called Eucharistia?
Because we ought to magnifye his death, and give thanks al together for our
redemption.

Say the words of the Lords supper.
Our Lord Jesus Christ in that same night wherein he was betrayed, did take
bread, and when he had given thanks, he brake it and gave it unto his
disciples, sayeinge. Take and eat. this is my body, which is given for you.
This do in my remembrance,

In like manner the cup also after he had supped, and when he had given
thanks, he did give it unto them, sayeing, drink all of this. This cup is
the new testamente in my blood, which is shed for you, and for many in
remission of sins, do this, how often so ever ye shall drink it in the
remembrance of me.

What is the principal end of this supper?
The principal end of this supper is, that it may be a token of the promise
of Christ toward us, monishyng us and testifying that the benefits of
Christ be given unto us, and therefore it avails to stir up and confirm
our fayeth.

There be also other ends that is to say, thankesgyuynge, for so great a
benifite. Also that we may be provoked unto good works and to eschew sin,
because we hear now that we be made members of Christ's body, and that
Christ will take effect in us. Also the fruit of love and charity must follow
that we one toward an other do the offices of love as common me^bres of
Christ's body.

What is the wholesome use of this supper?
When we having fayeth do use it, whereby we believe that the benifites of
Christ do truly come unto us that is to say, remission of sins and that we
be truly grafted in Christ, and that he will take effect in us, as in his
own members. This believe causes the use of this Sacrament to be wholesome unto
us, and it comforts our consciences. And the use of this Ceremony does not
avail without this fayeth, like as the unlearned do sometime Imagine, them
self to purchase remission of sins, by the self work of receyuynge, that
is to say, because they come and do use the Sacrament with other. Like as the
Papists taught the Mess to avail by the work which is wroughte.

I reason against the where thou sayests the use of the Lords supper to be,
to confirm and establishe our fayeth.
No outward thing but only the holy ghost does confirm our faith.

The use of the supper is an outward thing. Therefore by this work our
fayeth is not confirmed.

I answer unto the mayor: It is true that the holy ghost does only confirm
our fayeth, but he does use outward tokens, as it were instruments
wherewith he does admonyshe us, and by them as certain testymonyes and seals
does stir up and confirm our fayeth, none otherwise then by the word he
admonishes moves and stirs up our herts to believe. etc.

What is the worthy preperation, and to who^ ought this sacrament to be
ministered?
They come and receive it worthyly, which doing repentance and being afraid
for their sins, do seek conforte beleuynge that their sins be forgiven
according unto the promise of Christ, and for the confirmation and
establishynge of this fayeth, do use this sacrament, as a witneshing or
testimony of remission of sins. And because they must use this sacrament
which do repent, therefore the church in time past did drive them from the
communion which were open sinners. Nor they ought not to be admitted unto the
supper of the Lord, which be manifest and open evil doars, and will do no
repentance.

What difference is between a sacrament and a sacrifice?
Sacramentum, is a cerimonie or token of promission whereby God promises or
gives unto us a certain thing. So was circumsicion a certain token, whereby
God promised that he would receive the circumcised. Baptism is a token,
whereby God works with us, and receives us into grace, and he him self
does in a manner baptize us, for the minister does baptize in the steed of
Christ.

Sacrificium, is a ceremony, or a work of ours, which we give unto God,
whereby we may honor him, that is, that we may testify us to acknowledge him,
unto whom we make such obedience, to be true God, and that for that cause we
give him such obedience.

Of sacrifices.
How many kinds of sacrifices be there?
TWo. The one is called propiciatoriu^, that is, which obteyneth mercy and
appeaseth the wrath of God. The other is called Eucharisticu^, that is to say,
of thanks geuynge.

What is sacrificiam propiciatorium?
It is a work which deserves for other remission of sins and everlasting
punishmente, or a work reconcilynge God, or appeasynge his wrath for other
men, a satisfaction for sin and everlasting death.

And there is only one sacrifice which deserves remission of sins, that is
to say, the passion or death of Christ. Hebrews.ix. Certain sacrifices in the
law were called propitiatoria, not because they deserve remission of sins
before God, but because they did siginifie the sacrifice of Christ, which was
to come.

What is a sacrifice of thanks giving?
Not that which deserves remission of sins or reconcilyng, but it is done of
us which be reconciled, that for receyuynge of remission of sins and for
other benifites, we may give thanks unto God with this our obedience.

Which be sacrifices Eucharisticall or of praise?
In the law were, offeringes washinges, restoringe, first fruits, tithes.
etc. Now by fayeth, preachinge of the Gospel, invocation, gyuinge of thanks,
confession, the cross, humility, the adversities, afflictions of saints,
prayer, also all good works, of holy men. These sacrifices be no
satisfactions for them which do them or appliable for other which can deserve
for them, bye the work which is wroughte remission of sins or
reconcilynge, but they please God for our faith sake.

Of this kind of sacrifices be there many sentences in the prophets and
Psalms. Psalm.li.

A trobeled heart is a sacrifice unto god. Psalm.xlvi. Offer unto God a
sacrifice of praise. And Peter says: ye be a kind which is chosen, an holy
priesthode that ye may offer spiritual sacrifices. And Hebrews.xiii. By him
may we ever offer a sacrifice of praise, the fruit of the lips of them
which do acknowledge his name that is to say, invocation, thankesgeuynge,
confession and such like. For in the new Testament the liuitical
worshyppynges and sacrifices be abrogated, and a spiritual worship or
service unto God must succeed in the stead of them, that is the ryghtuousnesse
of fayeth, and the fruit of faith according unto this. The true worshyppers
shall worship the father in spirit and truth. John.iiii.

Of the cross and adversities.
What is the crosses
IT is any aduersitye given or laid upon us by God, not to the entente he
would that we should perish, but that he may call us to repentance, and
exercise our faith, or it is any aduersitye or trouble which chaunseth unto
us, by the certain counsel and good will of God that thereby the faith of holy
men may be proved, the love that they have toward god may be known, and that
the godly may be adorned with an excellent and notable deliverance before them
which do persecute them. The cross is the fellow or companion of the most
fayethful word. But adversities as it is said, be sacrifices of praise, yet
to be applied for other according unto this of Paul: Every one shall take
reward according unto his labor. Also Abacuc.ii. The rightuous shall live by
his faith.

How shall we conforte our selves in the cross and adversity?
In all kinds of tribulations must we have in a redynes, four special
comfortes.

The first, that we be not punyshed by chance but by ye counsel and sufferance
of God. Hereunto belongs ye knowledge of ye provision of god. Math. x. One of
these littel sparowes shall not fall upon the earth without ye will of mi father
but even al ye hears of your head be nu^bred. And ye.i. of the kings ii. the
lord does mortify and revive Seco^darely, ye god suffers us not to be
punished to ye intent we should perish but that he may call us to repe^tau^ce
and exercise out faith So Paul.i. Cor. xi. when we be judged of ye lord we be
corrected lest we should be co^de^pned with this world. Also pro. iii. The lord
does chastise him who^ he loves.

Hebr. xiii. He does scourge every son which he receives. Apo. iii. I
chastise them whom I love And David: It is good for me ye thou cast me down.
And Christ. Blessed be they which morn. Woe be unto you which laughed now etc.

Thirdly, when we se the ungodly live in all wealth riches and delight, we our
self never the less being cast awayes of all men, oppressed with great
misery, that therefore we be not angrye or take indignacion, but that we obey
God with an equal mind, knowing that these troubles be not tokens of wraugth
or reproving but that we may be made members like unto the image of christ. So
Paul. Romans viii. If we suffer with Christ, we shall reygne with him, we
must be made like in form unto the Image of the son of God. And Peter
says Judgment begins at the house of David. And Christ says. He which
will follow me let him take his cross. And Paul. all that will live godly,
shall suffer persecution. And David. They which do sow in sorrow shall reap in
joy. etc.

Fourthely that in all these we do receive and keep stedefastelye fayeth, that
is to say, that God will be present with us, and help us, and for his wisdom
and goodness, will once deliver us. And in this faith is god to be called upon,
for we be often punished of God, that we may have occasion of exercisynge our
faith and invocation. And by this occasion the knowledge of God is more
excellent, and it encreasethe in us, as the example of king Manasses doethe
teach. That the lord is god, Which knowledge of god in idleness, and pleasure
and prosperitye is forgotten Like as ye example of the children of Israel
does teach. The people did syte to eat and to drink, and did rise up to
play.

Wherefore does the scripture so diligently setfurth and entreat these co^fortes?
That we may accustom our minds unto true repentance and that we may
learn to suffer adversities, and erercise our obedience and fayeth, and
specially that we may repress the affections of the mind, when we be
provoked with wrong, we fall into desire of revenging. So Esaias. In silence
and hope shall thy strength be. And Christ says. In your patience shall ye
possess your hertes Luke.xxi.

What is true patience
Not only to obey God in adversities, but also to over come the indignation
of nature which is feeble, or eles certaynelye to resist it. And this virtue is
necessary in the church and the common wealth, that is to say, to forgive
private wrongs for the tra^quility of ye common wealth, lest contencions be
stirred up in the church. Let us esteem rather that we ought to suffer
adversities, then trouble the quietness of the common wealth for private injury
done unto us.

But what evil works impatience?
It is angry with God, and it does expel, first obedience, and then after
faith out of the hertes Therefore in great adversities many be altogether
blasphemers, and they seek for cou^celes against the commandment of God, like
as Saul did axe counsel of a witch Also the sorrow of iniurye ingendereth
hatred, and does provoke unto reuengynge. Of the which thing arises, not
only private discordes, but also sedysions and strife in the common wealth.
Also herysies, and many other euyles. These must be far from a christen man.

Of humiliation or Lowlines
What is humiliation?
HVmiliation or making low, is the true fear of God, toward God, wherbye
consciences affrayede with the judgment of God, cast away al confidence of
their own powere, of their own wisdom or righteousness. We have an example
in David, when he was chidden of Nathan the prophet, he perceived his sin,
not trustyng yt he could pease the wrath of god by his own righteousness When
he did se that he was expelled out of his kingdom, he did know that it was
by the counsel of God, therefore he did not trust yt he was able to keep the
kingdom with his own power or wysedo^.

Of this lowelines is mention made. Esaie.lxvi. Upon whom shall my spirit
rest, but upon him which is lowely. And Christ. Blessed be the humble.
Therefore they which be lowely be heard of God Psalm.Ci. He has looked upon
the prayer of the lowely. etc. They be exalted of god, Luke.i. He has deposed
the mighty from their seat, and has exalted the humble.

The humiliation of Monks, which they have feigned in outward virtues and
ceremonies, is plainly Hypocrisy, and it may rather be called pride.

Of prayer
What is prayer?
IT is a peticion of a certain thing of God, with the affection of the heart
and with faith and thanks gyuinge unto God for the benifites received.
Therefore to pray is to speak with God and to desire some thing upon him.

How many kinds of prayer be there?
Two. Invocation or yrayer, and thanks giuinge.

What is invocation?
It is whereby God is called upon in any thing, or whereby a certain thing is
axed of God.

Hereunto belong psalms which be prayers.

How many things be required in invocation or prayer,
Four, The commandment of god the promise, fayeth and the thing which is
desired.

What is the first?
The authority of gods commandment, which commands us to pray and call
upon god. Let us learn, that to swear bye the name of God, to steall to
commit adultery. etc. be not only sins, but also yt it is sin not to
pray, not to require somethynge of god not to look for help in pereles, not
to give thanks for the benifites received.

Also it is not in our choice to pray or not to pray, but it is a necessary
work commanded of God.

But thou will say, my misbelue and my unworthiness does affraye me?
When misbeleue tempts the resist it with the word of God Math. vii. Are
and it shall be given you, for every on which axeth receives. And Psalm xlix
Call upon me in the day of thy tribulation, and I shall hear the. etc.

But when thy unworthiness accuses the thou shall remember that the authority
of gods commandment ought not to be denied for our unworthiness. It were
surely a great madness, to dispute as concerning the other commandments,
that we would not abstain from theft, murder, adultrye. etc. because we be
not worthy to obei god. What housefather co^mau^dinge his serua^te to do a
lawful work, would receive such an excuse, if he should answer yt he were not
worthy to obei him?

What is the second?
The promise of God which testyfyethe that our prays be heard, John.xvi.
I say verilye unto you, what so ever ye shall axe my father in my name, he will
give it you. And Luke.xi.

How much more will your father which is in heaven, give the holy ghost unto
them which desire him. Taulerus sayethe that the heart of man can never be so
desirous to take, but God is much more desirous to give. For he is true, and
keeps his promise.

What is the third?
Fayethe that is to say, that we believe our sins to be forgiven us, and
our prayers acceptable unto god, and that they be heard for Christ's sake,
and not to be in vain, but either to purches deliverance from the present
perell or mytgatynge, or some oher good thing. In present pells we must make
this condition. If it do not displease god, if he judge that it be profitable
for us like as David did.ii. of the kings, xv. If I ca^ find grace in the eyes
of the Lord, he will bring me again, But if he shall say, I am not content
with the, I am redye, let him do as he thynkethe good. So the leper, Math viii.
Lord if thou wylt thou cast make me clean. And Christ says. Father if it be
possible, let this cup pass from me, never the less not as I will. etc.

Therefore we ought not to prescribe unto God the manner, nor yet the time of
our delyuerance but like as Paulle sayethe. That God does more for, us then
we either desire or understand. More over our fayeth must not wax faynte,
when those things which we axe be not by and by granted, as though God
would not hear our prayers, but we must know that our fayethe is
exercised with such prolongynge.

Like as God did promise a son unto Abraham, yet he prouokeinge Abrahames
fayeth, would not fulfill his promise until his extreme age.

What is the fourth?
The thing which is axed. For our prayer ought not to be a vain
blatterynge. But we must either axe something of god or eles give him thanks
for some benifit received.

What is to be axed of him?
The Scripture doethe command us to axe spiritual and bodily benefits
private things and common things which be present and those which be to
come. Also we be commanded to pray for the church, that it may be delivered
from errors and ungodliness, and from evil examples, that thereby mo may
obey the Gospel and so be saved. Paul commands us to pray for kings and
rulers, that God may grant us peace. Also we be commanded to pray for our
living and other bodily necessaries. Like as the prayer of the Lord does
conteyne al these.

Of the lords prayer
What is the prayer of the Lord?
It is a brief form of praying which Christ taught his disciples and all
fayethfull men. Matthew.vi. When ye pray say thus

OVre father which art in heaven. Hallowed be thy name.

Thy kingdom come

Thy will be done in earth as it is in heaven.

Give us this day our daily bread.

And forgive us our trespases, as we forgive them that trespass against us.

And lead us not into temptacio^. But deliver us from euel, So be it.

The preface is the title. For we call god our father, dwellinge in heaven
where we look for no earthly heritage, but for heavenly Joys and everlasting
life.

The first peticion praeth for the glory of God for the doctrine and goinge
forth of the gospel, that is to say, that the name of god may be declared
sete fourth and praised among al people. For it is great ungodliness, that the
name and honor of our works and creatures should be preferred before the
glory of god.

The second peticion prays for the virtue of the gospel and for our
governance, that is to say that God would witsaffe to begin his kingdom
among us bye the virtue of the holy gooste. And that the kingdom of the
deuel may be confounded and broken.

The third peticion prays that here in erath al pastors, Rulars and
subjects, may do that which is acceptable unto god. Like as the Angels in
heaven do never resist his will.

These three peticions belong unto the glory of god, these which follow do
declare our wrechednes and miseries

The fourth prays for our living, peace, defendinge against our
adversaries, good fortune in doing our business, bringing up of childer, to be
short all commodites belonging to this present life necessary as well for the
soul as the body.

The first peticio^ prays that our sins may be forgyuen us, and that to
be certain, if we will forgive other. For to the intent we should certaynely
know that God will forgive us, he settethe this work before us, that is to
say, that we forgive the^ which do fault unto us Wherefore this peticion
teaches that in every prayer we ought to have fayeth of remyssion of sins,
and that we must take Christ for our mediator.

The sixte peticion prays that we be not drawn bye the craft and subtelti
of the deuel unto ungodliness and other mischife, lest at the length we,
taken in such trappes, may fall into desperacio^ The seventh peticion
prays, for the deliverance from sin and wretchydnes, from the myseryees
of this present life and that everlasting life and righteousness may be given
us.

The conclusion Amen, is a certificacion of the heart and conscience, that we
should believe us to be heard of the father.

Of the office of Rulers.
What is the office of Rulers?
IT is a godli ordinance ordained of god, for keeping of good order and peace,
to punish evil doares, and save them which be innocents, where unto obedience
is dew, not only, for the auoidinge of their oath but also for conscience. Or
more briefly so. It is every lawefull power, ordained among men by god, for
the mayntenaunce of the good and the punishemente of the evil, and to judge
according unto right and equalnes. Romans viii.

What is a tiraunt?
He is an evil and vnequalle officer which rules not according unto the
laws, but after his own unright desires and malice

Is the office of rulers grounded upon holy scripture or no?
Yes verily. As well in the old as new testament. Gene. viii. Who so ever
shall shede man's blood his blood shall be also shede. And Exodus xxi. If any
man do purposely kill his neighbor thou shall pull him from mine altar,
that he may dye.

Rome.xiii. Let every soul be obedient unto the superior power for there is
no power, but it is of God. etc.

i. Peter.ii. Be ye subject unto all rulars which be created among men for
the love of god, either unto the king, as most excellent or unto captains
as they which be sent of him.

Math. xxvi. Christ said unto Peter: he which strikes with the swearde
shall peryshe with the swearde. And Luke.iii. John Baptiste says unto the
souldiars, do no man wrong, but be co^ent with your wages.

Is then the office of Rulers, the ordinance of God?
Yes, The good creature of God. and a thing not only permitted of god, as
those things which be evil are said to be permytted. As war pestilence. et
cetera. But a thing allowed by ye word of God, instituted and ordained of god,
like as the mouyngs of the heavens and celestial bodies be ordained of god, and
other creatures.

Wherefore then do so many ungodly and iuell persons spoil and hold offices and
Empies?
There must difference be made between the persons and the office The office is
the work of God and remains, although the persons do abuse ye ordinance of
God. Like as Nero Iulianus, and such like.

Unto what things must the Rulers have respect?
Unto God, unto their self, and unto their Subjects.

Wherefore unto God?
That they may know what is their deuty, and what God does requiere of the^,
For he requirethe four things of them.

First, the knowledge of God, that is to say, that they ought to know him to be
God, in whose hand all powers of the earth be, which gives ye kingdoms from
one unto an other, and does constitute Empires, like as Moises says, Deuteronomy x.
David.i. Paralip xxx. Daniel..iiii. The king of Babylon did not acknowledge the
Lord to be God, therefore was he driven out of his kingdom.

Secondarily ye fear of God, yt they may fear God in all things, and walk
diligentli in his ways. So does Moses exhort. Deuteronomy. xvii. And Psalm.ii. And
Psa. lxxxii. Pharao the king of Egypt, because he would not fear the lord
God, was stricken with ten plages, and at the length drouned in the sea Saul
despising the commandment of God, was casten out of ye kingdom.

Thirdly, wisdom which they may obtain of God, like as Solomon.iii. Reg iii.
Psalm. ii. Be ye learned which judge the earth.

Fourthly, judgment and justice that they may judge that which is right upon
ye earth. So Moses Exodus xxiii. Hier. xxii. Deuteronomy. xvi. Esai. x Sap. vi. Achab
the king of Israel, because he exercised vnrighttuousnes, against Naboth, was
corrected of the lord. iii. Of kings the last chap Camoises ye king of the
Persians, Caused the false judge to be flain, in an example of fear unto al
other judges.

Wherefore unto their self?
That they may know where they should seek comfort in adversities, and that
they be not able to rule al things right in the common wealth without ye help
of God, against so great power of ye deuel which ever goes about to destroy
and desperse kingdoms, And this comfort stands in four things, First, in
vocacion, that they may know their self to be laufullly called unto the office
of a ruler For this does specially comfort the conscience in adversities
Absalom died an evil death, because he invaded the kingdom of his father, and
likewise the king of Munster.

Secondarely, that they may know, god to be the author and leader in this
office, and that he uses officers as instruments, and appoints angels for
the governance and sauegarde of them, Daniel.xii. Iosue v. Iudi. ii

Thirdly that they may know God to take Civil justice for the most precious
treasure upon earth, in so much that he witsafe to call the Rulers by this word
Elohim, Psalm.lxxxii. I have said ye be gods, and that he commands to pray
for kings and Rulers. i. Timoth. ii.

Fourthly, that they ever have before their eyes, the examples and historyes of
the old testamente, how God has wonderfully delivered the rulars from present
euels. For an example be Abraham, Joseph Gedeon, David, Esechias etc.

Contrary wise how he has destroyed those which make insurrection against
the rulars For an example be Chore, Datha^, Absolome, Judas of Galyle, Theudas
and the uproar of ye husband me^

Wherefore must they have respect unto their subjects?
That they may know, by what means they ought to rule and govern their
subjects in peace and tranquillity. For they must with one eye have a respect
unto God, and with the other unto their subjects.

Besid that, that they take not their subjects as it were brute beasts but as
companyons, and fellow heirs of everlasting life. Then after, that they defend
the^ which be pore widows, fatherles Childer, them which need whose father and
judge God testifyeth himself to be, and that they know them felfe also to have
a lord in heaven Colo. iii.

Thirdly, that they promote and definde good me^, and correct the^ which be
euel, that they which be good may have peace, the^ after good brynggyng up of
youth in lernyng, and finally Godlynes.

^ But they must correct with reason, as it is a common saying yt they leese
not the more for the less that is to say, that they do not for the cause of
the manne destroy, a whole city of country. ^t is a proverb He ca^ not be a
rular, which ca^ not dessemble. For an example is David, which would not kill
Ioab the murderer, so long as he lived. And Augustus was wont to say: To war
is to catch fish with a golden hoke.

What do the Rulares owe unto their subjects? Three things
First, That they hear with an equal mind widows, fatherles chylder,
poremen, and judge and promote their cause.

Second, yt they defend their subjects, and keep them in peace that they
promote good men, and punish ye evil doers and adourne the commonwealth with
good ordinances and laws.

Thirdly that they institute and provoke, unto godlynes, and the knowledge of
gods word. These works do greatly adourne rulars and be acceptable unto god.

What do the subjects owe unto their rulers?
Three things, tribute, fear, honor and love. Romans xiii. Give yt is due unto
all men, unto whom tribute, tribute: unto whom fear fear, unto whom honor:
honor Be in debt unto no man, but love one another. Of tribute says Christ:
Mat. xxii. Give unto the Emperor that is due unto him Of fear, Prou xxiiii.
My son fear the Lord and the king, and have nothing to do with the
sedicious. Of honor.i. Pet. ii. fear God and honor the king.

Is the power of Rulers infinite?
No, for they ought to commau^d or do nothing against the law of god, or the
law of nature. They be to blame also when they command any thing against the
laws of their kingdom, or against the form of their Empire.

It was not lawful for Achab to take wrongfully the vyneyard of Naboth the
citysen against his will. So is it not lawful for princes to wythdrawe the
goods of their Citisens so much as they lust and at their own pleasure. For
the citisens be Masters of their own goods. And Ihon Baptist says be
content with your wages. etc

Wherefore, the place of the kingdoms right or title in Samuel grau^teth not
unmeasurable license unto princes, But it speaks of their wages: yt is to say
it grauntethe them to take wages of the goods of pryuate men for the necessity
of the common wealth.

But what if they shall command any thing against Gods law?
Then must we answer with the apostles: God must rather be obeyed then men.
For an example be Daniel, the three Childer, also the Machabies, also the
apostles Act.iiii. They must rather be monyshed that they ought to keep, not
only the second table, but the first also, that is, that it belongs not only
unto rulars to take care for defendyng of the tranquillity and peace of their
citisens, and to wythdrawe and expel wrongs from their goods and bodies: but
also to keep good order concerning religion.

Wherefore the rulers must forbid ungodly service, ungodly doctrine Heresies
forswearynges, and contention of religion. Like as not only the Kings of
Israel did, but also of the Gentiles, Nabuchodonosor and Darius, which made
proclamacions, wherein they did forbid that any blasphemi should be spoken
against the God of Israel So shall commone wealths be truly happy, for God in
like manner will defend them, and give the^ abundance of al goodness as he has
said: I will glorify the^ which glorify me.

Be these politic works acceptable unto God?
Yes, Domestical and politic works of this life, which every one does
according to his vocation, be good works, and in them which be Godli, be ye
true service of God, for they be works comau^ded of God, and therefore prophets
do often praise these politic works whereof some be works of mercy commended
above facrifices. Esa. i. yseaketh of sacrifices. Who does require these things
of your hands etc. But of such polytike works he says?

Seek judgment, healpe them which be opressed, defend widows etc.

And he promysethe thereunto rewards. If your sins shall be red as scarlet,
they shall be made as white as snows Ose. vi. I will mercy and no sacrifice. etc.

And of domestical offices Paul says.i. Timo. ii. A woman shall be saved by
generation of childer etc. Here does he join faith and the works of vocacion.

Wherefore do hipocrites then so greatli praise monastical works?
They do impudently and sore, grieve the consciences of many me^ for the work
of Civil life ought to be preferred before monastical works for three causes.

First, because they be commanded of God and be our vocation Second, They
be offices of Love, ordained for the common profit of al men.

Third, They be in ieoperdy of ye cross and common adversities, therefore they
be exercisynges of faith. Contrariwise, monastical works have no
commandment of God or vocation, wherefore they be unprofitable service. Math.
xv. They worship me in vain teaching the commandments and doctrynes of
men. Beside yt they which teach these works do not help other, but rather
enjoy most pleasant idleness, whose bealy is their God. Ro^ the last chap.
Finalli, they will take no payns in the troubles and aduersyties of the common
wealth. etc. Therefore Civil life is much to be preferred before monastycall
ceremonies and works.

Of matrymony
What is Matrymonye?
IT is lawful coupellyng of man and woman, instituted, universally, for the
brynging forth of children and avoiding fornication

Whose Ordinance is it?
It is the ordinance of God, for God is ye ordeiner of Matrimony First by the
counsel of God man is created. Gene. i. Let us make a man after the similitude
of our own image. Secondarelye, the woman is also created by the counsel of
God. In the same place. It is not good yt the man shall be alone let us make
him an helper. etc. And he casting Adam in a sleep, did take a rybbe. etc. and
thereof builded a woman. Thirdly he did bring her unto Adam, and blessed the^:
Increase and multiplye, and fill the earth.

Between How many may Marriage be made at one time?
Between two alone

For Matrimony is the laweful coupling of man and woman And although the
examples of ye old testamente do wytnes, that Poligamia, or having of many
wives was used, perchance for the more increasing of childer or^ e^mitted for
other causes: yet ye new testament does generally forbide it, Christ being the
author, which does call again matrymony unto the first institution. Math. xix
He which made man, made them man and woman. Gene. ii. They shall be two in one
flesh.

Where was it instituted?
In paradise a place most pleasant

When was it instituted?
In the beginning of the world, in the time of innocencye when there was as yet
no sin.

Wherefore was it instituted?
First, for the procreation of Childer, that mankind might be preserved, Genesis
iii. Increase and multiplye etc.

Secondarili, for the avoiding of fornication. i. Corinth. vii. Let every man
have his wife, and. Every woman her husband

Thirdly, for the eschewing of Idleness, that is to say, that they which be
married should have some thing to do, lest they should sin in idleness.

What is to be done in Matrimonye
Let them which be married put al their trust in God which is ye author and
institutor of matrymony, Let them live together peaceably and with one heart let
the^ bring up their Childer which GOD has sent them, and their household in
the fear and love of God, and let the^ so use their goods that they do not
hurt other men.

What is to be suffered? What is the cross of mariag?
After breakyng of ye co^mau^dme^t God said unto ye man. Thou shall eat thy
bread in the sweat of thy brows etc.

He sayede unto the woman thou shall bring forth thy childer in sorrow. etc.
And yet does he comfort them in the cross. He say the unto the man whils
thou be returned into earth whereof thou art made. etc. He says unto ye woman:
Thou shalt bring furthe, but in sorrow. And Paul.i. Timoth ii. The woman
shall be saved bye generation of childer, If she will remain in faith.

May matrymony be dessolued or no?
No, for Christ says Math. xix. Let man not separat yt which God has
coupled. Yet when adultery does chance, the band of marriage is broken, and yt
faith which is promissed is also broken, wherefore in such case it is lawful to
separate, according unto ye doctrine of Christ.

What are to be observed in matrymony?
The consent of fathers and mothers, or of them which be in their stead Also
the consent of the persons which make ye contract, Also the laws of nature,
Imperial, and the customs of ye country. For matrymony perteyneth also unto
Civil or politic order. Also let them which be married think, that this
kind of life is acceptable unto God, and therefore is it anorned with promises
and the word of God. Also with blessings as well bodyly as gostly. Psalm
Cxxviii. Thou shall eat the labors of thy hands, thou shall be blessed and
it shall be well with the. Thy wife like as a byne tree. etc. Also Matrimony is a
token of the spiritual Marriage and fellowship which is the church of Christ
Ephe. v.

Is marriage fre for all men?
Yes, before Christ's time, virginity was condemned, nor it was not admitted
that any should remayn virgyns, for the sede which was to come. Because it was
uncertain of what woman Christ should be borne. And it was the curse of the
law, not to bring forth seed in Israel. But now is Matrimony free.i. Cor.
vii. concerning virgins I have no commandment. etc. But Christ does accept
three kinds of gelded me^. Math. xix. These except, noman ought to be without
Marriage.

Of invocation of Saints.
Are saints to be called upon for mediators?
NO, for Paul says: there is one mediator of God and man, a man Jesus
Christ.i. Tim. ii. And Roman. viii. Jesus Christ which was dead, which also
has risen again, which sits at the right hand of his father, which also
does pray for us etc. And.i. Ihon.ii. If any manne shall sin, we have an
advocate with ye father Jesus Christ, just. By these sentences is the most
vain distinction confuted, wherbi the papists teach that there be two
mediators, that is to say, one of Redemption, as Christ: And the other of
intercession, as saints.

Ought the saints to be worsheped?
No. For Christ says. Math.iiii. Thou shall worship thy lord God, and him
alone, shall thou serve. And. S. Austen in the book of treue religion. Saints
are to be honored for Imitation, not for religion. And we honor Angels with
love not with bondage, nor we build not temples for them. For saints will not
yt we shall worship them so. For they know us, when we be good to be the
temples of God. Therefore it is well written, that the Angel did forbyde the man
to worship him, and told him he should worship God Apoc xix. And xxii.

Chrisostomus.vi. Homili. De profectu Euangel^ says: with god we need no
patro^s, nor much ru^nyng up and down, to flatter other men But although thou
be alone, and have no patron, and if thou will thy self pray unto god thou
shall have thy purpose. For god does not so expressly grant when other do
pray for us, as if we should pray our self, although we abound with much
sin. For an example is the woman of Cananye, Math xv.

Yet by lords and Earls must we goes unto the kings or Princes.
Ambrose. Romans i. Does manyfestly confute this similitude saying: like as he
is ryghtly condemned for a trayter, which gives the honor of a king to an
Earl or lord: So be they also worthy to be accused which give the honor deue
unto the name of God unto any creature, and forsaking the Lord, worship
their fellow servants. Now then we make suyt unto the king by his rulars and
officers because he is a man, and knows not unto who^ he has committed the
common wealth. But to obtain ye fauore of god which knows al things we need
no forspeaker, but a devout mind.

How must we then worship saints?
We must think and speak also, most honorably of saints. For god will
without doubt that we shall honor the^, who^ he his self does honor. The
father does acknowledge them for his Chylder. The son calls them brethren and
fellow heirs. The holy ghost calls them his temple. Therefore he which does
not honor them does despise Christ in them, and the grace of God, whereby they
have atteined unto so great holiness and virtue. For what does he judge of the
holy Church, which will not honor, our like members in Christ, which be now
set at rest and certifyed of everlasting health? The old church did celebrate
the memoryales of saints, it did thank god for their deliverance, for the
grace of god given unto them, and for their blessedness, and for the godly
gifts which god did pour into his church by his saints. We see also in
saints, what the grace of god ca^ do For when we hear the^, which were like
unto us, so myghtely to have overcome the world and death we should by and by
be provoked to conceive the trust of the mercy of god promised in Christ. The^
their Examples do inflame us unto emitation, yt we pray unto god for such
like faith, and follow the virtues of the saints as our vocation and
profession is So is our faith in Christ confirmed charity is kyndled, Hope of
everlasting life is made strong, we remember that they be not lost, but sent
before us unto the life of the world to come. Therefore we worshipe them with
such kind of worship and love, as we give unto holy men in this life. But with
godli honor we nether worshipe, nor yet do teach that any other ought to be
worshipped but god alone. For the saints their selves, or men, or yet Angels
will not suffere that to be given unto them, which they know is due unto god
only.

Of buryall
Whereupon comes burieng of the dead?
OF the word of god Genesis iii. Thou art ashes and you shall be turned into ashes.
Because this word. A pha^ in hebreu signifies earth which is dug up, or
ground, like as it is seen, in graves. For this cause this honest Ceremony of
buryenge did ever remain in the Synagoge and in the church, and it is a
testymony of our faith, that we believe the resurrection of the flesh, and of
our love toward our neighbors which be dead, whom we believe not to be lost,
but only to be sent before us, nothing doubtyng but that we shall se al our
friends in the day of the lord, and that they and we shall dwell together with
Christ for evermore. The gentiles, and specially the Romans, did burn their
dead bodies.

Where must the place of buryeng be?
Among our auncytoryes as well Jews as Gentiles, Buryenge was without the
Cyty. So Abraham did bye a field of Ephrom for ye buryieng of his wife Sara,
Gene. xxiii. Where also afterward were buried Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, and
Joseph. So was ye young man whom Christ raised from death carried out at ye
port Naim, Luke.vii. So Lazarus was buried without Bethania. So likewise the
sepulcher of Christ was without Iherusalem, Therefore remained this word
Efferrie among latin men that is to say to be carried out.

How must buryal be celebrated?
Buryeng ought to be relygyously handled among christen me^ for ye
vndeceyueable hope of our resurrection. And ye corse must be carried unto ye
Sepulcher, of godli men. And when the body is buried, we ought to remember,
that we be al dead and dampnable through Adam Then again that we be al revived
in Christ, which has restored al unto us, which Adam before has corrupted
and lost for he has been dead for our sins, which he has al cleansed and
purged by his death and has abolished our death, and he is made resurrection
and life unto al them which believe. He which believes in him, although he
shall be dead, yet shall he live. And every one which lives and believes in him,
shall never dye, John.xi. Our bodies be me^bres of Christ. Therefore like as God
has raised up Christ our lord, and our head, eue^ so will he raise up us by
his power.i. Corinth. vi.

Of the rysyng again of the dead.
What is the resurrection of the dead?
IT is wherein at the last day al men shall rise from death, they which be godly
unto everlasting life, and they which be ungodly unto everlasting punishment.

How can thou prove the resurrection of the dead?
This article of our faith is counted the best, for whose cause we profess all the other. Therefore the scripture, and specially ye new Testament is full of
testimonies. And to confyrme our minds against. Epicures opinions, and to
noryshe fear and our faith, it is good to have in a redynes, many testymonies,
which may testyfye, that we shall rise with these same bodies. Math, xxiii.
Christ proves the resurrection of the dead because God has said, I am the
god of Abraham, and the god of Isaac, and the god of Jacob. etc. God says he,
is not the god of ye dead, but of the living. Therefore it is necessari that
holy me^ which be dead shall rise again with their bodies.

Also cap. xix. He calls resurrection a regeneration, when these bod^es
raised from their graves or sepulchers shall be renewed. Luke.xiiii. It shall be
restored to the resurrection of the just:

Johan.vi. This is the will of my father yt every one which seth the sone and
believes in him, shall have everlasting life, and I will raise him up again in
the last day. Romans viii. If the spirit of him which raised Jesus from
death, do dwell in you, he will reuyne your mortal bodies, for the spirit of
him which dwells in you. In ye same place. But we also having ye first fruits
of ye spirit do long after the election of the childer of god among our
selves, lokynge for the redemption of our bodies. i. Corinth. xv. He does
purposly defend this article through out ye hole Chap. For he proves by the
resurrection of Christ, that we shall also of necessity rise again. For
therefore has Christ risen yt he might overcome and abolyshe death, and that
he might restore anewe an everlasting life unto them which believe.

Like as death, says he, entered in by man, even so by man is the resurrection
of the dead. And like as al be dead in Ada^, even so shall al be revived in
Christ. ii. Cor. iiii Ever cariing about, ye diyng of Jesus christ in our
bodies, yt the life of Jesus might also appear in our bodies If the life of
Christ ought to be declared in our bodies, it is necessary that our bodies
delivered from death and raised up again, shall live an everlasting life. If
we believe ye Christ is dead and has rise^ again: Thessa. ii
even so will god bring the^ with him which have sleped.

Bring forth witness out of the old Testament.
Esa. xxv. The face of the^ which be wrapped in, shall be devoured in this hill
wherwythe all people be wrapped, and the covering wherwyth all people be
couerede, and death shall be devoured for evermore. The prophet calls ye face
of them which be wrapped, death and sin wherein al people be wrapped, for
death before God is as it were a wrappyng in, wherein al ye world is inuolued,
but this wrappyng in, in the hill Syon, yt is in ye church shall be abolished from
ye godly, for yt is the fruit of the Gospel, that it revive the^ which be dead.
Esaie. xxvi. The dead shall live, My killed men shall rise. Awake and be merry
ye which dwell in duste. etc. Go my people, enter into thy chamber and shite
thy doors etc. Esech. xxxvii. Lo, I will open your graves, and bring you out
of your sepulchers, mi people etc. Job xix. I know that my redemere lives, and
in the last day shall I be raised from ye earth and I shall be covered again in
my Skyn, and in my flesh I shall fe god my savior.

To be short this article is contained al over in ye promises and examples of
ye fathers. For because delyueraunce and gloryfication is promised unto holy
men, and yet they never thelesse be in this life punyshed and in the power of
death, therefore it is necessary an other life to remain, wherein they
gloryfied, shall live everlastingly.

So ye epistle unto ye Hebrews teaches, that the fathers of ye old testament
keped the faith and believe of resurrection. For in faith be they al dead, not
receyuyng ye promysses etc. Therefore Jacob commanded his childer to bury him
in ye sepulcher of his fathers And Joseph commanded his bones to be carried out
of Egypt.

Shall al men rise both good and euel?
The resurrection of al men shall be one and common, as well of the godly as of
the ungodly, but in unlike condition. For the godly shall rise into everlasting
life but ye ungodly into judgment and everlasting pains.

Prove that the ungodly shall also rise with there bodies unto punishment?
John.v. Christ says: The hour shall come, wherein all they which be in their
graves, shall hear the voice of the son of man and they which have done good
shall proceed into resurrection of life, but they which have done euel into
resurrection of judgment Daniel.xii. Many of these which do sleep in the duste
of the earth, shall awake. Some into everlasting life, and some into
Everlasting reproffe that they may se evermore. ii Corinth. iiii. We must al
appear before the justice seat of Christ, yt every one may make account of
his own deeds, like as he has done, whether it be good or euel. Math. x.
Fear him which can, cast both ye body and the soul into everlasting fire
Esai. lxvi. They shall go forth and se the carcases (that is to say the
bodies) of men, which have broken my commandments. The worm of them shall
not dye, and the fire shall not be quenched, and al flesh shall be full with sight
of them.

How shall the resurrection be?
Paul.i. Corinth. xv. In the twyncklyng of an eye, in the last trumpet, for
the trumpet shall blow, and the dead shall arise uncorrupted, and we shallbe
changed.

How shall this alteration be?
That which is corruptible (says he) must be made incorruptible, and that
which is mortalle must be changed into immortality, but when that which is
corruptyble shall be made incorruptible, and that which is mortal shall be changed
into immortality. Then shall the word be fulfilled which is written, death is
devoured and swalowed up in the victory.

How shall they arise?
Gloryously with all perfection gostely and bodily. Paul.i. Corin xv. Does
number four gifts of a gloryfyed body, clearnes, power or leithweiknes and
quicknes or redines. This body says he, is sown, yt is, is buried in the
earth in corruption, infamy, infyrmity, a natural body. It shall arise in
incorruptiblenes, glory, power a spiritual body.

Show a figure of the resurrection by ye creatures?
Behold a corn of wheat, which is casten dry into the earth, and it is not
reuyued so that it can not grow, unless it be dead or roten before. Ioh. xii.
Christ says: unless the corn of wheat. etct. The corn is sown into the
ground, little, vile an dry, which putrified in the earth as it were reviving,
grows into a te^dregrasse, anon after comes stalks and then the ears. So
shall thy said body, which is buried, at the length arise, but with an
unspeakable beuty. For the ryghteouse shall shine in the kingdom of god, as it
were the sun.

But what shall come of them whom the last day shall find yet living in flesh?
They shall not fall in ye hands of them which buri the dead. For Paul
says.i. Thessa. iiii. We which remain as yet, shall be also carried up with
them which be dead before, into the clouds for the metyng of the lord, in the
air, and so shall we ever be with the lord.

Of the end of the world, of the judgment or ye last day of the lord.
What is the consumation of the world?
IT is when ye state of this world, and the course of times shall pass away,
when Summer, winter, day and night shall cease, Gene. x.

What is the last judgment or the day of the lord?
It is when the lord Jesus Christ in his coming, with great power and majesty,
shall give equal and undeniable judgment unto all me^ according unto their
works as well unto the godly, as the ungodly, either unto everlasting life or
everlasting punishment.

How many commings of ye lord be there?
The scripture does teach us yt there be two comings of the lord, The first was
lowly, when he was incarnate in ye shape of a servant, that he might bear our
sins. The other shall be gloryouse and terrible, when he shall come as ye last
judge in an unspeakable majesty, in the end of the world, to judge the quick
and the dead. Augustinus: Christ did come privily to be judged, He shall come
openly also for to judge, Act. x. Christ is ordained of god, ye judge of the
living and the dead. Act. xvii He has appointed a day, wherein he will judge
the world in equalnes.

How shall he come to judge?
Visibly in a cloud, like as he has ascended up. Acts. i And in majesty and
glory.i. These. iiii. in the voice of the archaungell and in the trumpet of God.

Wherefore to judge?
That he may give unto the godly everlasting life both bodily and gostly, and
unto the ungodly punishment and everlasting fire. What order of ye last
judgment shall there be? Certain tokens shall go before the day of judgment,
Certain shall be upon the same day, and certain shall follow.

What tokens shall go before?
The Empire of Rome shall be destroyed, The man of sin shall be declared, ii.
These. ii. Their shall false Christ's rise and false prophets. The church of
Christ shall suffer most greuouse persecutions Math. xxiiii. There shall be tokens
in the sun and moan etc. Luke. xxi. The Gospel shall be preached in the whole
world.

What tokens shall appear upon the same day?
The cominge of Christ shall be sodden, like as the fleyng of the lyghtenyng from
the east unto ye west. fire shall go before his face Psalm.lxxx. vi. The
tokens of ye son of man shall appear in heaven. All dead men shall arise, as
well godly as ungodly. Christ will deuid the good from the euel and will give
the last judgment Matthew.xxv.

What token shall follow?
Visible renewinge of ye world Punishment of the ungodly, life of the godly
Everlasting.

Can the hour and the day of the judgment be known?
Of that day and hour says Christ Matthew.xxiiii. No man knows, no not the
Angels but mi father alone. And ye.i. These. v. The day of the lord like as a
thief upon the night So shall it come when they shall say peace and
tranquillity, then shall the sodden destruction come upon them.

Of Everlasting life What is everlasting life?
IT is the everlasting taste and fealing of grace and the mercy of god, and
peace or everlasting joy of conscience, in the hertes of the faithful, Or it
is a certain knowledge of god and our lord in Jesus Christ, which begyneth
here in faith under a sure hope and spirit, and it shall be openly declared
after this life unto everlasting joys and an immortal heritage. more briefly
so. Everlasting life is to know ye true god, and Jesus Christ who^ he has
sent, Ioh. xvii

What is everlasting death?
It is everlasting sorrow and fear of conscience for the wrath of god.

Who has promised everlasting life?
Christ our lord.

Unto whom?
Unto them which believe. For so has he said. Ioh. iii. He which believes in
the son of god has everlasting life, but he which does not believe in the
son, he shall not se life, but the wrath of god taryeth upon him. John.v. Vereli
verily I sai unto you he which hears my word, and believes in him which has
sent me, he has everlasting life, and he shall not come into judgment, but he
shall pass from death into life.

Which be the effects and virtues of everlasting life?
Not to feel any more sin and death, but to have everlasting Joys and
gladness. Esaie. xxv. And death shall be utterly devoured, and god shall wipe all
tears from the eyes of them, and there shall be no more death, nor sorrow, nor
Crieng etc. Apoc. xxi. Esa. lxv ^o I create new heavens, and they which were
before shall be no more remembered, nor yet ascend into your hertes, but ye shall
rejoice and be merry for evermore in those which I create. Because lo I create
Iherusalem, gladness and the people of it rejoice, and they shall be merry in
Iherusalem, and I will rejoice in my people, and ye voice of weping and
wailing, and the voice of Cryeng shall be heard no more in it etc. Also Chap. li.
They which be redeemed of the lord, shall return and come praisinge into Syon
and everlasting joys upon their heads. They shall rejoice and be merry, and
sorrow and morning shall be abolished. Psalm. iiii. Pore men shall eat and be
satisfied and they shall praise the lord which do seek for him, and their
herts shall live for Evermore. Psalm.iiii. They shall abound with corn and
wine. But I will sleep and take rest, because thou lord do make my dwelling
place sure. Esaie. lxiiii. There is no eye which sees, but thou alone O God
what thou have prepared unto them which love the.

These testimonies do declare that everlasting life is such astate, wherein we
be delivered from sin and death, and from all miseries and wretchedness, shall
live in everlasting light the treue knowledge of god and shall have
everlasting Joys and everlasting mirth. Which god grant unto us for ye love
of his son Jesus Christ, which lives and reygneth with the father and the
holy ghost, blessed above al things for ever more Amen. *

Imprinted at London by John Day and Wyllyam Seres, dwelling in Sepulchers
Parish at the sign of the Resurrection a little above Holbourne Conduite.

M.D. xlviii. the.v. of October.

Cum gratia and priuilegio ad imprimendum solum.


