A SHORT RVLE OF GOOD LIFE.

To direct the devout Christian in a regular and orderly course.

Newly set forth according to the Authors direction, before his death.

Set me down (O Lord) a law in thy way. Ps. 118. I said (O Lord) that it is my
portion and al my riches, to keep thy law. Ibid. At S. Omers, by JOHN HEIGHAM
An. 1622.

THE PREFACE TO the Reader.
WHen that great servant of God, S. Benet, had in most seruent and devout
prayers, ^eelded up his soul unto God: two of his religious followers (as
reports S. Gregory) being ignorant altogether of his death, although in
places far distant, had the like vision. They saw out of their godly Fathers
cel^e, directly toward the East* a most beautiful way, adorned with gorgeous
Tapestry, and shining with a multitude of innumerable lamps, to proceed even
unto heaven. At the top whereof there standing, a notable person in a
venerable habit, and demanding of them whose way it was which they beheld,
they answered they knew not. But he incontinently said unto them these w^rdes.
Haec est via qua dilectu^ Domino coelum Benedictus ascendit. This is the way,
by the which Gods wel-beloued servant Benedict, went up to heaven, meaning
thereby (as S. Bernard notes) the holy Rule of a religious life, instituted
and practiced by the same Saint, by which not he alone was passed, as by a
most ready and pleasant way to heaven, but whosoever of his followers would
travel by the same, should with like security, arrive to the end of a most
happy journey.

The Author of this little Book (gentle Reader) I nothing doubt, but is very
well known unto thee, as also for his learning, piety, zeal, charity,
fortitude, and other rare and singular qualities, but ^speciallie for his
precious death, he is renowned in the world abroad: neither needs there any
extraordinary vision, but the sound and certain Doctrine of the Catholic
Church, is sufficient to persuade, that he is a most glorious Saint in heaven:
he being such an one as has confessed a good confession before many
w^tnesses, and made (as Saint John says) his garments white with the blood of
the immacula^e Lamb. But because thou should not be ignorant, of the way by
which this valiant Champion of Christ, arrived unto so happy a Country, he
himself has left behind him for thy benefit, and even amongst the least of
his fruitful labors, for the good of souls, had designed to publish unto the
world, the description of this most gainefull voyage to heaven; be-decked with
the most pre^ious ornaments of all Christian virtues, and with the most
pleasant and comfortable brightness of notable rules of spiritual life: every
one of which, may be as it were a Lantern unto thy feet, and a continual
Light unto thy steps.

This therefore do I now (devout Reader) present unto thy sight, affirming
unto thee, that which thou thy self wilt not deny, as being both true and
manifest: that, Haec est via qua dilectus Domino N. caelum intrauit, This is
the way by which the wel-beloued servant of God N. went up into heaven.

For in what estate soever he lived in this world, he ran the way of
Christian perfection, in an ordinary course of a secular life, (...) from his
very infancy he was a spectacle to all that knew him in the state of
Religion, the which he embraced from his childehood; he was a rare example of
religious perfection and discipline: and finally in his many several and most
cruel conflicts with the enemies of Christ, he shows how strong and
unconquered the love of God is, whose burning heat never so many waters or
gustes of most main floudes, may either quench or smother: and whose power
the most power-able thing of all, which is Death, can not overcome.

Thou therefore (my dear brother) heholding, according to the ex^ortation of
this victorious triumpher, see thou imitate his faith. Fashion thy life and
manners according to these devout rules, which are a most perfect mirour of
his godly life: and in so doing, thou may hapilie attain thy self to the
like crown of glory.

For though Martyrdom be a most special gift of God, and he freely
bestows it where he likes, neither is it an ordinary reward due unto
never so great merits of never so holy personages, and it is to his excellent
power a most easy thing, subito honestare pauperem, even from the midst of
a sinful life, to exalt unto Martyrdom: yet is there a certain disposition
in those which are chosen to so high a dignity ordinarily required of God,
which is first to have killed their passions, before they be killed by
persecutors; first to have been exercised in a spiritual conflict of
mortification, before they be tried in the furnace of Christian confession;
first to have become the town, butchers, before they be delivered to the
hangmans shambles. Otherwise (as our Savior says) Qui amat animam suam
perdet eam: Who so loves his life or soul disordinately shall loose it, and
never be able to stand in that combatte, wherein not flesh and blood, not
pride, ambition, and vain glory, not malice and rancour; but a mortified
^inde, and a resigned heart into Gods hands, obtains the victory.

Which disposition and ready preparation for this so happy a crown, was most
perfectly found in this our Author: whereupon iusued, that he might truly ^ay
with holy. I. B. Elegit suspendium anima mea, and mortem ossa mea. Desperaui
nequaquam, vltra iam viuam. My soul bath made choice of hanging, and my bones
of death. I am become desperate, I will now live no longer: because long before
he had hanged up his soul by perfect estranging of it from earthly affections,
and keeping it fixed and joined to God; thence did it pooceed, that his earthly
bo^es, abhorred not that death which was to be suffered for Christ. And because
he had wi^hdrawne his hopes from the base desires of this life, therefore did
^e contemn this life for the love of this heavenly life, and he thought he
had lived long enough, when he might die to live for ever.

Enjoy therefore these rules devout Reader, and joyfully tread the paths of
this most pleasant way to heaven: and if by the compendious commodity thereof
thou shall see thy journey toward thy everlasting country to be forwarded; give
glory unto God, and unto this his faithful servant; and assiste with thy
devout prayers those which have been means to prepare it for thee.

Yet do I advise thee of two especial thin^es: first, that whereas in these
Rules thoushalt sometimes read, that thou must do this or that; thou must not
understand that word ( must) as though thou were bound to the performance of
any thing there expressed, but only that those actions do belong unto the
exercise of perfection without any further bond, then either the law of God,
or holy church do impose.

Secondly, that before thou begin to practice these Rules, containing in them
great perfection, thou acquaint thy self with an other Book entitled The
Exercise of a Christian life, or such otherlike, lest thou attempt to build a
great house with slender foundation: and climing to the top of a high ladder;
without passing by the middle steps, at unawares thou receive a fall. Vale.

A SHORT RVLE OF GOD LIFE.
THE FIRST CHAPTER of the foundations of a Good life.
The first foundation.
THE first foundation of a good life is, often and seriously to consider for
what end and purpose I was created, and what Gods designement was, when he made
me of nothing, and that not to have a being only, as a stone, nor withal a
bare kind of life or growing, as a plant or tree, nor moreover a power of
sense or feeling only as a bru^t beast, but a creature to his own likeness,
endued with reason understanding and freewil. Also why he now preserves me in
this health, state and calling. Finally why he redeemed me with his own blood,
bestowed so infinite benefits upon me, and still continues his mercy toward
me.

The end of man.
The end of my being thus made, redeemed, preserved, and so much benefited by
God, is this and no other: that I should in this life serve him, with my whole
body, soul and substance, and with what else soever is mi^e, and in the next
life enjoy ^im for ever in heaven.

Rules that follow of this foundation.
^ Was made of nothing by God, and received body and soul from him, and
therefore am I only his, not mine own, neither can I so bind or give my self
to ^^y creature, but that I ought ^ore to serve, love and obey God, then any
creature in this world.

Secondly I commit a ^^^de of theft, and do God great wrong, so often as I
^^ploy any part of my body (...) soul, to any other end the^ to his service,
for which only I was created.

Thirdly, for this do I live, and for no other end, but for this, do all
creatures serve me, and when I turn the least thing whereof God has given me
the use or possessing* to any other end then the service of God, do God
wrong, and abuse his creatures.

The second foundation.
Seeing I was made to serve God in this life, and to enjoy him in the next,
the service of God, and the salvation of mine own soul, is the most weighty
and important business, and the most necessary matter wherein I must employ my
body, mind, time, and labor: and all other affairs are so far forth to
be esteemed of me weighty or light, as they more or less tend to the
furtherance of this principal and most earnest business. For what avails it a
man to gain the whole world, and loose his own soul?

Rules that follow of this foundation.
FIrst what diligence, labor, or cost, I would emploie in any other temporal
matter of credit* living, or life, all that I am bound to employ in the service
of God, and the salvation of my soul: and so much more, as the weight or worth
of my soul, passes al other things.

Secondly I ought to think the service of God, and salvation of my soul my
principal business in this world, and to make it my ordinary study and chief
occupation, and day and night to keep my mind so fixed upon it, that in every
actio^ I still have it before mine eyes, as the only mark I shoot at.

the third foundation.
I Cannot serve God in this world, nor go about to enjoy him in the next, but
that Gods enemies and mine, will repine and seeke-to hinder me: which enemies
are three: the World, the Flesh, and the Devil. Wherefore I must resolve my
self, and set it down as a thing undoubted, that my whole life must be a
continual combat with these adversaries: whom I must assuredly persuade my
self to lie hourly in wait for me, to seek their advantage. And that their
malice is so unplacable, and their hatred against me so rooted in the^, that I
must never look to have one hour secure from their assaults: but that they
will from time to time, so long as there is breath in my body, still labor to
make me forsake and offend God, alure me to their service, and draw me to my
damnation.

Rules following of this foundation.
I Must prepare my body and mind to all patience, and think it no news to be
tempted, but a point annexed necessarily to my profession, and therefore never
must I be wearied with the difficulty, considering the malice and wickedness
of mine adversaries, and my professed enmity with the^.

Secondly I must always stand upon my guarde, and be very watchful in every
action, seeing that whatsoever I do, they will seek to pervert it, and make it
offensive to God, even my very best endeavors.

Thirdly I must never look to befree from some trouble or other, but knowing
my life to be a perpetual warfare, I must rather comefort my self with hope
of a glorious crown for my victories, then of any long or assured peace with
mine enemies.

The fourth foundation.
The thing which these enemies endeavor for to draw me unto, is, sin and
offense of God: which is so odious, hateful, and abominable, that God does
more detest and dislike it, then he did the cruel usage, the wounds, the
torments, and the death it self, that for us he suffered of the Jews, and it
makes our souls more ugly, then the plague* leprosy, or any other most
filthy disease does the body.

Rules following this foundation.
SO careful as I would be not to wound, torment, or murder Christ, so
careful must I be, not to commit any mortal sin against him, yea and much
more, seeing that he hate^h sin more then death, having voluntarily suffered
the one, and yet never committed the other.

Secondly when I am tempted with any sin, let me examine my self, whether I
would buy the fulfilling of mine appetite, with being a leaper or full of the
plague, or with death presently to ensue after it: if not, then much less
ought I to buy it with the leprosy, loss, and death of my soul, which is of
far more worth then my body.

The fifth foundation.
Being Gods creature made to serve him in this life: my body, soul, and goods,
and all things any way appertaining unto me, are but lent, or only let me for
this end, and I am only as bailiffe, tenant or officer, to demaine or goue^ne
these things to his best service: and therefore when the time of my stewardship
is expired, I shall be summoned by Death to appear before my Land-lorde, who
with most rigorous justice will demand account of every thing and creature of
his, that has been to my use, yea of all that I have received, promised,
omitted, committed, lost and robbed: and as I can then discharge this account,
so shall I be either crowned in eternal joy, or condemned to perpetual
damnation.

Rules following of this foundation.
FIrst, I must use all things in this life as an other bodies goods, for which
I must be accountable to the vtter-most farthing.

Secondly, the more I have, the greater and harder will be mine account of the
good use thereof, and therefore the more wary^ought I to be, in disposing of it.

Thirdly, let me often consider what bodily, ghostly, and internal gifts of
God I have received, what in baptism and at other times I have promised: how
profitable and necessary good works I have omitted: how many grievous and
heinous sins I have committed: how often I have lost the grace of God, and my
right to heaven: finally how much honor, and how many souls I have robbed
from God: and these things being well perused, let me seek to make that
recompense and satisfaction for them, which I would wish to have made when
death shall summon me before my heavenly judge, to give up a most strict
account of them.

The fruit of these foundations consists in often considering them, as most
necessary points, and as it were the very first principles of good life, upon
the understanding and practicing whereof, depends my progress in virtue: and
therefore I must very often r^ade them and examine my self, whether my mind
and actions be answerable unto them.

How we ought to be affected toward God.
THE SECOND Chapter.
First of the consideration of Gods presence.
THese foundations being laid, it behooves me further to descend to the
notice of my duty to God, my neighbor, and my self.

And first concerning my due^ie unto God, a very fit mean I can use to
please him is, to bear alwaie in mind his presence. For sure it is that as
God, he is every where in substance, power and presence, and in him I live,
move, and I am, as the scripture says, because he works with me in all my
deeds, thoughts and words: In so much that as the beam of the sun, the heat
of the fire, or wettnes of the water, so depend I of God: and should he
withdraw himself from me but one moment, I should forthwith turn into
nothing, and therefore it is a very forcible means for my good, to do all
things as if I did see God visibly woorking and cooperating with me in every
action, as in truth he does, and knowinge that what words, thoughts, or
deeds soever pass me, and what part of my body or mind soever I use, Gods
concourse and help thereunto, is more then mine own, I must be a fraid to use
them in any such thing wherein I might offend him: but rather seek to do all
things so that they be worthy of his presence, help, and assistance in them.
And if I can get a custom or habitte to remember still the presence and
assistance of God (as by use easily I may) I shall with due regrd, reverence,
and consideration, abstain from such behavior, as I think may any way be
offensive unto him I shall also get a great facility in turning my mind and
heart to him, and in talking often with him by short and sweet prayers, which
are the fuel of devotion.

Other affecto^ is that we ought to have unto God

Secondly I must endeavor to kindle in my self, these affections toward God.

The First Affection.
FIrst, of a sincere and tender love of him, as the fountain of all beauty
and fellicity, of which love I may guess by these signs.

By often thinking, and an earnest desire of God.

By sorrow of his absence, and contentment, in consideration of his presence.

By my diligence in performing without delay or tediousness, that which
pleases best my Savior, and by finding such comfort in doing it, that it
grieves me when for things of less goodness, I am enforced to defer it.

By withdrawing all disordred love from all creatures, and especially my self,
and by loving nothing but in God, and for God.

By seeking to increase this love by consideration of Gods goodness, and his
daily benefits.

By taking delight in Gods service, or things tending thereunto, not because I
find contentment in it, but because it is to Gods glory, to the which I would
have all things addressed.

By taking tribulations, or troubles of body or mind patiently, yea and with
joy, knowing that they come by Gods permission, and thinking them as favors
which he affords to his dearest friends.

The Second Affection.
THe second affection is, a reverent and dutiful fear of God, which I may
gather by these signs.

If when I remember the presence and Majesty of God, I frame both my body and
mind to reverence and honor him, with all humility and decency: fearing
least by any unseemly and light behavior, I should seem to be contemptuous,
and careless of my duty toward him.

If I find great fear to do any thing that may offend God, not only
mortally, but even venially, and be withal very watchful to avoid the least
offense, least my fra^lty which is great, should draw me to it, and so to
further inconvenience.

If I fear to be banished from him, or forsaken for my sins, and endeavor
what I may to preserve his love and mercy toward me.

The Third Affection.
THe third affection is, Zeal of Gods honor, and desire that he should be
duly served and obeyed of all his creatures, of which I may judge by these
signs.

First, if I find a grief in my self and am heartily sorry, when I see or
hear of other folks faults, or think of mine own, considering how by them,
a base and wretched creature, dishonored and despised his creator, in steed of
him, serving his professed enemies, the flesh, the world, and the devil.

The second sign is an earnest desire to help my neighbor, or mine own
soul out of sin, by praying for this effect, and refusing no convenient
labor to accomplish the same, so that my Lord God be no more, or at the
least, less offended then before.

The Fourth Affection.
THe fourth affection is, to endeavor as near as I can, to take occasion of
every thing that I hear, see, or think of, to praise God. As if the things
were good, then to praise God that he gave grace to do them: And if the
thinge^ were evil, to thank God that either he preserved me or other, from
them, or at the least has not suffered me to continue still in the^, or to be
in his wrath condem^ed for them.

Also I must consider, and with my inward eye see God in every creature, how
he works in all things to my benefitte, and weigh how in all c^eatures, both
within and without me, he shows his p^esence, by keeping them in their being
and course of nature: for without him they would presently turn to nothing:
and I must assure my self, that in all this, he has as well a regard to my
good, as to others. And therefore all creatures must be as it were books to me
to read therein, the lou^ presence, providence, and fatherly care that God has
over me.

The Fifth Affection.
THe fifth affection is, to consider, that I being a Christian, and only my
faith and all mine actions proper thereunto, ought not only to be different
from the erroneous opinions, sects, and actions of infidels, but even mine
ordinary actions, of eating, drinking, playing, working, and such like, ought
to have a mark and badge of christianity, and some difference from the like
things done by heathens. And this mark which makes christian and good
works, is a right and sincere intention, which in every principal action I
ought to procure, so that it be done to the honor, g^orie, and service of
God, and agreeable to the rule of christian duty, with that measure,
temperance, and circumstance, which faith and reason requires: persuading my
self, that as well in these actions done in this sort, as in others that carry
more show of piety, God may be served and honored. And therefore it should be a
great negligence and carelesnes in me, for want of directing mine intention
(which by use is easily gotten) to lose so many great merits, as in these
ordinary actions I might daily and howerly gain.

The Sixth Affection.
THe sixth Affection is, a Perfect resignation of my self into Gods hands, with
a full desire that he should use me as it were most to his glory, whether it
were to my temporal comfort or no. And to be as ready to serve him in misery,
need, and affliction, as in prosperity and pleasure: thinking it my chiefest
delighte, to be used as God will, and to have his pleasure and providence fully
accomplished in me, which is the end for which I was created, and for the which
I do now live.

To attain this resignation, it is a very fit way to debate and discourse
with my self, what thing there is could happen unto me, though never so much
against my liking, which if it should fall out, would trouble me, or make me
loose that indifferency which I ought to have, in most willingly yeeldinge my
self to whatsoever God shall lay upon me: And if I find any thing which I
think I should not well digest, nor accept with due patience, let me endeavor
to overcome my self in it, and by praie^ and meditation* seek to win the
difficulty thereof, that there may be nothing which I would not willingly accept
at Gods hands, how contrary soever it were to mine inclination. To which these
considerations may help me.

First the end I aim at, is Gods glory in this world, and his reward in the
next, and therefore knowing that nothing, but my voluntary sin can bar me
from this end, what need I much care by what means God will have me to
attain it? for the means can last but a little, and the end endures for ever,
and is so much the more comfortable, in that it has been atchiued with more
discomfortable, toiles.

Secondly God loves me more then I love my self, and is so wise, that he
best sees what is fittest for me, all present and future circumstances
considered: he is so mighty that what his wisdom and love shall conclude for
my good, his power can put in execution: and therefore let me rather yield my
self wholly to his providence, then mine own desires.

Thirdly whatsoever moves me to fear or dislike any thing, which I could not
frame my mind to bear, God sees it as well and far better then I, yea and
all other secret and vnkowen hazardes that are annexed to that thing: if
therefore he knowing all these things, will nevertheless let it happen to me,
I must assure my self, that it proceeds of love, and is for my greater good,
and that he having laid a heavy burden upon weak forces, will by his grace
supply all my fears, wants and frailties.

The Seventh Affection.
THe seventh affection is, gratitude and thankfulness, which I ought to find in
my self toward God, and feeling an earnest desire to do any thing that might
counteruaile, or in part answer the excessive love that God, has and
howerly does show unto me, and to let no little good that I receive though
never so ordinary, pass without thanks to him, who even in the least things
is contented to serve me* and finally to make God my repose, and his
remembrance my comfort, and to loath al earthly things as base and unpleasant,
in comparison of him.

Of my duty to my Superiors.
THE THIRD Chapter.
NExt my duty to God, it behooves me to consider my due^ie to my Superiors,
whom I must account as his Vicegerents, and substitutes in the things wherein
I am subject unto them.

And first to speak of those which are my superiors in temporal things, in
all points belonging to their charge, I am to yield them temporal duty,
contenting my self with their appointment, so far as with justice and equity
they can command, and by Gods laws I shall be bound to yield unto them.

And for my spiritual superiors, whom I am to account as guides of my soul,
a far better part then the body. First I must procure that my choice be of
virtuous, grave, and mortified me^, who having their own passions well
subdued, may the better teach me how to bridle mine. And because it is the
chief help and most profitable, if my choice be good, and very dangerous if
it be evil, I must make my choice with great advise and deliberation, using
the counsel of some other persons of good and grounded judgment in such
things.

When I have a man of discretion and good government, and experienced in
directinge of souls, I must behave my self toward him in this sort.

First, I must procure to love him as a parent or father, by which name such
men in the Church of God are called, endeavoring to carry my self toward him,
as dutifully (not only in spiritual things, but also in those temporal
wherein, I might justly fear any sin) as a well nurtured child behaueth him
self toward his natural father: and seeking to make him take an affection and
desire to direct me with great joy, diligence and care, to all spiritual good.

Secondly, I must reverence and honor him as the Vincegerent of God, and
consider Christ in his person, and do my duty to him, as if in him I did see
Christ, taking heed of any such familiarity or surlinesse, as may and usually
does breed contempt, and always carrying my self with due respect to his
function and office, and having mine eye more bent upon that, then either his
person, calling or other temporal or spiritual qualities. Thirdly, I must
avoid such things as may cause in me any unjust discontentmentes or dislike
toward^s him: and therefore interpret his doings and sayings in the best sort,
not giving rash judgment of them, but rather seekinge to excuse his faults,
if he have any: and in my daily prayers to commend him to God, and pray that
God may grant him grace, judgment and discretion, and the assistance of his
spirit that thereby he may direct me, as is most for Gods glory, and my souls
health.

Fourthly, to obey him in all things wherein I see not any express sin, taking
his words when he counsaileth, commands, or forbids me any thing, as the
words of Christ; agreeable to the saying of our Savior: He that hears you,
hears me, and he that dispiseth you dispiseth me. Wherefore if he reprehend me
I must take it patiently with desire of ame^dme^t, and what he e^ioineth me,
willingly must I perform* though it be against mine own will, sense, or
liking.

To conclude, my obedience toward him, or rather toward Christ's person in
him, for whom in all things I obey, ought to be done with these conditions.
Speedely without delay. Voluntarily without constraint. Simply without
questions or excuses. Conte^tedly without murmuring or grudging. Stoutly
without despair or impatience. Constantly with perseverance to the end. Humbly
without pride.

I ought also to persuade my self, that God of his great goodness, by him will
direct me in such things as appertain to his direction, and will put such
things in his mind, as shall be most for my benefit and good, and therefore
must I resolve to lay my soul in his hands, and to frame my judgment to his
in all things, that he shall think fit for me to do or omit, where I see
no danger of sin, persuading my self, that though the man be imperfect, yet
God whose Vicegerent and instrument he is, neither will, not can deceive me.

Of my duty toward my neighbor.
THE FOVRTH Chapter.
AFter knowledge of my duty toward God and my Superiors, I must consider my
duty toward my neighbor, and the manner, how to behave my self in his
company and conversation.

First I must procure to remember, that my external behavior, my gate, my
gesture, my countenance, and my outward actions, be done with gravity,
modesty, and all decency: that I be not light, vain, or too lavish in mirth,
not too austere, or too much inclined to sadness, but with temperate modesty
rather composed to mirth, than melancholy. Which external composition is
necessary both for edi^ying our neighbor, who being unable to judge or enter
into our thoughts, judges of every one according to that where of his sense is
witness. And next in respect of God, who being every where present, requires
in us behavior worthy of his sight and company: and lastly, in respect of our
own soul, this care of external decency being an approved means to avoid
infinite venial sins, and much more all mortal.

Of external composition there be three chief points.

First the care of our countenance, ga^e, and gesture. Secondly of our voice
and speech. Thirdly of our apparel and other adherents.

In countenance, I must avoid an vnst^ied kind of variety and often change,
keeping, as near as I mai^, one settled tenor thereof, rather bent to smiling
the^ heaviness, and free from ^rowning* and such like unseemly distemper
Neither ought I to al^er my coun^ena^ce, but when reasonable and just cause
moves me to show either mirth, sorrow, dislike, or compassion, or some other
modest or temperat affection.

My gate ought to be grave, neither too swift nor too slow, but with a mean
and sober pace: my gesture must be decent, free from affectation, or
singularity, and from all show of inward disquietnes or vnordred passion, which
though I cannot choose but sometime feel, yet it (...) good as much as I may
to conceal it, because outward signs do feed the inward distemper, and
bewray to others my imperfections to my discredit, and their^ euel example.

My voice neither ought to be very loud, nor my laughter so vehement as to be
heard a far off, but both seemlie and modest, for excess in the voice, and
immoderate lowdne^, are always certain signs of passion, and therefore ought
to be used but upon some extraordinary necessity.

My speech ought not to be so much, as to make me be noted for talkatiue, yea
it is good to be rather sparing in words, and readier to hear, then to
speak. But when occasion forces to much talk, I must speak deliberately
without rashenesse or leuity, avoiding ouer-many jests, especially bitter
taunts and sharp words. I must also take heed of affected speech and
impertinent ceremonies, and use such affability and convenient complements, as
common ciuility and usual courtesy requires.

Mine apparel must be free from lightness, or more gawdines the^ fitteth my
age, calling, or company. It must be decent, and comely, not too open, nor with
unusual or new fashioned dresses, that other grave persons of my quality and
calling, (that are well thought of) do not use: It must be handsome and clean,
and as much as may be without singularity, that therein the staiednes and
seemly estate of my soul, may be perceived.

Always when I am to go to any company, either of my dwelling place, or
strangers, I ought to forecast their disposition, and what talk or action is
likely to be tendered unto me by their presence. If I fear detracting
speeches, let me arm my self not to seem to approve them, yea rather to
mislike them, and to turn the talk to some other matter, and so in all other
kind of unlawful talk.

Finally let this for conversation be my chief rule, always to foresee and
provide my self against the occasions, that by every company are likely to be
offered me, and in the beginning to talk either for dispatch of necessary
business, if there be any, or for maintaining mutual love and charity, if it
be merry, or ordinary talk.

This foresight of occasions, and faults likely to be committed, is the
principal remedy against all sin, and therefore especially to be noted and
used.

To conclude, the virtues necessary in conversation, are modesty, decency,
affability, meeknes, ciuility, and curtesy, show of compassion to others
miseries, and of joy at their welfare, and of readiness to pleasure all, and
vnwillinges to displease any; and the want of any of these, where occasion
requires, make^h conversation faulty.

The vices chiefly to be avoided are, pride disdainefulnes, rudenes,
frowardnes, wantone^, or, lightness, too much ^amiliarity, churlishnes, and
offensive speeches.

Of my duty toward my self.
THE FIFTH Chapter.
THe last point is to consider my duty toward my self, and the care I ought
to have of mine own particular.

First I must procure that which before is mentioned, in all my actions to have
the badge of christianity: that is a pure and sincere affection and intention,
not seeking in any thing my own delight, pleasure, and contentment, more then
may stand with the honor and glory of God, remembering that I am to serve him
and not my self, more then is necessary to enable me for his better service, I
being his more then mine own.

Secondly I must procure to foresee in every action, at the lest in all the
principal, to fore arm my self against those occasions of sin which shall be
offered in them: and where it lies not in my power to avoid the occasion of
any great sin, the more danger there is, and the greater the sin is that I
am in danger of, so much the more preparation must I use to resist it, and the
more earnestly ask for Gods grace.

Thirdly I must have care of my senses, as the means and entrance of
temptations. To which it is a principal help, not to be easily drawn with
every noise or phansy to move my head or eyes, except there be good cause:
nor to be sudden in motion, or going hither and thither, without
deliberation. I must also remember well, that the eye is never satisfied with
seeing, nor the ears with hearing novelties, and therefore must I needs bridle
the unmeasurable appetite of both these senses, by breaking of mine own
desires in that behalf.

Fourthly because confusion, and an unsettled kind of life, is the cause of many
sins, and an enemy to all virtue, I must set down with my self some
certain order in spendinge my time, alotting to every hour in the day, some
certain thing to be done in the same, so near as possibly I may, or at the
least to have sometimes in the morning, evening, and afternoon, certainly
devoted to some good ex^rcise, which I must (though not by vow) after a sort
bind my self unto, when things of greater weight do not call me from them.
Also to keep due times of rising, meals, and going to bed, and all other
ordinary times: the observation whereof is most necessary for a regular and
virtuous order of lif.

Fithly it is a most necessary rule of good life, not only to keep order in
my temporal and spiritual actions, but also to persevere and continue in one
order, having once set it down with sound advise. For the nature of man being
apt to change, we are given still to novelties, seeking new ways to
perfection, and confirming or habituating our selves in none: wherefore (except
necessity, charity, or greater spiritual good do require) I must not flit
from one exercise to another, from one ghostly father to another, from on form
of behavior to another, but first plant a good plat-forme with mature advise,
and then resolve and fully determine to continue in the same.

Sixtlie I must not cumber my mind with many spiritual or external exercises
at once, nor labor my self to much at the first, for my force being
distracted to many offices, is the less able to perform any of them, and is
easily ouer-labored without profit: wherefore I must not think to get all
virtues at once, or cut off all imperfections together, but having a general
resolution to get virtue, and leave all vice, begin with some one,
endeavoring to endeavoring to break my self of some one fault, which I am most
inclined unto, and procuring to get the contrary virtue: for the care of
avoiding one offense, will make me take heed of all the rest.

Seue^thly ma^s nature being so corrupted, that without continual violence
and force, it cannot attain to virtue, or leave vice, whereunto it is much
inclined, I must assure myself that care and watchfulnes is ever necessary: and
because I am apt to fall, I must often renew my good purposes, which for that
it is a material point, it will be good to set down with my self these
rules.

First to appoint and set down with my self, that every morning one of my
first thoughts shall be of the good purposes I have made, which must not be
many, but some one or two particular and principal points that I see most
necessary for me, and to set down also in the morning, at what times in the
day I will remember the same, as at service, at dinner, at euensong, or such
like times, for the care to remember them at some certain times, will make me
stilmindful of them, and so readier to perform them.

Secondly to examine my self twice in a day, whether I have broken them since
the morning or no: and if I have, then to be so^e for it, and begin again to
fortify my self better against the next occasion.

Thirdly because I can never go on in virtue without falling, I must every
morning, or at least every holiday, think with my self that hitherto I have
done nothing, and that, by Gods grace, that day I will begin a fresh, as
though it were the first day that ever I began to do any good thing.

Fourthly to celebrate the day of my conversion every year as a solemn day,
and as the day of my birth, wherein I was brought forth and dedicated to God,
and therein, and in some other principal fea^^es in the year, to to call to
mind the first fervor, devotion, and zeal, that God did then give me, and
this I ought to do very often a^ other times also.

Eighthly, I must not make small account of little sins, not be careless in
committing the^, but always carry that mind, that I would not offend God
willingly, even in the least venial sins for any thing: and I must never
think any thing little, wherewith so high a majesty is offended. For one that
cares not to committ little sins, gives the devil a great advantage, to
draw him into greater.

Ninthly, as I must take heed of pampering my body too much, and ought to take
some ordinary corporal punishment, as of fasting, discipline, haire-cloth, or
the like: fo on the other side, I must have care of my health, and so temper
all my spiritual exercises and bodily afflictions with discretion, that I may
continue in them still, and not make my self unable to persevere long, by the
indiscreet greedines of a short time, and to use discretion* these observations
will avail.

First, before God to think whether doing this or that, I may be able to
continue my undertaken course in his service, my body, force, health, and other
cares, comber^, or businesses considered.

Secondly, to ask counsel of spiritual men, long practiced in spiritual
affairs.

Thirdly, to read spiritual books, entreating of that which I design to do.

Fourthly, to pray that God with his light and grace, would lighten my heart, to
know and perform that which is fittest for me, and most to his glory.

An order how to spend every day.
THE SIXTE Chapter.
IN time of health hours of going to bed and rising, may be either nine and
five, or ten and six, or according to the strength or weakness of every man's
body, so they be certain.

After I am up for a good pretty space, it is good not to talk, but at the
least for half a quarter of an hour to busy my mind in prayer and meditation,
and then to talk if need be: because my business with God being greater than
with any man, it is fit that he should first be talked with of matters
concerning my soul, and the^ others of worldly things,

I must procure to go neatlie and handsome in my attire, agreablie to my
calling* and to avoid all kind of indecency which breeds dislike and
contempt, and does rather offend, than please God: when I am ready I must go
to my prayers appointed. And before I set my self to pray, I must call to
mind what I promised to do for any at that time, or what other necessary
business I have the^ to dispatch, and I must keep touch i^ my words in the
least things, and cut off occasions of being interrupted as nere as I may. In
prayer I must observe these things.

In the first beginning, I am to consider the presence of God and of his Saints.

Secondly, for the better procuring of atte^tion, to take my good Angel, or
some other Saint, as it were, to say with me.

Thirdly, I must think a few, well said, better then many hastiely shufled
over. It is good sometime to omit some vocal prayers, and to spend the time
in meditation of some part of Christ's passion, or of his life, or of mine own
sins, as the book of meditation gives notice.

After prayer, on woorking days, I must go presently about some woork or
exercise that may be of some profitte, and of all other things, take heed of
idleness the mother of all vices.

Toward eleven (if company and other more weighty causes will permit) I may
say my beads, and call to mind how I have spent the morning, asking God grace
to spend the afternoon better.

Dinner times, on flesh days, may be eleven: on fasting days, toward twelve
of the clock: When I am called to dinner, I must think for what end I am to
eat, that is to help nature, and not to content mine own appetite.

I must learn my little children (if I have any) to say some short grace, or
at the least, I must say grace to my self: and when I am set, before I lay
hand to my trencher, I many pause a while, and in my mind desire God to give
me temperance, and mind^ulnes of his presence.

At meals I must neither be too curious or doubtful of what I eat, neither
too precise in the quantity finenes, or coursnes of the meat, but of that
which God has sent, take a co^petent meal, measurable to my need, and not
hurtful to my health.

After dinner I must thank God for his gifts, remembering that he has fed me
for this end, that I should be more able to serve him, and do my duty* and
when I retire to my chamber, it is good to say some short prayer of
thanksgiving, desiring God to make me thankful for all his benefits.

I must remember that many have wanted that which I have had, and would have
been glad of my leauings: and therefore I ought to have care and regard of the
poor, procuring something for them, and some times goeing my self to see
them served, considering Christ in their persons.

If I have strangers I may keep them company, and talk friendly and merrily
with them as occasion shall serve, directing my behavior agreeable to my former
rules of conversation, and having this intention in my talk, that amity and
love may be maintained, and all breach and unkindness avoided.

I must, if time and place will permit me, be always doing some profitable
thing, to avoid sloth, directing mine intention in all my exercises to this
end, that I may avoid idleness, and temptations, and bestow my time in good
sort to Gods glory.

After dinner, I must call to mind, whether I have any promise to perform, or
any other business to do that is not ordinary: that I neither forget the thing,
nor time appointed for it.

About three of the clock in winter, and fou^e in summer, I may go to
Euensong, and use the same order of my morning ptaier. It is good for me
sometimes to go about the rooms of the house, and to see that they be kept
clean, and handsome, thinking that God is delighted in cleanenesse, both
bodily and ghostly, and detesteth sluttishnesse, as a thing which he
permits as a punishment of sin, and one of the scourges of hell.

A little before supper, it will be good to read some part of some good book,
procuring to take some benefitte by it* and continuing in one book until I have
read it over, and then begin some new: and if I have any book that I would
often read, I may take some time from my work, or the holy days* to read a
part thereof: but the time before supper, it is good to spend in continuing
that which I have begun, and when one is ended, to begin an other: When company
hinders me from doing these things at their due times, I need not be much
troubled for omitting the rest, so that my prayers be said: but in such
occu^^ants in steed of that I should have done* I must seek to make my
conversation meritorious, by having a good intention, and often renewing of the
same, and by watchfulnes to avoid all offense of God, leaving him in one
exercise, to serve him in an other, as he apointeth occasions to fall out.

Supper time may be six, and drinking times on fasting days, seven of the
clock. When I am called to supper I must remember what my intention ought to
be, and to take the same course that is prescr^^^^d for dinner.

After supper, I may talk as occasion shall serve, or walk for my health, or
read some pleasant, yet profitable book, as Catholic histories, or such like.

Toward the hour of going to bed, I mu^^e examne my self, first whether my
promises, or appointments concerning extraordinary things and business, be
performed: if I have forgotten any necessary thing, I must take order to
remember it, that I forget it not the second time.

This done, I must examine my conscience touching the thoughts, words, and
deeds of that day, and especially concerning the purposes that I have made in
the morninge, and how I have observed these rules, and what faults I have
committed of any moment.

After I have examined my conscience, and said my prayers, it is good to
abstain from talk that night (unless some just occasion require the
contrary) that my mind may be free from idle thoughts, when I go to sleep.

When I lie down to rest, my intention must not be so much for sloth, and
contentment of the body, a^ for necessity of keepinge my health, and that I may
rise fitter to serve God.

Also when I lie down, I may imagine to lie by the pilar, cross, maunger, or
some such place, where Christ was present, that when I wake in the morning he
may be the first that shall come into my mind.

Before I sleep, I must say some short thing to commend my self to God, my
good Angel, and some other Saints, and purpose by their help when the time of
rising comes, not to suffer my self to be overcome with floth, but as though
Christ called me, spedily to rise. I must also then set down where upon I
will think as soon as I awake, that God may have the first fruits of my
thoughts, for which the devil lays great wait.

On holy days.
I Must rise one hour, or half an hour, sooner then on other days: And if
it be a day of receiving, my first thought must be to think what a happy
ba^quet I am to go unto, desiring God to give me due preparation. I must seek
to say my prayers that day both more, and with greater devotion, and especially
after the communion.

In steed of my work, I must bestow those days in reading good books,
hearing sermons, and such like godly exercises, not lightly running over the^,
thinking it enough to have read or heard good things, but pawsing upon such
things as move my affection, and p^inting them well in my mind and memory.

Because I am like to be troubled with company more those days the^ others. I
must endeavor to recompense in this sort. First by often lifting up my heart to
God in talk. Secondly, by striving against occasions of evil speech, and by
not yeldinge to speak of other folks faults. Thirdly, in seekinge when
occasion serves to help those I talk with by mine example or words, And
finally to make my talk agreeable to the rules of conversation.

On principal Feasts, it is convenient to prepare my self before hand for
them, and to live a day or two before, as it were in expectation of them,
desiring the presence and solemnity of that day, wherein God does most
abundantly bestow his graces: that having heretofore been slack in his
service, I may that day begin of new, to take heart and courage, to amend my
life by the help and prayers of that Saint, or by the meritte and benefitte of
that action of Christ, the holy day shall, be.

For Confession and Receiuinge.
EVery sunday; and high feast, and all the festiual days of Christ, our Lady,
the Apostles, and such other principal holy days, I must prepare my self the
day before to receive.

On Saterdaie at night, or on the eve if occasion serve, I must go to
confession, and withal diligence, the nearer the time comes of receiving,
the more wary must I be of my behavior* I must go to confession twice in a
week, Wednesday and Saturday at night, when there comes not a great holy
day, or some other day:

When I want means to go to confession, I must notwithstanding at my usual
times prepare my self, and to almighty God make even in words the same
confession, that I would to my ghostly father: for though it be not a
Sactament without absolution of a true Pre^st, yet is it a godly thing, and
good to keep me in ure, and my conscience in awe*

Every year twice, once about Christmas, if I may, upon Newyeers day, or
Epiphany, and another time about S. Mary Magdalens day. I must make a general
confession of the half year last past: and so from time to time, taking those
two times especially to renew my self, and to remember Gods goodness
toward me, and to begin with new feruor more earnestly to serve him, as my
duty and his benefits require. I must also compare one time with an other, and
see whether I go forward or backwards in Gods service, and endeavor every
half year, to gain some ground of my self, and to amend some one
imperfection.

When I make my general confession, if I have one certain ghostly father, I
must yield up an account of my conscience concerning th^se points following.
First how I find my self affected in Gods ser^^ce, and whether I find a
con^entment and delight therein, or rather a tediousnes and dulnes.

Secondly, what prayers I use to say, and how much time I spend therein,
and what taste, or trouble I feel in the same.

Thirdly, what temptations and passions I am most troubled withal, and what
means I do use to resist them.

Fourthlie, what imperfections I am most prone unto, what virtue I chiefly
labor to attain, and which I have most facility to practice.

Fifthly, what mortification I do use to break mine own will, and what other
cha^^isement to mortify my body.

Sixthly, what desire I find in my self, to amend my former faults, and to
begin a better course.

Seauenthly, how I find my self for my resignation of mind to Gods will, and
for suffering and loss, punishment, sickness, or disgrace that he should lay
upon me.

Lastly, how my health is aggreable to my exercises, and whether I find not my
body or mind ouercharged with too much prayer, penance, or such other actions
of devotion. These things are convenient to be uttered, that the pastor
knowing the estate, disease, force, or weakness of his sheep, may be the abler
discreetly to direct it.

Every weeeke.
IN the beginning of the week, I must fore^see what holy days there are in
the same, that I may the better prepare my self for the^. Also in the
beginning of the week, I must think whether I have any extraordinary
business, temporal or spiritual to do, that having a foresight of it, I may
remember it and provide the better for it. When I read my rules, I may omit
the reading of other books, unless leisure serve me to do both.

I must twice a week at the least, go see into the offices of the house, and
survey the household book: but if I have the government of it wholly in mine
own hands, I must do it oftener, having regard that was^e and lauishing be
avoided, frugality used, and behauing my self in the demeaning of temporal
things, rather as a steward or bailife of an others goods, then an owner of
mine own, seeing that in truth I must at my dy^^g day be liable to God, how I
have spent every farthing.

I must ^uery week read some part of this rule of good life, so dividing it,
that at the months end I may have read al^ seeking to print these spiritual
directions in my mind, and endeavoring to put them in daily practice.

Of Rules in sickness.
THE SEVENTH Chapter.
IF my sickness be great, I need not use any vocal prayers at all, more then
in the morning to commend my self to God with a (...) and Aue, and Creed: or
if I cannot well say so much, now and then I must call upon God with short
prayers, as Lord Jesus save me: Lord strengthen me: Lord grant me patience,
and such like.

In sickness when I can bear it, it will be good sometimes, to have a part of
some good book read unto me, but yet not much, for fear* of hurting my health.

As in health I ought to be obedient to my superiors and by diligent
observation of my rules, to show my duty toward God: so in my sickness I
must be contented to be ruled by the physicians, and such as have ca^e of me in
things belonging to my bodily health, and must persuade my self, that in that
time, one chief rule I have to observe, is to be patient and tractable, which
in such case counteruaileth the merit of all my usual exercises. I must also
assure my self, that I do God good service, when I do any necessary thing,
and take any convenient recreation, that may further my health.

I must take heed of being testy or froward, which sickness for the most part
does cause, thinking that how much pain soever I suffer, Christ suffered far
more for my sake, and far more had I suffered long since in Hell, if God had
dealte with me as I diserued.

So soon as I fall sick, I must procure that I be confessed, and if my
sickness continue long I must keep my custom of receiving, at the lest every
eight days, though I must not think that I am then bound to so much
preparation or prayer, as when my body was in good health.

If I see my disease dangerous, and have cause to fear death, I must procure
to have some good body with me too put me often in mind of God, of the Passion
of Christ, and seek to have my viaticum* and other Sacraments, and
preparations of Gods Church. It is good also to have my will ready before I
fall to any extremity, and a certain order set down, for all temporal
matters, that I be not cumbred with then when it stands me most upon to look
to my sou^e.

Of the care of Servants.
THE EIGHT Chapter.
I Must see that they lie not out in the nights, but that I know what becomes
of them: I must not keep such as are great swearers, or given to any great or
notorious vice, unless there be great likelihood, and certain hope of their
amendment. I must procure by what mean conuenie^tly I may, that they may have
necessary instruction in matters apertaining to the salvation of their souls.

I must take special heed of any secret meetings, messages, or more then
ordinary liking, betwixt the men and the women of my family. I must see that
the men have no haunte of women to their chambers, least lewdness be cloaked
under some other pretense.

I must have great regard, that my chiefest officiers and me^ of most account
be trusty persons, of good life and example, because the rest will follow as
they shall lead the^.

I must seek as much as may be, that my servants be not idle, nor suffered to
use any great gaming, sor by the one they shall fall into lewed life, by the
other into swearing, vnthri^tines, robbing and such vices.

I must see that they have their wages at due times, least for want they fall
into bad courses. When they do not their duties, I must rebuke them,
agreablie to the quality of their fault, and not wink at great matters, lest
they wax careless, and bold to do the like again yet must my rebukes be
^e^pered with gravity and mildnes.

Of the care of my children.
THE NINTH Chapter.
I Must think that my children, so long as they are under age and in my power
or custody, ought to be kept as my self; I having in this time to answer for
them. I must take heed they come not amongst such servants as are like to
teach them to swear, or any other vice, and I must give special warning that
none do it.

I must set honest and sound persons to govern the^, that may also teach them
virtue and goodness, yet not trusting too much to my servants care but that I my
self have a special eye over them, and take an account what they do.

I must use them to deu^tion by little and little, not cloying them with too
much at once, but rather seeking to make them take a delight in it* I must
teach them their, Pater noste^. Aue, and Creed, and other good prayers, and
make them perfect in the ten Commandments, and those of the church, and
the points of faith, especially those that heretics deny.

I mu^t keep them always occupied in some profitable thing, allotting them
according to their age, more or less time to play: I must often speak to them
of the Passion of Christ, and of the lives of Saints.

I must on the one side break them from their wills, and punish them as they
deserve, yet remembering also that they are young, and not keeping them in too
much subjection, which may breed in them base and servile minds, and make
their love less toward me: and I never ought to beat any child in mine
anger.

I must procure that they be taught such exercises and qualities, as are fit
for those of their degree, and yet have a chief care, that good and honest
persons be about them.

I must not use them to vain dresses and costly appa^ell, but rather often
show them the vanity thereof: yet must they not be kept too strait in that or
any other thing, that they are afterward to have, lest they being too much
bard from it, make them too eager of it, when they come to enjoy it at their
own will.

I must use them to give alms, to make much of the poor, and to use reverence
to aged persons, and spiritual men, and praise often the true religion and
virtue of their parents, and ancestors in their hearing, that it may move
them to imitate their good works. I must tell them often of the Abbeys, and
the virtue of the old Monks and Friars, and other Priests, and religious men
and women, and of the truth and honesty of the old time, and the iniquity of
ours. I must use them to read good books, that are fittest for their capacity,
and see them kept from vain books of love, heresy, and such like

I must harten them often as they grow in years to suffer adversity, and to
digest grief, especially in Gods cause and a good quarrel, telling them the
examples of others, and how good a thing patience and constancy is.

When they are fit to go to school, I must procure that they have discreet
and calm teachers, and such as are not choleric, hasty, or cursed, lest they
take dislike and tediousnes in learning and they must be rather won unto it
by praise and emulation of others, then by beating and stripes* I must see that
they be taught such ciuility, curtesy, and complementes, as their degree^, and
the time requires: and frame them as much as may be, to be gentle, humble, and
affable eue^ to the meanest, rebuking them for angry and sharp words, or
disdainful behavior, even to their inferiors.

I must be times as age will permit them, inure them in confession, and often
use of the Sacraments, the only remedy for their unstaid and green wits.
I must not let the boys and girls be much together, especially out of sight,
after eighte and nine years age, least they fall to unhappiness. Likewise my
daughters, must not be much amongst the men, nor my sons amongst the women.

When they come to such age as they must of force be in many companies, I must
procure some sound and honest persons to be for the most part with them, to
inform me of their courses. I must make them in any wise to beware of lewd
conversation, which is the overthrow of youth, and therefore cause this point
to be beaten into them by good and zealous men.

I must never assure or marry them, until they be of sufficient age to make
their choice, and frame their likeinge: neither force them to any match least
they curse me all their lives after, as it often happens.

Of Temptation.
THE TENTH Chapter.
FIrst I must learn to know when I am tempted, for if I can find my
tempta^ion* I may reckon it half overcome. For if I have fear of God, or care
of my soul, I cannot but arm my self earnestly to resist, knowing that
temptation proceeds from an enemy, to whom I have resolved by Gods grace
never to consent, what misery or trouble soever I endure,

How to know temptations and good motions.
IT is always a spiritual desolation original and proceeding from the
devil, when it darkeneth and disqu^eteth the mind, awaketh and stirs up
our passions, when it draws to external and earthly solaces, leaving in the
mind a tediousnes and unwillingness to prayer and other works of devotion.

Also when it diminishes our affiance and trust in God, and d^iueth to a kind
of despair of Gods mercy, or perseuering in his service, making it seem an
irksome and impossible thing, and moving us to forsake it: and when I find my
self troubled in this sort, I must assure my self without all doubt, that I am
tempted by the d^uell, and therefore arm my self to resist him, by doing that
which those temptati^^ dissuade me from.

On the other side, comfort that is caused by Gods spirit, is known by these
signs: it incenseth the mind by a quiet and calm motion, to the love of God,
without any inclination to any creatures love, more then for Gods only glory,
and it breeds a kind of inward light and brightness, whereby for the time the
mind sees after a most effectual sort, the necessity, profit, and true
comfort that is in Gods service, and conceiueth a contempt and dislike of
worldly delights, and tastes that which is the greatest felicity in this
life, that is so assured and perfect contentme^t in being in God^ grace, and
seeking to please him, that it then judges no contentement in the world like
or co^parable unto it, as in truth there is none.

Also true spiritual comfort brings a deligh^e and desire to think of the
benefittes of God, the io^es of Heaven, the comfort of meditation and talking
with God. Finally it confirms our faith, quickneth our hope, and increases
charity, and leaves the mind with a sweet taste of joy, quiet and free from
all cumbers.

Sometimes the devil transformeth him self into an Angel of light, and at the
first when he knows our good desires and purposes, he seems to sooth us in
them, and to set us forward toward the performance thereof, but in the end he
draws us to his biasse, and by corrupting our intention, or by perverting the
manner, time, or other circumstance of the due executions, makes the whole
action worthles and faulty, though other wise virtuous in it self.

There must be great heed taken in the beginning, middle, and end of our
thoughts: for when either at the last it tends to apparent sin, or
withdraws from the greater good* or tends to courses of less merit, or
more danger then we are in, or if it disquiet the mind, or be^eaue it of the
won^ed calm and love of virtue, it is a sign that the devil was the beginner
of it, whose property is to hinder good and withdraw us to evil.

When in any suggestion I find the serpent by his sting, that is the devil, by
the wicked end he moves me unto, it is good to untwist and reuerse his
motion, and to look backwarde even unto the beginning, and to mark what
plausible color he first pretented, that the next time I may the better epsy
his cunning, subtle dealing, and driftes.

How to behave our^ selves in time of Temptations.
IN the time of my desolation and disquiet of mind, I must not enter into any
deliberation, or go about to alter any thing concerning the state of my
soul, or purposed course of life, but perseuete in my former resolutions, made
in time of my good and quiet estate, wherein I was free from passion, and better
able to judge of things convenient to my good: yet may I and ought I resolve
upon such helps, as are fi^t to resist and repel my d^scontented thoughts
(so they be not prejudicial to my former purposes) as prayer, penance,
confession and such like remedies.

In temptations and troubles of mind, I must remember that before time I have
had the like, and they have in fine passed, leauinge me very glad and joyful
when I resisted them, and sorrowful when I yield too much unto them, and
therefore I must think that these also will pass after a while, and I shall
feel the like joy in having resisted and overcome them And in the mean time I
must with patience endure the cumber and trouble of them, assuring my self,
that God therewith is highly pleased* and the ennemy most effectually subdued.

Neither the multitude, con^inuance, nor badnesse of any thought must breed any
scruple or disquiet in me. For not to have them, is not in my power, but only
not to consent unto them: and so long as with deliberation I have not
consented, nor willingly, or with delight stayed in them, I have not, sinned
any more then if I had only had them in a dream.

If before I had evil thoughts, I had a resolu^e mind never to yield to any
mortal sin: and afterward when I remember my self, and mark that I was in
a bad thought, I still find the same resolution, it is a sign that in the
time of my distraction and bad imagination, I did not willingly consent or
offend in them: neither is it like but my mind being so well affected, I should
have easily remembered directly and without doubt, if I had yielded farther
then I ought.

Desolations are permitted of God for three causes.

First, for a punishment of our sins, remisnes, and coldness in Gods service.

Secondly, to try whether we be true servants of God, or only hierlinges,
that are willing to labor no longer then they receive the hire and stipend of
present comfort and delight.

Thirdly to assure us that it passes the reach and compass of our ability,
either to attain or to maintain in us the fervor of devotion, the intensiue
love of God, the abundance of godly tears, and other spiritual graces and
comfortes, which we must acknowledge to proceed of Gods gratuity and mere
liberality, not of our own force or desert.

It is good while I feel the sweetness of Gods visitation and presence, to
fortify my self against the desolations that will ensue, and remembering those
that are past, to think that all troubles, will as well pass, as comfortes,
and that our whole life, is but a continual succession and mixture of sorrow
and joy, the one always ouertaking the other, and neither of them continuing
long together: And therefore I must settle my mind in a kind of indifferency
unto them both, as it shall please God to send them.

First, to know it a thing that comes from my mortal enemy, and tends to
my eternal destruction.

To look for temptations before hand, and not to think them novelties, but
necessary sequels of our enimity and hostility with the devil, with whom we
must never be friends.

To resist them stoutly at the first, and to crush the serpent in the head, for
nothing makes the Devil to become so furious and violent, or to redouble his
suggestions, as to perceive the soul dismaide with his temptations, or not
expecting by the confidence in Gods help and mercy, an assured victory.

To bear patie^tly the multitude and continuance of the^, assuring my self
that they will have an end ere long.

To think on the joy I shall have for ^ot consenting unto them, and the crown
of glory I shall enjoy.

To remember how often I have been as grievously annoied with the like, and yet
by Gods help have given the devil the foil.

Not to strive with unclean temptations, but to turn my mind to think of
other matters, and to change the place, or work, to find some way to put me
out of those fantasies.

To resist vices, by practicing and doing acts of the contrary virtues.

To arm my self, before hand, by getting those virtues which are opposite to
such vices as I am most inclined unto. For in those does the Devil always seek
his advantage to overthrow: me.

In grievous affaults to open them to my ghostly father, and going to
confession, thereby to obtain by means of the Sacrament, more ability to
resist.

In extreme troubles to use some bodily chastisment* to call for help of our
Blessed Lady, my good Angel and the assistance and prayers of other Saints:
especially to humble my self in the sight of God acknowledging mine own
weakness and wholly relying upon his help, and earnestly in word and heart
calling for his assistaunce, and firmly trusting in his mercy, yea and offering
my self (so as he forsake me not) to suffer these and all other temptations
whatsoever it shall please God to permit, even so long a^ he shall think good:
for of all other things this most overcomes the Devil, when he sees we
turn his evil motions and troubles, to so great meritte and victory of
ourselves.

A Prayer in Temptation.
O Merciful Jesus, the only refuge of desol^te and afflicted souls: O Jesus
that have made me and redeemed me, in whom all things are possible unto me, and
without whom I am able to do nothing, thou see who I am, that her^ prostrate
my prayers, and pour out my heart unto thee: what I would have, and what is fit
for me, thou know: my soul is buried in flesh and blood, and would be feign
dissolved, and come unto thee. I am urged against my will, and violently drawn
to think that which from my heart I deteste, and to have in mind the poison
and bane of my soul. O Lord thou know my mould and making, for thy hands
have framed me, and with fleash and skin thou have clothed me: and lo this
flesh which thou have given me, draws me to my ruin, and fights against
the spirit: if thou helpest not, I am overcome: if thou forsakest me, I must
needs faint, why do thou set me contrary unto thee, and make me
grievous and a burden unto my self? D^ddest thou create me to cast me away?
Did thou redeem me to damn me for ever? It had been good for me never to
have been borne, if I were borne to perish* O most merciful father, where are
thy old and wonted mercies? Where is thy gra^ions sweetness and love? How long
shall mine enemy rejoice over me, and humble my life upon earth, and place me
in darcknes like the dead of the world? What am I O Lord, that thou set
me to fight all alone against so mighty, subtle, and cruel enemies, that
never cease to bid me a perpetual battle? O Lord why do thou show thy
might against a leaf, that is tossed wi^h every wind, and persecutest a dry
stuble? will thou therefore damn the wo^ke of thy hands? will thou throw me
^ro^ thy face, and ^ake ^hy holy spirit from me* A^asle O Lord whither shall I
go from thy face? or whi^her shall I fly from thy spirit? whither shall I fly
from thee incensed, but to thee appeased? whi^her from thee as just, but unto
thee as merciful? do with me Lord that which is good in thine eyes, for thou will do all things in righteous judgment. Only remember that I am flesh and
blood, frail of my self and impotent to resist, show thy self a Savior unto
me, and either take away mine enemies, or grant me grace that without wound or
fault, by thee and with thee, I may overcome the^ sweet Jesus, Amen.

Consideratio^s to settle the mind in the course of virtue.
THE XI. CHAPTER.
The first consideration, how weighty a thing the business of man's soul is.
Whosoever being desirous to take dew care of his soul, co^mencing a
spiritual course, first must consider, that he has taken such a business in
hand that for the importance, necessity, and profit thereof it surmounteth all
other traffickes, trades and affairs of the world, yea and to which only all
other business ough^ to be addressed: for therein our manage is about the
salvation of our soul, our chief jewel and treasure: of which if in the short
passage of our brittle and uncertain life, we take not that due care that we
ought, for a whole eternity after, we shall evermore repent and be sorry for it,
and yet never have the like opportunity again to help it.

Secondly, the better to conceive the moment and weight of this business, let us
consider what men use to do for their bodily health. For we see they make so
principal a reckning of it, that they spare no cost nor toil, nor leave any
thing unattempted that may avail them to attain it. They suffer them selves
to be launced, wounded, pined, burnt with red hot irons, besides diverse other
extreme to^ments, only for this end. How much greater miseries ought we to
endure? How much greater pain and diligence ought we to employ for this health
of our soul? which is to survive when the body is dead, rotten, and devoured
with worms: and to survive in such sort, that it must be perpetually tormented
in hell with intolerable torments, or enjoy endless felicity in heaven. And
therefore of how much greater worth and weight we think the soul, and the
eternal salvation or damnation thereof, then the momentary health or sickness
of our body, so much greater account and esteem ought we to make of the
business of our soul, then of any other worldly or bodily affair whatsoever.

For what avails it a man (says Christ) to gain the whole world and make
wrack of his own soul? If therefore we keep diue^se men for diverse offices
about our body, and many thousands to live by serving and providing things for
every part thereof: If we spend so much time in feeding, refreshing, and
reposing of the same If the greatest portion of our revenues, (be they never
so large) be consumed, in the meats, pomp, sportes and pleasures thereof: How
much more ought we to seek as many helps, services, and purueiers for our
soul, for who^e only sake our body was given, and of whose good the welfare of
the body only proceeds?

Thirdly, the necessity and poise of this care of our soul, may be gathered of
this, that all other matters are in^rea^ed with men, or some other creatures:
but this business of our soul is with God him self, who by how much he ^s
nobler and worthier than any of his creatures, so much more is the weight of
this matter, that can not be dealt with any without him, and so much more
diligence ought there to be employed therein, especially in this time, wherein
God is still ready to farther our endeavors in this behalf, where as when time
is expired, condemn he may for our negligence, or reward us for our
carefulnes, but not help us any more to alter the estate of our soul, be it
never so badde, or miserable.

Fourthly, we may gather how material and important this matter is, by the life
of Christ and his Saints, who withdrawing the^ selves from all other worldly
affairs, thought it work enough to attend to this business of their soul;
and whosoever are now solemnized and honored in Gods Church, they are honored
only in this that they have with a glorious Conclusion, happily and constantly
accomplished this business to Gods glory, and their own salvation. And who so
considers the intolerable torments of Martyrs, the extreme austerity, sharp
life, and penance of Confessors, the painful agonies, and conflicts of
Virgins, the rough storms and troubles of all Gods Saints, and does remember
withal that they undertook them for no other respect, but only for the better
bringing this business of their soul to an end, it will soon apeare how
weighty a thing, and how precious the salvation of the soul is, which they
did think not too dear bought with all the miseries, sorrows, and pains,
that this world could afford. Let us also consider that what soever moved
the^ to such care and earnestnes in this behalf, has no less place
doubtless in us than in the^, seeing that our soul is as dear bought, as
much worth, created to as great glory as theirs: the danger of our salvation
rather more than any way less than theirs. God has as much right in us as in
them, and we as many titles of bond and duty to serve him as they. Finally we
are assaulted by the same ennemies, enuironned with the like hazzardes, and
subject to as many, yea more occasions of sin, and allurements to damnation
than they. Who therefore see^h not that we are in every respect to account the
care of our souls as important and necessary to us, as ever it has been to
any: Wherefore, let not the wise man glory in his wisdom, nor the strong man
in his might, nor the rich man in his riches, says God by his Prophet Hiere 9.
But let him that glories, glory in this, that he knows me, for I am the
only Lord that works mercy, judgment, and justice upon the earth, and these
things please me, says our Lord: as who would say, it is folly and vanity
to glory and rejoice in any other thing, then in the knowledge and service of
God, and procuring mercy and mild judgment for our soul.

How we ought to arm our minds against temptations that happen when we seek?
earnestly to serve God.
The second consideration.
FIrst, seeing this business of our soul is of so great moment, he that
earnestly goes about the same, must offer him self up unto God, and be most
ready to endure constantly all the dangers, cumbers, and difficulties that
shall happen, and resolve never (by Gods grace) to be dismayed and beaten back
from his purpose, by any trouble or encounter what soever, knowing that
glorious and honorable enterprises, can never be atchiued without many
contradictions. Wherefore let him persuade him self, that when he has settled
his mind seriously to follow this business, hell it self, and all the
ennemies of God and man's soul will conspire against him: the flesh to allure
him to the dilightes of the senses, and to recall him to the vomit of his
abandoned pleasures: the world to intise him with pomps and vanities, with
ministering occasions of sin, and provoking by evil examples: yea, if that
will not serve, by terrifying him with persecutions, extortions, obloquies,
slanders, and torments, and with all kind of disgrace. Finally, the devil (a
professed enemy of all those that take care of their souls) will seek to
entrappe him with a thousand trains, passions, and subtle temptations,
leaving nothing that he thinks may remove a man from these endeavors
tending to his salvation.

Secondly, the case standing thus, let that saying of Scripture come to our
mind, My son, coming to the ^^ruice of God, stand in justice and fear, and
prepare thy sou^e, unto temptation. Wherefore he that enters into the way of
life, must remember that he is not come to a play, pastime, or pleasure, but to
a continual rough battle and fight, against most unplacable and spightfull
enemies; and let him resolve him self, never in this world to look for quiet
and peace, no not so much as for any truce for a time, but arm him self for a
perpetual combat, and rather think of a multitude of happy victories (which
by Gods grace he may obtain) then of any repose or quietness from the rage
and assaults of his ennemies. Let him see and peruse the pattern of his
capitains course, who from his birth to his death, was in a restless battle,
persecuted in his swaddling clowtes by Herod, annoied the rest of his infancy by
banishment, wa^dring and need In the flower of his age slaundered, hated,
pursued, whipped crucified, and most barbarously misused: In the same sort were
all his Apostles, and all his principal soldiers handled: for whom he loves
he chastises, and proves like gold in the furnace. And therefore no man
must think it a new thing to be tempted and troubled, when he once runs a
virtuous course, contrary to the liking of his enemies. For the disciple is
not above his master, nor the servant above his Lord, who as we see had the
same entreaty.

Thirdly, lest we should be aghast and discouraged at the expectation and fear
of so many discomfortes; and the incessant malice of so spiteful ennemies, let
us remember the words of Elizeus: that more stand with us, then against us.
Against the corruption of nature we have grace. Against the devil we have God,
who will never suffer us to be tempted above our force: Against the power of
hell we have the prayers of Saints: Against the miseries of the body, the
spiritual comfort of the mind, which God allotteth in such measure as our
necessity requires: and if there were nothing else, this were enough to make
troubles welcome in this case, for that thereby we purchase an inestimable glory
for a short and passing combat, the comfort whereof nether eye has seen, nor
ear heard, nor heart conceived. And on the other side by the same, we avoid
other intolerable and external torments of Hell, the least whereof, passes all
those that can be suffered in this world. And therefore is our change most
happy, that by the pain of a short life, avoid the misery of an eternal
death, and deserve the unspeakable happiness of the life everlasting. For this
cause says Saint James; Think you it all joy (my brethren,) when you shall
fall into diverse te^ptatio^s, knowing that the trial of your faith works
patience, and patience has a perfect work, that you may be perfect and
entire, failing in nothing.

Of the watchfulness and attention required in the care of our soul.
The third Consideration.
Seeing this weighty affair of our souls health is hemmed in, and besette with
so many and manifest perilles and troubles, it stands us upon most watch^ully
to take he^d to every thought, word, and d^ede tha^ passes, lest through the
number, and subtility of our enemies trains, we be often intrapped: for it is
hard to touch pitch, and not to be defiled, to live in flesh a spiritual life*
to converse in the world, without worldl^e affections. Wherefore as a Legate
that is to deliver his embassage before a great presence of Peers and Nobles,
has not only regard to his matter, but also to his words, voice and actions,
that all be suitable to the weight of his message: So we having to work this
exploite of our soul before the eyes of those that lay wait to take us in any
trippe, ought to be very warye, even in our least thoughts and deeds, for
fear that we offend the presence of God, and give occasion of triumph and
vic^ory to our deadly foes. And for this says the scripture, keep thy self
very watchfully.

Secondly, to attain this diligent and attentive care to all our actions, let
us consider what men use to do, that carry great treasure by places haunted by
thieves, how warily they see to their way, how often they look about them, how
many times they prepare themselves, some times to fight, and otherwhiles to
run away: Likewise how warily he walks, and how careful he is never to
stumble nor fall, that carries in each hand a thin glass of liquor very
precious, through stony and rough places: And when we have marked these men's
carefulnes in these inferior matters, let us remember, that much more respect
is necessary in us, whose treasure is more precious then any worldly iewelles,
and yet do we carry it in earthen and frail vessels, in the midst of so
many thieves, as there are passions, and disordered appetites in us, as there
are Devils in waire for us, and as there are stumbling stones, and occasions of
sin set round about us. To procure this attention, the most effectual
helps are these.

First, to think how careful we should be to do all things well, if this
present day were the last that ever we should live in this world (as
peradventure it may be) and that at the end thereof, we were to be conuented
before a most severe and ^igourous judge, who according to the deserts of that
days actions, should pass the sentence of life or death upon us.

Secondly, to remember that God is in his own substance, power, and true
presence, in every place, and sees both our outward and inward actions, more
then we our selves, and therefore let us seek in every thing so to behave our
selves, that we fear not to have God a witness and behoulder of all that we
do, think, or say, and let us ask him grace to do nothing unworthy his
sight.

Thirdly, we must consider the carlesnes of our life past, remembering how often
we have fought against God, with his own weapons, and abused the force that he
has afforded, in every part of our body and mind, and therefore as S. Paul
Warns, as we have exhibited our members to serve uncleanness and iniquity, to
iniquity: So now let us exhibit our members to serve justice unto
sanctification.

Fourthly, to procure this attention, it is good oftentimes in the day when we
are about our ordinary actions, to use some short prayers or some one verse
of a Psalm, or any other short petition of Gods grace, aid, and assistance:
for these short prayers, are fuel of devotion, causes of attention, food of
the soul, preparations against temptations, and assured helps to attain any
virtues: therefore it is good to use them in lieu of sighs, and in the
beginning of every chief action, directing therein our intention and action,
to Gods glory and service, and our good.

Of the necessity of perseuera^ce in continuing watchful over our selves.
The last consideration.
FIrst seeing the su^me and compleme^t of al ver^ue consists in the
continuance and progress in it: perseverance of all other things, is most
necessary in this business: to the better a^taining whereof, these considerations
may prevail.

First, to consider by whose instinct and motion I began to take special
care of my soul, and I shall find that being a thing contrary to the
inclination of flesh and blood, and above the reach of nature, to resolve upon
so painful and wary a course, in hope of a reward and joy that faith does
promise, that I say God only, and no other was the author and mouer of my
heart unto it, and therefore unless I mean directly to resist God, and run a
contrary course to that which he prescribes, I must resolve my self to
persevere to the end in that which I have happily begun.

Secondly, the end of this enterprise was to serve God, to bewail my former
sins, and to work by Gods help the sal^a^ion of mine own soul: and when I
resolved upon these means, I was in a state free from passion, and as w^ll
able to choose thinge^ convenient, a^ I could be any other time, and wholly bent
to do that thing which was for my greatest good. Wherefore seeing I can never
aim at a better end, nor be in better plighte to make a sounder ch^^^e, my
surest way is to persevere stil^ in my resolution to the end, never altering my
designeme^t, unless it be ^o a better, and further my course.

Thirdly, I must co^side^ who he is, that that would make me forsake it: For if
God moved me unto it, doubtless it is the D^u^ll would remove me from it: for
God cannot be c^ntrary to him self, neither uses he to alter our minds but
only from evil to good, or from good to better: therefore unless I mean to
yield wittingly unto the Devil, and to follow mine enemies counsel unto mine
own perdition, I must persevere unto the end: For with what pretext soever the
Devil seeks to cover his motion, sure it is, that his drifte is, to draw me
from God and goodness, and to damn my soul for how can he intend any thing
to my good, that bears me such a cancred malice, that he cares not to
increase his own pain, so that he may work me any spiritual, yea or corporal
harm?

Fourthly* I must print that saying of Christ in my mind, He that perseuereth
unto the end shall be saved. For not he that begins, nor he that continues
for a month, or a year, or a short time, but only he that perseuereth to
the very end of his life, shall be saved W^erfore the same cause that moved me
to begin, ought also to move me to continue, that the merit and crown of my
good resolution be not cut off by any want of perseverance. Let not the cries
of mine enemies move me: let me with S. Paul say, the world is crucified to me,
and I to the world: and with David, it is good for me to cleave unto God.
Finally let me imitat the example of Christ that perseuered o^ the cross unto
death for my sake, though often called upon to come down.

Fifthly, I must consider that in what state soever of grace or merit of
damnation, I begin the next life, I must and shall undoubtedly persevere in it,
according to the word of Solomon; whersoeuer the tree faleth, there shall it be
toward south or north, that is, toward heaven or hell: for both the pain of
this continues for ever, and the joy of the other after it is once begun
(for it may be deferred for a time by the pains of purgatory,) is also
everlasting.

If therefore I will persevere in heaven, let me persevere in the way that
leads unto it, and never forsake the painefulnes of it till, the iourneis
end. The passions of this life are not condign or compatable to the fu^u^e
glory: and it is extreme folly for avoiding a short and transitory pain, to
hazard the loss of everlasting joy, and put my self in peril of pe^petuall
bondage, in far more extreme and endl^s torment.

The sinners persevere still in wickedness, and service of the Diu^ll. The
wordlinges persevere in pursuing vanities and following the world, yea and that
with most servile toil and base drudgery, and not without many bodily, and
ghostly harms, how much more ought a true servant of God persevere in his
service, and not seem by forsaking him in the way, to condemn him for a worse
master then the world or the Devil, whom many thousands serve to the end, to
their own damnation.

Let me remember that the first Angel, for want of perseverance became a
Devil. Adam for want of the same, was thrust out of paradise, and Judas of an
Apostle, became a prey of hell Finally, there be many thousands in hell fire
burning* that began very good courses, and for a time went forward in the same,
and yet in the end for want of perseverance were damned for ever.

What good a soul loses by mortal sin.
1. The grace of the holy Ghost.

2. The friendship and familiarity with God.

3. Al moral virtues infused, and of Gods spirit.

4. The inheritance of the kingdom of heaven.

5. The portion of Gods children, and patronage of his fatherly providence
which he has over the just.

6. The peace and quietness of a good, and clear conscience.

7. Many comfortes and visitations of the holy Ghost.

8. The fruit and merit of our former life, during the state of sin.

9. The merit and satisfaction of our present actions, albeit in the mean time
they dispose to Gods grace, and satisfy the precepts of God, and the Church.

10. A great portion of the communion of Saints, and of the participation of
the good works and prayers of the whole Church. And finally of the fruit, and
part of the merit of Christ's passion.

What misery the soul gains by mortal sin.
1. Condemnation to eternal pain.

2. To be quite cancelled out of the book of life.

3. To become of the child of God, the thrall of the Devil.

4. To be changed from the Temple of the holy ghost, into a den of theeue^^
a nest of vipers, a sincke of corruption.

How a soul is prepared to justification by degrees.
Faith sets before our eyes God as a just Judge. Angry with the bad*
Merc^full to the repe^ta^t.
Of this faith by the gift of Gods spirit a^iseth a fear by consideration of
Gods justice and of our own sins.
This fear is comforted by hope grounded in Gods mercy and the merits of
Christ.
Of this hope a^iseth love and charity unto Christ. For loving us without
desert Red^ming us with so many torments.
Of this love follows sorrow for offending Christ of whom we have bin so
mercifully. Created, Redeemed, Sanctified, Called to his faith.
Of this sorrow arises a firm purpose to avoid all sin, which God above all
things detesteth. The diuil above al things desires. Above all things
hurts the soul

Of devotion to Saints, and how our conversation may be in heaven, as Saint
Paul says it should.
FIrst (after a special devotion toward our B. Lady, whom above all pure
creatures we ought continually to affect and reverence) we must procure to have
a kind of reverent familiarity with our good Angel, who^ we ought to make
reckning of, as a most undivided and peculiar friend, who is unto us, as a
nurse unto a child, a shepherd unto a wandering lamb, a guide of our waie^,
a guardian of our persons, a counselor in doubts, a comforter in troubles, a
patron in our needs, and an assured friend in all our afflictions.

We must therefore love him as our friend, honor him as our superior, thank
him for his censure^ finally, use him as one to whom we may boldly both impart
our comfortes, and utter our desolations When we sleep he wa^ che^h over us,
when we wake he attend^th on us, wheresoever we be he gardeth us, whithersoeuer
we go he ass^^teth us, and whatsoever we do* he has still an eye to succor
us. We must therefore often commend our selves and our business unto him, often
ask his advise, and with our inward ear often harken what he says within
us. We must account him as an ordinary and assured friend, eu^rmore ready at
our call to afford his present help, and to bear us company in all
necessities.

Because our nature is delighted* and help with varity, we may every day in
the week use the patronage of diverse Saints, according to the order of our
Letanies.

On Sunday the blessed Trinity, our Lady, and the nine quires of Angels,
especially the three Archangells there named, Michael, Gabriel, and Raphael.

On monday, S. John Baptist, with all the Patriarchs and Prophets.

On Tuesday S. Peter with the rest of the Apostles, Evangelists, and Disciples
of Christ, and all the holy Innocents.

On Wednesday S. Steven with all the holy Martirs.

On Thursday S. Siluester, with a^l the holy Bishops, Confessors, and Doctors.

On Friday S. Benedict with all the holy Priests, Levites, Monks, Eremites,
and Religious men.

On Saturday S. Mary Magdalen, with all the holy Virgins and Widows.

We must every day in the morning, so soon as we awake, commend our body,
soul, and affairs to God, and our patr^nes of that day.

In every principal action, we must commend our selves to some one of them,
desiring their helps and asista^ce. We must often in the day think what
guestes we have bidden that day into our soul, and seek to make it a sit
receipt for so honorable a company.

We must seek to imitate that virtue, which in these Saints most shined, who
are pat^ones of that day; As in our blessed Lady and the Angels, obedience and
cha^itie: In the Pa^riarchs and Prophets, tempe^ance* hope and holiness. In
the Apostles and Evangelists, zeal of souls, and of the honor of God In the
Martyrs patience and constancy. In the Bishops and Doctors, watchfulness
over our charge, and zeal of Gods truth, and sobriety In the religious
Fathers, penance, contempt of the world, discretion and austeritie. In the
Virg^ns, and widows, the subduing of our appetites, purity of heart and
chastity.

An other exercise of devotion to Saints.
IF I will keep my mind continually attentive in goodness, and go in
continual awe of offending* I may take this course. I must in every room of
the house where I dwell, imagine in some decent place thereof, a throne or chair
of estate, and ded^cate the same and the whole ^oome to some Saint, that
whenever I enter into it, I enter as it were into a chapel or church that
is devoted ^o such a Saint, and there^o^e in mind do that reverence that is
due to them.

And thus having in every room settled several Sain^es, and in mind
consecra^ed the same unto them, and decked it with such furniture as is fit
for such an inhabitant, the same house will be to me in a manner a Paradise,
and the consideration of the Saints presence, will be a continual bridle to
restrain me from ^rreue^ent demeanor, unfit for such a behoulder as there I
^aue placed, to be a witness^ and aider of mine actions: But to help my
memory, and to au^id confusion.

First, it is good to appoint in every room, some certain and de^erminac
place, where I mean to conceive the Saints presence.

Secondly, to choose some ce^taine and determinat ^aint, and when I have once
de^oted the place to one Saint, not to change, but still to keep the same,
for easier habituating my memory.

Thirdly, in those rooms wherein I am most conversant, I may place two, three,
or mo^e, as the room will minister co^nueniency to frame their places for the
better conceiving and remembering of them.

Fourthly, I must place such Saints in the room as are fittest to be patterns
and examples unto me in that action, for which that room principally se^ueth;
As in the dining chamber or pa^lour, saints of spare and regular diet, of sober
and virtuous conuersa^ion. In the b^d chamber, Saints given to short sleep and
watchfulness. In the Chapel, Sainte^ given to much prayer and devotion, and
so in other rooms.

Fifthly, I may in steed of Saints, place some mystery of Christ's life or
passion: as the last supper in the dining chamber: and such like.

Sixthly, not only in the house, but also in the wallkes, gardens, and orchards
about the house may I do the same: and so make my walks as it were short
pilgrimages, to visit such Saints as are patrones of the place I go unto.

Seue^thly, it is not good to place Saints in all the rooms in one day, but
first to consider well in every room the fittest place for that purpose, and
then to begin one day with one or two, and the the next day with two more, that
they may be the easher im^rinted in my memory.

Eighthly, it is good in some rooms to place austere, mournful and rigorous
Saints, conceiving them in attire suitable to their auste^itie and doleful
profession while they were alive, that when I find my self too lavish in
mirth, or too much inclined to pleasure, the company and presence of that
austere example, may temper my disposition

And likewise in steed of these Saints I may place some lamentable history of
the old or new Testament, or some representatio^ of death, hell, or judgment.
Likewise in other rooms, to place some glorious fair, and comfortable
Saints, histories, or figures, with all suitable to joy, that may serve me in
time of my heaviness to alay my sorrows: and the like in fear, hope,
presumption, despair, and such other passions, but especially in those which I
find my self most inclined unto.

Ninthly, I must take heed that I make not this exercise a toil, but rather a
spiritual recreation, and therefore I must not be too eager to do all things
on a sudden, but get the habit and custom of it by little and little, for so
will it prove an exercise of wonderful profit, easines, and contentment.

An other exercise to take occasion of Gods creatures, to serve and remember
God, and to attain virtue.
FIrst, concerning persons I may allote to every man and woman of the house
where I live a Saint, so that every one of the company shall with his presence
bring me in memory of his Saint, and whatsoever I do with any of them, I shall
always carry a respect to his Saint, and be afraid to offend.

Secondly, every one shall represent unto me some virtue or some vice: so that
when I see them, I may in one remember and practice humility; in an other
patience, modesty, obedience and such like: or on the other side, remember and
take heed of swearing, anger and such like faults, and be sorry that ever I
offended in them.

Thirdly, I may take occasion of other creatures to remember Gods mercies, as
by mon^, the selling of Christ: by meat, his last supper: by wa^er, the water
of his eyes and side, and washing of his Disciples feet: by drinking, his
e^sell and gall: by wood, his Cross and thorns: by stone, his grave: and so
in all other points of Christ's life and passion, and in all other things, the
consideration whereof may move me to goodness: as by fire to remember hell, by
ashes death, by light that discovers things that darcknes did hide, the
final judgment and day of general descouery, and by the beauty of the
elements, and by the pleasure and comfort of other creature, heaven.

This exercise must not be ordinary unless it be the first point, but now and
then used to recollect the mind after long distraction.

Certain Iaculatory prayers*
Gracious Lord, and sweet Savior, give me a pure inte^^ion, a clean heart, and
a regard to thy glory in all mine actions.

Jesus possess my mind with thy presence, and ravish it with thy love, that my
delight may be to be embraced in the arms of thy protection.

Jesus be thou ^ig^t unto mine eyes, music to mine ears, sweetness to my
taste, and contentment to my heart.

Jesus I give thee my body, my soul, my substance, my same, my friends, my
liberty and life, dispose of me and all that is mine, as shall be most to thy
glory.

Jesus I am not mine but thine, claim me as thy right, keep me as thy charge,
love me as thy child.

Jesus fight for me when I am assaulted, heal me when I am wounded, revive me
when I am spiritually killed, receive me when I fly, and let me never be quite
co^fou^ded.

Jesus give me patience in trouble, humility in comfort, constancy in
temptations, and victory against my ghostli^ enemies.

Jesus give me modesty in countenance, gravity in my behavior, deliberation in
my speeches, purity in my thoughts, rigtheousnes in my actions.

Jesus be my sun in the day, my food at the table, my repose in the night, my
clothing in nakedness, and my succor in all my needs.

Jesus let thy blood run in my mind as a water of life, to cleanse the filth of
my sins, and to bring forth the fruit of life euerla^^ing.

Jesus stay min^ inclinations from bearing down my soul: bridle mine appetites
with thy grace: and quench in me the fire of all unlawful desires.

Jesus keep mine eyes from vain sights, mine ears from hearing evil
speeches, my tongue from talking unlawful things, my senses from every kind of
disorder.

Jesus make my will pliable to thy pleasure, and resigned wholly to thy
providence. and grant me perfect conte^tme^t in that which thou allottest.

O Lord make me strong against all occasions of sin, and steedfast in not
yielding to evil* yea rather to die then to offend thee.

Jesus make me ready to pleasure al, loath to offend any, gentle in speaking,
courteous in co^^ersation, loving to my friends, and charitable to mine enemies.

Jesus forsake me not lest I perish, leave me not to mine own weakness, lest I
fall without recovery.

Jesus grant me an earnest desire to amend my faults, to renew my good
purposes, to pe^ form my good intentions, and to begin a fresh in thy service.

Jesus direct mine inte^tions, correct my errors, erect my infirmities, protect
my good endeavors.

Jesus alay my passions and make me able to master the^, that they never draw
me beyond the rule of reason and piety.

Jesus make me humble to my Superiors, fre^dly to my equals, chari^able to my
inferiors, and careful to yield due respect to all sorts.

Jesus grant me sorrow for my sins, thank^ulnes for thy benefits, fear of thy
judgments, love of thy mercies, and mindfulnes of thy presence. Amen.

A prayer before we settle our selves to our devotions.
O Most gracious Jesus, give me leave to present my self before thy divine
majesty, and to pour out my unworthy prayers unto thee in sight of all the
glorious court of heaven Behold O Lord, not in my merits, but in the
multitude of thy mercies I now come to make manifest my necessities, and to
utter my grie^es unto thee. I come as a poor and needy wretch, unto a God of
infinite glory. I come as a worm of the earth, unto my sovereign maker, and
creator. I come as a guilty and heinous offendour, unto a most just and severe
judge I am not worthy to lift up mine e^es to heaven, much less to open my
mouth in thy glorious presence, or presume to ta^ke with a Lord and King of
such majesty, being my self but slime and ashes. But O father of mercies, and
God of all comfort, thou promisest that who asks shall receive, who knocks
shall be let in, who seeks shall find. Thou inuitest the greatest sinners, and
refusest not to yield thy assistance to any that will use it. Gran^ me therefore
grace now to pray unto thee, as my duty and thy desert requires, Grant me a
pure intention, a fervent devotion, an atte^tiue mind, that I be not carried
away with impertine^t thoughts, nor any other distraction, but with humble
heart, firm hope and perfect charity I may effectually pray unto thee, and
ask of thee that which thou see most for thy glory and my good to grant,
sweet Jesus, Amen,

An other.
O Gracious Jesus, help me to pray worthily, that thou mai^st mercifully
grant my petitions, keep my thoughts from wandering, restrain my
imaginations, and preserve my ^ences from being distracted. Defend O Lord my
weak heart from all ghostly assaults, and so fix my mind upon thee, that I be
not carried away from consideration of thy presence: grant me distinctly to
pronounce my words, attentively to apply my thoughts, and to be wholly
ravished and posessed with zeal and true devotion. O Lord grant me to ask
forgiveness with deep co^trition and full purpose of ame^dement: grant me to
crave thy benefits with hearty thankfulness, and gratitude for those which I
have received. Grant me to pray for my self, with perfect resignatio^ unto thy
will, and for others with true charity (...) sincere affection. Afford O Lord,
such comfort to my soul, as thou see fit for me, and by the assistau^ce of
thy spirit inspi^e thy good motions into me, that I may feel them forcibly,
accept them thankfully, and fulfill them effectually. Finally I humbly beseech
thee of thy mercy and goodness, that I may devoutly spend this time of prayer,
endeavoring with thy Angels and Saints to praise thee; with true repentant
sinners to appease thee, and with all thy creatures dutifully to serve thee,
sweet Jesus, Amen.

A short meditation of man's misery.
WHat was I O Lord? What am I? What shall I be? I was nothing, I am now nothing
worth* and am in hazard to be wo^se than nothing I was conceived in original
sin, I may hereafter feel the eternal smart of sin. I was in my mother, a
loathsome substance. I am in the world, a sack of corruption, I shall be in my
grave, a prey of vermin. When I was nothing, I was without hope to be saved,
or fear to be damned: I am now in a doubtful hope of the one, and in manifest
danger of the other I shall be either happy by the success of my hope, or most
miserable by the effect of my danger. I was so that I could not then be
damned; I am now so, that I can scarce be saved. What I have been I know, to
wit, a wretched sinner: what I am, I cannot say, being uncertain of Gods
grace. What I shall be I am ignorant, being doutfull of my perseverance O Lord
erect my former weakness, correct my present sinfulness, direct my future
frailty: Direct it (O Lord) from passed evil in present good, to ^u^ure
reward, sweet Jesus, Amen.

AN EPISTLE OF A RELIGIOV^ PRIEST unto his Father. Exhorting him to the perfect
forsaking of the world.
To the worshipful his very good father, R. S. his duetifulle son R. S.
wishes all happiness.
IN children of former ages, it has binne thought so behouefull a point of
duty to their parents, in presence, by serviceable offices; in absence, by
other effectual significations, to yield proof of their thankful minds,
that neither any child could omit it, without touch of ungratefulness, nor the
pa^ent for^eare it, without just displeasure. But now we are fallen into such
calamity of times, and the violence of heresy has so crossed the course,
both of virtue and nature, that their engraff^d laws (never infringed by the
most savage and brute creatu^es) cannot' of Gods people without peril be
ob^erued. I am not of so unnatural a kind, of so wild education, or so
unchristian a spirit, as not to remember the root out of which I branched, or
to forget my secondary maker, and author of my being: It is not the
carelessness of a cold affection, nor the want of a due and reverent respect,
that has made me such a stranger to my native home, and so slack in defraying
the debt of a thankful mind, but only the iniquity of our days, that
makes my presence perilous, and the discharge of my duty an occasion of
danger. I was loath to enforce an unwelcome courtesy upon any, or by seeming
officious, to become offensive, deeming it better, to let time digest the
fear, that my return into the realm had bred in my kindred, than abruptly to
intrude my self, to purchase their anger, whose good will I so highly
esteemed. I never doubted, but that the belief, which to all my friends by
descent and pedigree, is in manner hereditary, framed in them a right persuasion
of my present calling, not suffering them to measure their censures of me, by
the ugly terms and odious Epithe^es, where with heresy has sought to
discredit my function, but rather by the reverence of so worthy a Sacrament,
and the sacred doom of al former ages. Yet because I might very easily
perceive by apparent conjectures, that many were more willinge to hear of me,
then from me, and readier to praise, than to use my endeavors, I have hitherto
bridled my desire to see the^, with the care and ialousie of their safety, and
banishing my self from the sent of my cradle in my own country, I have lived
like a forreiner, finding among strangers, that, which in my nee^est blood I
presumed not to seek. But now, considering that delay may have qualified
fear, and knowing my person only to import danger to others, and my
persuasion to none but to my self: I thought it high time to utter my sincere
and duetifull mind, and to open a vent to my zealous affection, which I have
so long smothered and suppressed in silence. For not only the original law of
nature written in all childrens hearts, and derived from the bowelles and
breasts of their mothers, is a continual soliciter, urging me in your behalf,
but the sovereign decree enacted by the Father of heaven, ratified by his
Son, and daily repeated by instinct of the holy Ghost, binds every child
in the due of Christianity, to tender the estate and welfare of his parents,
and is a motive, that allows no excuse, but of necessity presses to
performance of duty. Nature by grace is not abolished, but perfited, not
murdered, but manured neither are her impressions quite rased, or annulled, but
suited to the colors of faith and virtue. And her affections be so forcible,
that even in hell where ^ancour and dispight chiefly reigns, and all feeling
of goodn^s is overwhelmed in malice, they mou^d the rich glu^^on by expe^ience
of his own misery, to carry the less envy to his kindred: how much more in the
church of God, where grace quickneth, charity enflameth* and n^tures good
inclinations a^ a^e^tered by supernatural g^fts, ought the du^y of piety to
prevail? And who, but more merciles then damned creatures, could see their
dearest friends plunged in the like peril, and not to be wounded with deep
remorce of the^r lamentable and imminent hazardes? If in beholding a mortal
ennemy wroung and tortured with deadly pangs the roughest heart softeneth with
some sorrow. If the most frozen and fierce mind cannot but thaw and melt with
pity, eue^ when it sees the worst miscreant suffer his deseru^d torments: how
much less can the heart of a child, consider those that bred him into this
world, to be in the fall to far more bitter extremities, and not bleed with
grie^e of their uncomfortable case? Surely for my own part, although I
challenge not the prerogative of the best disposition, yet I am not of so harsh
and currish an humor, but that it is a continual corsiue, and cross unto me,
that whereas my endeavors have reclaimed many from the brinke of perdition, I
have bin least able to employ them, where they were most due, and barred from
affording to my dearest friends, that which has bin eagerly sought, and
beneficially obtained of mere strangers. Who has more interest in the grape,
then he that planted the vine? who more right to the crop, then he that sowed
the corn? or how can the child owe so great service to any, as to him whom he
is endetted unto for his very life and being? With young Tobias I have ^rauelled
far, and brought home a freight of spiritual substance to enrich you, and
medicinable receipts, against your ghostly maladies. I have with Esau, after
long toil in pursuing a painful chase, returned with such prey as you were
wont to love, desi^ing thereby to procure your blessing. I have in this general
famine of al true and christian food, with Joseph prepared abundance of the
bread of Angels, for the repast of your soul. And now my desire is, that my
drugges may cure you, my Prey delight you, and my provision feed you, by whom I
have been cured, delighted, and fed my self, that your courtesies may in part
be coun^eruailed, and my duty in some sort performed. Despise not (good sir)
the youth of your son, nether deem that God measures his indouments by
number of yee^e. Hoary se^ses are often cowched under green locks, and some
are riper in the Spring, then others in the Autu^ne of their age. God chose not
I say him self, nor his eldest son, but young David to conquer Golias, and to
rule his people. Not the most aged person, but Daniel the most innocent infant
delivered Suzanna from the iniquity of the Judges: and Christ at twelve years
of age, was found in the temple, questioninge with the g^auest Doctors. A
true Elias can conceive, that a little cloud may cast a large and abunda^t
shower* and the scripture teaches us, that God reuealeth to little ones, that
which he concea^eth from the wisest Sages. His truth is not abased by the
mino^ity of the speaker, who out of the m^uthes of infants and sucklings can
perfect his praises. Timothy was young, and yet a principal^ pastor. S. John
not old, and yet an Apostle; yea, and the Ange^s by appearing in youthful
semblaunces give us a pregnant proof, that many glorious gifts may be shrowed
under tender shapes. Al which I allege, not to claim any privilege
surmou^ting the rate of usual abilities, but to avoid al touch of presumption
in aduising my elders, seeing that it has the warrant of Scripture, the
testimony of examples, and sufficient grounds both in grace and nature. There is
diversity in the degrees of our carnal consanguinitie, and the preemine^ce
appertains to you, as superior over your childs body. Yet if you consider
our alliance in the chief portion, I mean our soul, which discerns man
from inferior creatures, we are of equal proximity to our heavenly father,
both descended of the same parent, and no other distance in our degrees, but
that you are the elder brother. In this sense does the Scripture say; Call not
any Father upon earth, for one is your father which is in heaven. Seeing
therefore that your superiority is founded upon flesh and blood, which are in a
manner but the bark and rhine of a man, and our equality upon the soul,
which is man's maine substance, think it I pray you, no dishonor to your
person, if with all humility I offer my advise unto you. One man can not be
perfect in all faculties, neither is it a disgrace to the Goldsmith, if he be
ignorant of the Millers trade. Many are deep Lawyers, and yet shallowe
Divines, many very deliver in feats of the body and curious in external
complements, yet little experimented in matters of their soul, and far to
seek in religious actions. I have studied and practiced these many years
spiritual physic, acquainting my self with the beating and temper of every
pulse, and traueling in the scrutiny of the maladies and medicines incident
unto souls. If therefore I profer you the fruits of my long studies, and make
you a present of my profession, I hope you will constre it rather as a
duetifull part, than any point of presumption. He may be a father to the
soul, that is a son to the body, and requite the benefit of his temporal
life, by reviving his parent from a spiritual death. And to this effect said
Christ these words: My mother, and brethren are they, that do the will of my
father which is in heaven: Upon which place S. John Climacus, showing to what
kindred a Christian ought chiefly to rely* draws this discou^se. Let him be
thy father, that both can, and will, lay his labor to disburden thee of thy
pack of sins. Let holy compu^ction be thy mother, to depure thee from thy
ordure and filth. Let him be thy brother, that will be both thy partner and
compeditor to pass and perfect thy race toward heaven. Take the memory of
death for thy perpetual phere, and inseperable spouse. Let thy children be
bitter sighs of a sorrowful heart, and possess thy body as thy bondsman.
Fasten thy friendship with the Angelical powers, with which if thou closest
in familiar affiaunce, they will be patrones unto thee in thy final passage.

This (says he) is the generation and kindred of those that seek God. Such a
father as this Saint speaks of, may you have of your own son, to enter you
farther in the fore recited affinity Of which happily it was a significa^t
presage, aboding the future event, that even from my infancy you were wont in
merriment, to call me father. R. which is the customary style now allotted to
my present estate.

Now therefore to join issue, and to come to the principal drift of my
discourse, most humbly and earnestly I am to beseech you, that both in respect
of the honor of God, your duty to his church, the comfort of your children,
and the redress of your own soul, you would seriously consider the terms
you stand in, and weigh your self in a Christian balance, taking for your
counterpose the judgments of GOD. Take heed in time, that the word Thecel,
written of old against Baltazar, and interpreted by Daniel. (Dan. 5.) be not
verified in you, whose exposition was. You have been poised in the scale, and
found of too light weight. Remember that you are in the waining, and the date
of your pilgrimage is well near expired, and now it behooves you to look
toward your country. Your force languisheth, your senses impair, and your
body droupeth, and on every side the ruinous cottage of your faint and feeble
flesh, threatens fall. And having so many herbingers of death to premonish your
end, how ca^ you but prepare forso dreadful a stranger? The young may die
quickly, but the old can not live long. The young ma^s life by casualty may be
abri^ged, but the old man's by no physic can be long adiourned: and therefore
if g^een years sometimes must think of the grave, the thoughts of sere age
should continually dwell in the same. The prerogative of infancy, is innocency*
of childhood, reverence, of manhood, maturitie, and of age, wisdom. And seeing
that the chief properties of wisdom are, to be mindful of things passed,
careful of things present, and provident of things to come, use now the
priuiledg of natures tale^t to the benefitte of your soul, and procure
hereafter to be wise in well doing, and wa^chsull in foresight of future
harms. To serve the world you are now unable, and though you were able, you
have little cause to be willing, seeing that it never gave you but an unhappy
welcome, a hurtful entertainment, and now does abandon you with an unfortunate
farwell* You have long sowed in a field of flint, which could bring you nothing
forth, but a crop of cares, and affliction of spirit: rewarding your labors
with remorse, and affording for your gain, eternal domages. It is now more
then a seasonable time, to alter the course of so vnthriuing a husbandry, and
to enter into the filde of Gods Church, in which, sowing the seeds of repe^tant
sorrow, and watering them with the tears of humble contrition, you may reap a
more beneficial harvest, and gather the fruits of everlasting comfort.
Remember I pray you, that your spring is spent, and your summer ouerpast: you
are now arrived to the fall of the leaf, yea and winter colors have already
stained your hoarie head. Be not careless (says S. Austen) though our loving
Lord bear long with offenders, for the longer he staieth, not finding
amendment, the sorer will he scourge when he comes to judgment; and his
patience in so long expecting, is only to lend us respite to repent, not any
way to enlarge us leisure to sin. He that is tossed with variety of storms,
and cannot come to his desired port, makes not much way, but is much
turmoiled; so he that has passed many years, and purchased little profit,
has had a long being, but a short life, for life is more to be measured by
merits, than by number of days, seeing (...) most men by many days, do but
procure many deaths, and others in a short space attain the life of infinite
ages. What is the body without the soul but a cor^upt carcass? and what the
soul without God, but a sepulcher of sin? If God be the way, the life, and
the truth, he that goes without him, strayeth, he that lives without him
dies, and he that is not taught by him, erreth. Well says saint Austen,
that God is our true and chiefest life, from whom the reuolting is falling, to
whom the returning is rising, in whom the staying is sure standing. God is he,
from whom to depart, is to die, to whom to repair is to revive, in whom to
dwell is to live. Be not you therefore of those, that begin not to l^ue,
until they be ready to die, and then after a ^oes desert, come to crave of
God a friends entertainment. Some think to snatch heaven in a moment, which the
best scarce atteined in the mountenance of many years, and when they have
glutted the^ selves with worldly d^ lites, they would iumpe from Dives his
diet, to Lazarus croune, and from the service of Satan, to the solace of a
Saint. But be you well assured that God is not so penu^ious of ^rendes, as to
hold him self and his kingdom salable, for the refuse and reuersion of their
lives, who have sacrificed the principal thereof to his enemies, and their own
bru^ishe appetites, then only ceasing ^o offend, when ability o^ offending
it taken from them. True it is, that a thief may be saved upon the cross, and
mercy found at the last gasp. But well says S. Augustine, that though it be
possible, yet is it scarce credible, that his death should find favor, whose
whole life has earned wrath: and that his repentance should be accepted, that
more for fear of heil, and love of him self, then for love of God or
lothsomnes of sin, cries for mercy. Wherefore good Sir, make no longer
delays, but being so near the breaking up of your mortal house, take time
before extremity, to satisfy Gods Justice. Though you suffered the bud to the
blasted, and the flower to fade: though you permitted the fruit to perish, and
the leaves to dry up: yea though you let the boughs wither, and the body of
your tree grow to decaie, yet alas keep life in the root, for fear least
the whole become fuel for hell fire. For surely where soever the tree falls,
there shall it be, whether it be to south or north, heaven or hell: and such
sap as it brings, such fruit shall it ever bear. Death has already filed
from you, the better part of your natural fores, and has left you now to the
lees and remissailes of your wearish and dying days: the remainder whereof, as
it cannot be long, so does it warn you speedily to ransom your former
losses. For what is age but the calendes of death? and what imports your
present weakness, but an earnest of your aproaching dissolution? You are now
impathed in your final voyage, and not far of from the stint and period of
your course: and therefore be not dispurueied of such appartenances as are
behoofull in so perplexed and perilous a journey. Death in it self is very
fearful, but much more terrible in regard of the judgment that it so^moneth
us unto. If you were laid on your departing bed, burdened with the heavy load
of your former trespasses, and goared with the sting and prick of a frestred
conscience: If you felt the cramp of death wresting your heart stringes, and
ready to make the rufull divorce between body and soul: If you lay panting for
breath, and suiming in a cold and fatal sweat, wearied with struggling
against your deadly panges: O how much would you give for an hour of
repentance? at what rate would you value a days, contrition? Then worlds
would be worthles in respect of a little respitte. A short truce would seem
more precious, then the treasures of Empires, nothing would be so much esteemed
as a trice of time, which now by months and years, is lauishly misspent. O how
deeply would it wound your heart, when lookinge back into your life, you
considered (...) faults committed, and (...) confessed, many good works
omitted, and not recovered, your service to God promised, and not performed?
How inconsolable were your case, ^our friends being fled, your senses frighted,
your thoughts amazed, your memory decayed, your whole mind aghast, and no part
able to perform that it should, but only your guilty conscience pestred with
sin, that would continually vpbraid you with most bitter accusations. What
would you think when stripped out of you: mortal weed, and turned both out
of the service and hows room of this world. you were forced to enter into
uncouth and strange paths, and with unknown and ugly compan^, to be conuented
before a most severe judge, carrying in your own conscience your indictment
written, and a perfect register of all your misdeeds? When you should see him
prepared (...) the sentence upon you, against who^ you had transgressed, and
the same to be your vmpier, whom by so many offenses you had made your enemy?
When not only the devils, but even the Angels should plead against you, and
your self, maugre your will, be your sharpest appeacher. What would you do in
these dreadful exigents, when you saw that ghastly dungeon and huge gulf of
hell, breaking out with most fearful flames? When you saw the weping and
gnashing ofteeth the rage of those hellish mo^sters, the horror of the place,
the rigor of the pain, the terror of the company, and the eternity of all
these punishments? Would you the^ think them wise, that would delay in so
weighty matters, and idly play away the time allotted to prevent these
Intolerable calamities? Would you then account it secure, to nurse in your
bosom so many s^rpe^ts as sins, or to foster in your soul so many malicious
accuser, as mortal faults? Would you not then think one life too little, to
do penance for so many iniquities, every one whereof were enough to cast you
into those everlasting unspeakable torments? Why then do you not at the least
deuote that small remnant and surplusage of these your latter days, procuring
to make an atonement with God, and to free your conscience from such
corruption, as by your schism and fall has crept into it. Those very eyes
that read this discourse, and that very understanding that conceiueth it,
shall be cited and certain wi^nesses of the rehearsed things In your own body
shall you experience those deadly agony, and in your soul shall you feelingly
find those terrible fears, yea and your present estate is in danger of the
deepest harms, if you do not the sooner recover your self into the fold and
family of Gods Church. What have you gotten by being so long customer to the
world, but false ware suitable to the shop of such a merchant, whose trafick
is toil, whose wealth trash, and whose gain misery? What interest have you
reaped, that may equal your detrements in grace and vertew? or what could you
find in a vale of tears, parageable to the favor of God, with the loss
whereof you were contented to buy it? You cannot be now inueigled with the
passions of youth, which making a partial estimate of things, set no
distance between counterfeit and current. For they are now worn out of force
by tract of time, or fallen in reproof by trial of their folly. It cannot be
fear that leads you amiss, seeing it were too unfitting a thing, that the
crauant cowardice of flesh and blood, should daunte the prowess of an
intelligent person, who by his wisdom cannot but discern, how much more cause
there is to fear God, then man, and to stand in more awe of perpetual, then
temporal penalties. If it be an vng^ou^ded presu^ption of the mercy of God, and
the hope of his assistance at the last plunge, (the ordinary lure of the Deuell
to reclaim sinners from the pursuit of virtue) it is to palpable a collusio^
to misleade a sound and sensed man, howsoever. it prevail with sick and
affected judgments. Who would rely ete^nal affairs upon the gliding
slipperines and running stream of our uncertain life? Or who but one of
distempered wits, would offer fraud to the discipherer of al thoughts, with
whom dissemble we may to our cost, but to deceive him it is impossible? Shall
we esteem it cunning to rob the time from him, and bestow it on his enemies,
who keeps tale of the least minutes of our life, and will examine in the end
how each moment has been employed? It i^ a preposterous policy in any wise
conceit, to fight against God ^ill our weapons be blunted, our forces
consumed, our limbs impote^t, and our breath spent, and then when we fall for
faintnes, and have fought our selves almost dead, to presume of his mercy: the
wounds both of his sacred body, so often rubbed ^ renewed by our sins, and
every parcel of our own so sundry and diverse ways abused, being so many
whetstones and incen^iues to edg and exasperate his revenge against us. It were
a strange piece of art, and a very exorbitant course, while the ship is
sound, the Pilote well, the Sailers strong, the gale fauou^able, and the Sea
calm to lie idle at rode, burning so seasonable wea^her: and when the ship
leaked, the Pilot were sick, the Ma^iners saint, the storms boisterous, and
the Sea a turmoile of outrageous surges, then to lanch forth, to hoise up
sails, and to set out for a voyage into far countries. Yet such is the skill
of these evening repenters, who though in the soundness of health, and in the
perfect use of reason, they can not resolve to cut the gables, and weigh the
anckers that withhold the^ from God, nevertheless they feed them selves with a
strong persuasion, that when their senses a^ astonished, their wits distracted,
their understanding dusked, and both the body and mind racked and tormented
with the throbs and gripes of a mortal sickness* then forsooth, will they think
of the weightiest matters, and become sudden Saints, when they are scarce
able behave themselves like reasonable creatures. If neither the canon civil,
nor common law allow^th, that a man perished in judgment should make any
testament or bequeste of his temporal substance, being then presumed to be
less then a man: how can he that is amated with the inward ga^boils of an
unsettled conscience, distrained with the wringing fi^tes of his dying flesh,
mained in all his habilities, and circled in wi^h so strange enco^brances, be
thought of due discretion to dispose of his chiefest jewel (which is his
soul) to dispatch the whole menage of all eternity, and of the treasures of
heaven, in so stormy and short a spurt. No no, they that will loiter in seed
time, and begin only to sow, when others reap: They that will riot out their
health, and cast their accountes when they can scarcely speak. They that will
slumber out the day, and enter their iorny when the light does fail them; let
them blame their own folly, if they die in debt, and eternal beggars, and
sall headlong into the lapse of endless perdition. Let such harken to* S.
Cipria^s lesson Let (says he) the grieuousnesse of our sore, be the measure
of our sorrow. Let a deep wound, have deep and diligent cu^e. Let no man's
contrition, be less the^ his crime. Think thou that our Lord can be so
soon appeased, whom with perfidious words thou have denied, whom less then
thy patrimony thou have esteemed, whose temple with sacrilegious corruption
thou have defiled? Think thou easily to recover his favor, whom thou have
avouched not to be thy Master? We must rather most insta^tly entreat, we must
pass the day in mourning, the night in watching and weeping, our whole time in
painful lame^ting. We must fall prostrate upon the ground hu^bling our selves
in sackcloth and ashes. And having lost the garment of Christ, we should be
vnvnwilling to be clothed with any other, hau^ng fa^sed our stomachs with the
^iand of the Deuell, we should now desire to fast from all earthly food. We
should ply good works, to purge our offenses: we should be liberal in alms,
to avoid the death of our souls, that Christ may receive, that the persecutour
would have spoiled: neither ought that patr^mony to be kept or fansied, with
which a man has been ensnared and vanquished. Not every short sigh will be a
sufficient satisfaction, nor every knock a warrant to get in. Many cry Lord
Lord, and are not accepted. The foolish Virgin knocked, and were not admitted.
Judas had some sorrow, and yet died desperate. Forslowe not, says the holy
Ghost, to be converted unto God. and linger not off from day to day; for
suddenly will his wrath come, and in the time of reueng he will destroy thee.
Let no man seiourne long in sinful security, nor post over his repentance
till fear, enforce him unto it: Let us frame our premises, as we would find
our conclusion, and endeavor to live, as we are desirous to die. Shall we offer
the maine crop to the Devil, and set God to gleane the reproof of his harvest?
Shall we gorge the D^uil with our fairest fruits, and turn God to feed on
the filthy scraps of his leauings? How great a folly were it, when a man pineth
away in a perilous la^guor, to provide gorgeous apparel, to bespeak su^ptuous
furniture, and take order for the rearing of stately buildings, and never
thinking of his own recovery, to let the discase take root within him? Were
it not the lik vanity, for a Prince to dote so far upon his subject, as
neglecting his own regaltie, to busy him self wholly in advancing his servant?
Thus says S. Chrysostom do they that when their soul has surfeited with all
kind of sin, and is drenched in the depth of infinite diseases, without any
regard thereof, labor their wits in setting forth her garment, and in pampering
the body with all possible delights And whereas the soul should have the
soueraignitie, and the body follow the sway of her direction, servile senses,
and lawless appetites do rule her as superiors, and she is made a vassal in
her own dominions. What is there, say^th S. Augustine, in thy meanest
necessaries, that thou would not have good? Thou would have a good house,
good furniture. good aparel good fare, good cattle, and not so much but thy
hose, and thy sho^s thou will seek to have good? Only thy life and poor
soul, thy principal charge and of all other things the most worthy to be best,
thou art content should be naught, and ly cankering and rusting in all kind of
euelles. O unspeakable blindness! Can we prefer our shoes before our soul,
refusing to wear an evil shoe, and not careing to carry an ugly and deformed
soul? Alas let us not set so little by that, which God prised so much. Let us
not rate our selves at so base a peniworth, being in truth of so peerles
dignity. If the soul be such, that not all the gold and treasure of the world,
nor any thing of less worth the the blood and life of almighty God, was able
to buy it. If not all the deinties that wit can devise, or heaven and earth
afford, but only Gods own precious body, was by him deemed a rep^st fit to
feed it: If not all the creatures of this, no nor millio^s of new worlds, if
so many more were created* but only the illimitable goodness, and majesty of
God can satisfy the desire, and fill the compass and capacity of it, who but
of lame judgment, or perverse will, yea who but of an incredulous mind and
pittiles spirit, could set more by his soul, or be contented to suffer so
noble a paragon, so many months and years, to lie chan^lled in ordure, and
mired in all sin? Can we not see our (...) sick, but we allow him a
Phisician; our horse diseased, but we send for a leach; nor our garment torn,
but we will have one to me^d it? And ca^ we so much malign our soul as to
let it die for want of cure, and seeing it mangled with so many vices, never
seek any to resto^e it to the wonted integrity? Is our servant nearer, our
beast more precious, and our coat deerer than our own soul? If any should
call us Epicures, Atheists, rebels unto God, or murderers of souls, we would
take it for an intolerable reproach, and think it a most disgraceful and
opprobrious calumniation. But to live like Epicures, to sin like Atheists, to
struggle against Gods callinges, and like violent rebels to scorn his
commandments: yea, and with daily and damnable wounds, barbarously to stab
our infortu^ate souls, this we account no contumely, we reckon for no
discredit, yea rather we register it in the ^aunt of our chiefest praises. O
ye sons of men, how long will you carry this heavy heart, aliking vanity,
and seeking lies? how long will children love the follies of insancie, and
sinners ^unne careless and wilful to their ruin? Will you keep you^ chicken
from the kite, your lamb from the wolf, your fawn from the hound. Dare you
not suffer a spider in your bosom, or a toade to come near you, and can you
nestle in your soul so many vipers as vices, and permit it to be so long
chewed and wearied with the poisoned jaws and tuskes of the Devil? And is our
soul so vain a substance, as to be had in so little esteem? Had Christ made
ship wrack of his wisdom, or was he in a rage of passion, when he became a
wandering pilgrim, exiling him self from the comfortes of his Godhead, and
passing three and thirty years in pain and penu^y for the behoof of our
souls? Was he surprised with a rauing fit, when in the tragedy of his passion
so bloodily inflicted, and so patiently accepted, he made his body as a cloud,
to resolve into showers of innocent blood, and suffered the dearest veins of
his heart to be launced, to give full issue to the price of our souls
redemption? Or if Christ did not err, nor deem amiss, when it pleased him to
redeem us with so excessive a ransom, then what should we judge of our
monstrous abuse, that sell our souls to the Devil for every vain delight, and
rather adventure the hazard thereof, then of a seely pittance of worldly
pelse? O that a creature of so incomparable a price, should be in the demaine
of so unnatural keepers? and that which is in it self so gracious and amiable,
that the Angels and Saints delight to behold it (as S. Chrisostom says)
should by sin be fashioned into so lothsom and disguised shapes, as to become
a horror to heaven, and a sutely pheere for the fowlest fends? Alas, if the
care of our own harms move us no more, but that we can still be so barbarous
to the better portion of our selves, let us at the least fear to injury an
other party, very careful and ieallous over it: who will never endure so deep
an impeachment of his interest to pass unrevenged. We must remember, that our
soul is not only a part of us, but also the temple, the paradise, and spouse
of almighty God, by him in baptism garnisht, stored and e^dowed with most
gracious ornaments. And how think you he can brook, to see his temple
profaned, and turned into a den of Devils? his paradise displanted, and
altered into a wilderness of serpents? his spouse defloured, and become an
adulteress to his utter ennemies? Durst we offer such usage to our Princes,
yea or to our Farmers daughter? would not fe^re of the law, and popular
shame, disturne us from it? And shall not the reverend* Majesty of almighty
God, and the vnt^bated justice of his angry sword, terrify us from offering
the like to his own spouse? Do we think God, either so impotent that he
cannot, so base and sottish that he will not, or so weak witted that he
knows not how to wreak himself upon so conte^ptuous and daring offenders?
Will he so neglect and loose his honor* which of al things he claims as his
chief peculiar? Will he that for the souls sake keeps a reckoning of our
very hairs, which are but the excrementes of her earthly weed, see himself so
much wronged in the principal, and pass it without remonstrance of his just
indignation? O dear sir, remember that the scripture terms it a thing full
of horror to fall into the hands of God, who is able to crush the proud
spirits of the obstinate, and to make his enemies the footestole of his feet.
Wrestle no longer against the cries of your own conscience, and the forcible
inspiratio^s that God does send you. Embrace his mercy before the time of
rigor, and return to his Church, jest he debar^^ you his kingdom. He ca^
not have God for his father, that refuses to profess the catholic church for
his mother: neither ca^ he atchieue to the church triu^phant in heaven, that is
not a member of the church militant here in earth.

You have been alas too long an al^a^t in the tabernacles of sinners, and
straied too ^ar from the fold of Gods flock. Turn now the biaze of your heart
toward the sanctuary of salvation, and the City of refuge, seeking to
recompense your wa^dering steps trodde^ in error, with a swift gate, and
zealous progress to christian perfection. The full of your spring tide is now
fale^, and the stream of your life runs at a low ebb. Your tired ship
begins to leak and grateth often upon the gravel of your grave, and
therefore it as heigh time for you to strike sail, and to putt into harbor,
lest remaining inthe scope of the wicked wind and weather of this time, some
unexpected gust, and sudden storm, dash you vpothe roks of eternal ruin.
Tender the pitiful estate of your poor soul, and be hereafter more fearful
of hell than of persecution, and more eager of heaven the^ of worldly repose. If
God the Father had been the inditer, the Son the sender, the holy Ghost the
scribe, that had written this letter: if he had dipped his pen in the wou^des
of our Savior, and used his precious blood in lieu of ink: If one of the
highest Seraphins, formed into a visible personage, had come in most solemn
embassy to to deliver it unto you, do you not think, that it would have
strained your heart, and won your thoughts to fulfill the contents, and alter
your course according to the tenor the^^ of? Doubtless I suppose you will not
deny it. Then (good sir) let it now take the same effect, seeing that
difference had been in the ceremonies, and not in the substance: and that very
God, that in those three persons should have then invited you to your
conversion, says of such as I am (though most unworthy) He that hears you
hears me, and he that despises you despises me. I exhort you therefore as
the vicegerent of God, and I humbly request you as a dutiful child, that you
would surrender your assent, and yield your soul a happy captive to Gods
merciful inspirations, proceeding from an infinite love, and tending to your
assured good. I have expressed not only mine own, but the earnest des^^e of
your other children, whose humble wishes are here written with my pen: for it
is a general fore, that sits at all our hearts, whom it has pleased God
to shroud under his merciful winge, to see our dearest Father (to who^ both
nature has bound, and your merits fastened our affections) to be disme^bred
from the body, to which we are united, and to be in hazard of a farther and
more gree^ous separation. O good Sir, shall so many of your branches enjoy the
quickening sap and fry of Gods Church, and daily shooting up higher toward
heaven, bring forth the flowers and fruits of salvation, and you that are the
root of us al^ ^e barren and fruitless still covered in earth, and buried in
flesh and blood? Shall the birds of he ^uen, I mean the Angels, sing and
build upon your boughs, and the stem be devoured by the worm of conscience,
and pestered with the vermin that Schisime ^ngendereth? Shall the beams be
bright, and the sun eclipsed? The brooks clear, and the headspring t^obled?
Your lot has no such affinity with the nature of a Phoenix, that you should
reap your offspring of your own ruins? You are not so tied to the straites
of a Pelican, as to revive your issue with murthe^ing your self, neither are
we a generation of vipers* that cannot come to life, but by our parents
destruction. Yea rather it is the thing we have chiefly in request, that we
may be as near lin^ked in spiritual, as we are ^n carnal consanguinity, and
living with you in the compass of one Church, we may to our unspeakable comfort,
enjoy in heaven your desired company. Disblame me good sir, if zeal of your
recovery, have carried me beyond the limits of a letter. So important a truth,
cannot be too much auerred, not too many hooks baited to draw a soul out of
the pudle of Schism. The misery thereof is so great if it fall, the reward so
excessive if it stand, so malicious the ennemies that assault it, and so just
the Judge that must proceed upon it, that to raise it from the lapse, and to
fortify it from recidiuation, no number of helps can be more than needful,
nor any persuasions more vehement then necessary. Howsoever therefore the soft
gales of your morning pleasures lulled you in slumb^ing fittes: how so^uer the
vio^ent heates of noone, might awake your affections: yet now in the cool and
calm of the evening, retire to a Christian rest, and close up the day of your
life with a cl^ere sunset, that leaving all darkness behind you, and carrying in
your conscience the light of grace, you may escape the horror of an eternal
night, and pass from a mortal day, to an cuerlasting-morrowe. Thus e^tsoones
commending unto you my bounden duty, and humbly desiring that my sincere
affection may find excuse of my boldness, I will surcease.

This 22. of October 1598. Your most dutiful and loving son. R. S.

Approbatione Bartholomei Petri Lintrens. S. T. Doctor, and in Vniuersitate
Duacena Professor.


