NEVVES FROM SPAIN AND HOLLAND CONTAINING.

An information of Inglish affairs in Spain with a conferrence made
theruppon in Amsterdame of Holland.

Written by a Gentleman trauelour borne in the lovv countries, and brought up
from a child in Ingland, unto a Gentleman his friend and Oste in London.

Anno, M. D. XCIII.

TO THE INDIFFERENT AND DISCRETE READER.
I RECEIVED great contentment, and thought my self exceedingly gratified by an
espetiall friend of mine, when as (of late) it pleased him to communicate
with me the ensuing discourse, concerning the estate, residence, and exercises
of the English nation in Spain, with other matter thereon depending, together
with a familiar conference had at Amsterdam, which also concerned English
affairs. But being in written hand, and only intended by one friend unto an
other, I was fory that so notable matter as is therein delivered, could not so
redely be imparted to many, and therefore I have presumed to put the same in
print, the thing (in my opinion) right vvoorthely deserving the same, and I
vvish that thy acceptance thereof may be answerable to my good meaning,
whereby I may the sooner be enduced for thy further satisfaction, to put
forth in print also the other discourse, promised in the end of this, whereof
I do very shortly expect to have a copy, and thus I leave the to God, and this
treatise (in the mean time) to thy considerate regard.

TO THE RIGHT WOORSHIPFVL M. N. MY GOOD OSTE AND DEAR FRIEND ABIDING IN
GRACIOUS STREAT IN LONDON.
IF I have been somewhat longer then you expected (my good oste and dear friend)
in performance of my promise made unto you at my departur from London, to
return you spedilie aduises from flaunders and Spain, of the affairs so much
desired and recommended unto me, no fear have I in the world but that my
pardon shall easily be obtained at your hades who know my good will both to you
and your country (which for diverse causes also I may well call mine) and more
the^ this, by your own experience you may easily imagyn the letts and
difficulties which trauelers and traffiquers are wout to find in forrayne
countries, for dispaching their business with in the compass of their own
designments.

True it is, that after my departing from you (which was on Michelmas day (if I
forget not) my passage was with good speed to Holland, and thence also with no
less opportunity to Spain, for that finding good occasion of imbarcation my
haste, was the greater and so I arrived in Calliz of Andaluzia, by the end of
Noue^ber, from whence passing within two or three days to the port of S.
Mary's (which is but one or two hours sailing by water as you know) I had
fit occasion to inform my self very particularly of the first point
whereof we had hard so much in Ingland, and I promised to write you the truth
to wit of the public reconciling of so many Inglish Soldiars to the
Catholic Roman faith, as were at that time detayned prisoners in the
Galleys of Spain, which galleys commonly for the winter time do reside in
this port of S. Mary's as fittest of all Spain for that purpose to resist the
incursion of the moors. And for that this was the first matter whereof you and
I talked and disputed so much in Ingland upon the uncertain relations that
Soldiers brought us thither from Spain, you suspecting the matter to be
feigned and I thinking the contrary; I shall first assure you in this that the
whole happened as we were informed, to wit, that above nyntie Inglish, partly
capteines, Nynty Inglis men reconciled in Spain.
and officers and partly marchaunts and common Soldiers, who had been very
resolute a long time in their religion, and had oftentimes affirmed to the
Adelantado their general and other Captains and friends which dealt with them
in that behalf, that they would rather dye then relent therein, yet afterward
upon three or four days conference with an Inglish father or two of this
side, they offered al most willingly to chainge their opinions and become
catholics, and that at such a time, when as they saw themselves out of al
dainger if they would have continued in the contrary, for that they had now
this kings warrant, both for their lives and liberties, and that the
inquisition should in no wise touch them for their religion, which I do ad to
the end you may not think parcha^ce that they did it for fear, but rather of
their own free vvil and election, professing themselves with tears and
extended hands (as here most credibly it was told me) that theyvvere, all
most fully satisfied, persuaded and convinced, and consequently desired with,
earnest request to be reconciled to the Catholic Roman faith and church;
and so they were, every one being first confessed of all his life past, and
afterward al together in solemn procession were carried to the great church of
the port, and there hard mass together, with extraordinary show of contrition
and repentance for the time past, and mass being ended, they al received the
holy Sacrament of the altar most devoutly, and the Adela^tado with diverse
other noble men kinghts and Captains were communicated with them, for their
comfort and devotion: and that ended, the Adelantado (who is a most noble and
honorable gentleman and affected excedingly to the Catholics of your nation)
had them all home to his own house, and gave them a ryall dinner himself
serving A dinnet made to the Inglish co^uetted.
them at the table, with Don Iuau de Padilla his eldest son, and heir, the
marquis of Montes Claros his nephew, Don Iuan de Porto Carera brother to the
Earl of Palma his other nephew, Don Iuan de Robles, Don Pedro de Acumnia, and
many other great men, who al did this honot to your nation that day, for joy
to see them so wilingly made Catholics, and I assure you that this day is one
of the most memorablest that ever your nation has had in these parts, and
will be remembered in the port of S. Mary's and places there about, for long
time.

By all which you may see, if you will (my good Sir) that it is true which so
offen I have urged A consideration upon the former co^ uersion.
unto you and others not greatly learned, who are so determinate in your
opinions without knowing the grounds whereon you stand, or at least not those
vvherin others do found them selves, or what truly may be said without
heat of co^tentio^, for the one or against the other, so if (I say) you would
be content but only to hear and examine the matter and confer with some
learned of the other side with indifferent desire to know the truth and to
acknowledge it when in conscience you should discover the same; it wear an
easy matter to come to that union so much desired, as many have do^ne, which
sincerly and with christian disposition before mentioned have bine content to
treat of this affair. but others as your self and some friends of ours there
with you are wont to apprehend so vehemently every new opinon that you fall
on, as there is no reason or argument, may be hard to the contrary and so no
marvel though you remain still with your own persuasions. And so much by
this occasion against you good Sir, and now to the course of my narration
again.

From the port of S. Mary's I went to Siuil against Christmas and in the way
I passed by The Inglish hou se and Church of S. George in S. Lucars.
S. Lucars vvher I found the Inglish Church of S. George appartayning in times
past unto the Inglish marchantes (which is an other point also vvher of you
desired to be informed) delivered up into the hands of Inglish Seminary
priests, together with all the houses, grounds, and other emoluments
belonging thereunto, and it seems that the place has gotten much by this
chainge, for that the same church (which I knevv some years ago while it was
in your marcha^ts hands) much in decay, is now very well repaired and kept in
good order, and fair habitation is in buylding about it, which they say shall
serve, not only for the priests to lie therein, but also for the marchantes of
the Inglish nation, to make there assembly when occasion is offered, and to
these buvldings and reparations not only the Duke of Medina Sidonia Lord of the
town, and the Cardinal of Siuil metropolitan of the place, do give their
favors and assistance for the recovery of all such commodityes as ever
belonged to that Church and house, but the King also himself who besides other
favors gave them two thousand Crowns in money toward the said buylding this
year past, and so it is like to be one of the fairest houses and churches that
is in the whole city of S. Lucars.

This house is to serve principally for a residence Resideces of Inglish
Priests in Libon and in the por te of S. Mary's.
of Inglish Priests as I have said, and there is a Doctor of divinity of your
nation provost thereof at this present, and there end is as I am informed not
only to keep up and serve that house and Church, but also to intertaine such
Inglish, as pass in and out to the Seminaries. For which cause also the Duke
of Medina Celi lord of the port of S. Mary's is about to erect au other
reside^ce like to this in that his town; and an other there is already erected
in Lisbone, and an Inglish grave Priest. Superior thereof with great
probability to have a Seminary also and college of Inglish students in that
city shortly; as al ready there is one of Irishmen and an other of the same
nation in Salamanca stirred up thereunto by the example of the Inglish.

But to pass forwards in my journey I arrived The Inglish hou se and Seminary
in Civil.
about Christmas at Siuil vvher I found a goodly Inglish Seminary newly begone
and brought to such perfection as in two months only there wear almost fifty
persons in the same, and the said College is placed in the midst and best
situation of all the town, and so well settled and provided for every way as
if they had been there many years: for that the good vvil and affection of the
people toward them, is exceeding great, and they seem to be ravished as it
were with a kind of admiration of them, to see so many Inglish tender
youths, al bred and borne in this Queens reign, and yet so forvvard and
fervent in this their religion, as to offer themselves to al kind of
difficulties, afflictions and perils for the same: for such is the profession
commonly of al these youths, and to confess the truth it gave me also
incredible admiration to talk with them in that point, and surely it seems a
spirit different from al other nations and men in these days, and must needs
proceed of an higher influence then flesh and blood or vvordlie pollecy or
persuasion, if I be not deceived.

I was present at certanie feasts and excercises of learning which these
young men made upon certain days in this their new college before, Don
Rodrigo de Castro, the Cardinal and Archbishop of that city, who estemeth
himself and his house (which is very honorable and of the most auncientest
Grandes of Spain) to be descended of your old Dukes of La^caster, as also
before the whole university and clergy of Siuil, and before the Governor
and noble men of the same, who flocked thither in so great numbers upon the
brute of Catholic Inglishmen, as it was of force to hold the said excercises
in the greater court of the said college, but yet adorned very dece^tly for
that purpose, and suerlie the excercises seemed to be done with general
approbation or rather admiration of al men.

The one Days exercise were disputations before and after dinner, upon
Conclusions drawn out of al divinity, the learnedest men of all that city and
university repayring thither to dispute with the Inglish priests that
defended the conclusions.

An other day was the feast of S. Thomas of Excercises of lerning by the
Inglish in Siuil.
Canterbery celebrated with great solemnity and exceeding much concourse of al
principal people of that city, the Cardinal and some other great personages
were intertayned with orations and speches in Latin, at their first
entrance, until the mass began, the church and court thereunto adioned, were
addressed and hanged with great store of rich clothes, and thereppon mnch
variety of poemes and learned inventions in Latin, Greek, Hebrew, French,
Spanish, Italian, and other languages wherein these students seem to have much
use and skill, some in the one, and some in the other. The mass was song with
great sole^nity, by one Don Alonso de Columna, brother to the general of the
Kings galleons. Two Sermonos were made bv two Inglish scollers, the one in
Latin, toward the middle of mass, after the gospel which endured about au
hour, the other in spanish after the mass was done, which Was somvvhat
shorter, but I can assure you that both the preachers acquitted themselves in
such order, as they gave wonderful contentement and drew many tears from the
hearers, as I can be witness, and I must needs confess, also that al beit I be
not hard to persuade my self well of Inglish men as you may guess yet easily
should I not have believed that your countryme could so well have framed
themselves, to give satisfaction in other countries if I had not seen and hard
this my self, though always I have known Inglish men's talents and abilityes
to be great, whereunto soever they list to apply themselves.

Thus passed that day which was the 29. of December and fifth day of
Christmas, vvherin S. Thomas of Canterbury his feast in Siuil.
S. Thomas was slain in his own Church of canterbury, as you know, King Henry
the second being then in Normandy, but yet he was presumed to be the cause and
occasion of this fact, though him self denied his intention thereunto al his
life after. but the universal Church of Christendom condemned him therein, and
began presently to celebrate this feast, every year by public authority, as
of a martyr, and appointed the gospel for the mass of this day, to be taken
out of the 10. of S. John, vvher Christ sets down the difference between
the good shepherd and the bad, for that the bad shepherd and hireling runeth
away when he sees the wolf coming to devour his sheep, but the true
shepherd stays and sticks to the defense of his sheep, and offreth his
life for the same if need be, as our Savior says in these words. Bonus
Pastor animam suam dat pro ouibus suis the good Pastor gives his life for his
sheep.

These words the first of the two scollers that preached in Latin, took for
his theme, and applied them to the present feast of S. Thomas, which he said
did appertain to every several sort and degree of people there present, and
that for diverse particular reasons which he touched in his preface, which
preface for that it sets forth the great variety of honorable personages
that were at his sermon, I shall not omit to put it down here word for word
as it was vttred and that also in Latin, although you be no great Latinist,
but I shall take pain also to put the same in Inglish. Thus then he began with
as much commelynes, grace of speech, and fervor of spirit, as ever I remember
to have hard any man in my life before. THE BEGINNING OF the Latin Sermon.
DIcturus hodie de praeclarissimo Ecclesiae Catholica lumine diuo Thoma
Cantuariensi (Illustrissime Cardinalis, clarissimique auditores) illud saepe
mecum ad solatium cogitare soleo, nihil me dicturum in hac tanta freque^tia,
quod ad omnes fere non pertineat; cum nemo fortasse sit ex vniuersa hac
nobilissimaque hominum corona, qui aliquid suum in gloriosissimo hoc Dei seruo
no^ agnoscat. Dicturus enim sum de ciue apud ciues, de senatore apud senatores,
de iudice apud iudices, de regni cancellario apud conciliorum praesides; de
religiouis assertore, apud religionis vindices, de Pastore vigilantissimo, apud
animarum duces: de regularis vitae professore, apud regularis vitae
obserua^tissimos: de Archiepiscopo apud archipraesulem: de vniuersi regni
primate apud vniuersalis Ecclesiae purpuratum antistitem: de martyr denique,
apud martyrij cupidos, si Dominus eos dignos inuenertt. Itaque cum omnium
parts in praesenti celebritate reperiantur, quid ni omnium quoque votis,
omniumque precibus ad commanem omnium Dominum recurramus, vt dicentem me
hodierno die, vel narrantem, vel perorantem vel supplicantem, vel lamentantem
etiam, and complorantem, (si id vel temporum vel rerum Anglicanarum necessitas
postulabit) diuina sua gratia comitari dignetur? and in primis beatissimam eius
matrem (quam summa semper religione Archiepiscopus Thomas venerabatur) onini
contentione imploremus, vt dexteram porrigat dicenti, and fluentem orationis
meae cursum ad filij sui gloriam plentissime dirigaet.

In Inglish thus.
Having to speak this day (most excellent and renowned Cardinal, and you the
rest most honorable auditors) of that right famous and noble light of Christ's
catholic church S. Thomas of Canterbury one point am I well to remember for
my comfort that I shall speak nothing this day in this noble audience which in
some sort pertayneth not to all that are present, seeing there is scarce any
man in my opinion in this most ample and honorable assembly which may not
acknowledge some part of his estate calling or condition, to be resembled in
this most glorious servant of our Savior.

For if you consider well, my speech must be 1. Citizens.
of a citizen unto cityzens, of a Senator unto senators, 2. Cou^celours.
of a judge unto judges, of a head and Chancellor of a kingdom unto the heads
and 3. Judges.
presidents of honorable counsels, of a defendor 4. Presidentes of concelles.
of religion, unto them that by office do protect 5. Iquisitores.
religion; of a vigilant pastor unto those that are Captains in guyding
souls, of him that 6. Pastors and preachers.
professed reguler life, unto such as are most obseruant of regular austerity,
of an archbishop 7. monks and friars.
to an archprelate, of the primate of an universal 8. Archbishopes Cardinales.
kingdom, to a Cardinal of Christ's universal church, and finally of a martyr
to them that are desirous of martyrdom, if god shall 9. Inglish scholars
dedicated to martyrdom.
find them worthy of so great a dignity, wherefore seeing all that are present
have there parts in this holy celebrity; what remains but that with the
prayers of al we make recourse to him, that is master and Lord of al, beseching
his divine majesty to accompany me this day with his holy grace, while I in
this sermon shall recount, declare, persuade, implore, cry out, complain or
weep in your presence, according as the consideration of these times or the
most afflicted state of our desolate country shall enforce me to do. And first
of al, let us begin with our humble recourse unto his glorious mother the
blessed virgin Marie, whom S. Thomas ever honored with special devotion,
desiring her with al instance to assist me in this action for the directing
the course of this my spech, unto the honor and glory of her son, our Savior.



This was the entrance unto his sermon which he prosecuted after with such
fervor of spirit, choice of good words and tender matter, as no man I think
passed without his part of tears, as before I told you, and suerly if it
were not over louge I would send you the whole sermon, as perhaps I may when it
comes forth in print, as I think it will, for I have hard diverse say they would
procure it, but for me at this time it shall be enough to have repeted this
beginning, and to adioyn thereunto (for that it seems to me very excellent and
effectuous) the very last part and conclusion of al which he added in few
words, about the martyrdom of saint Thomas, after he had vttred many notable
things of his life, and especially of his great austerity in fasting, praying,
vvearing of hear cloth, chastening of his body, and other such afflictions of
his flesh, which this blessed servant of god (by testimony of them that lived
with him, and have written his life) did use, both at home and in his
banishment. After al which this preacher brought in this conclusion, turning
his spech to the rest of his felloes the Inglish scholars there present.

THE CONCLUSION OF THE SERMON.
ATque haec dicta sint, vt hinc etia^ intelligamus (fratres mei charissimi)
quae vita martyrium antecedere debeat; quantoque disciplinae ac sanctitatis
studio, hoc summum in terris bonum, a Domino sit comparandum. Thomae vero pro
hac singulari vitae praestantia, non est mirum si singular quoque genus
martyrij conssumce fuerit; de quo cum iam mihi ingrediendum esset, vt pro rei
dignitate nonnulla diterem; video me exclusum tempore, vt ne facti quidem narr
andi locus detur. Sit igitur satis vno quasi verbo summatim quae sequu^tur
perstrinxisse: Henricum scilicet, ficta pace Thomam in Angliam post septem
annorum exilium reuocasse: quo cum venisset, and sedi suae restitutus fuisset,
nouas calumnias statim excogitatas, veteres inimicitias resuscitatas esse: Regi
in Normandia degenti, verba quaedam per iracundiam excidisse, quibus gratum ei
putabatur fore, si vir Dei de medio tolleretur: aduolasse statim in Angliam
aulicos quosdam e regia familia, qui his ipsis festis naetalitijs saluatoris,
Cantuariam ruentes, virum Dei, nec fugientem, nec repugnantem, nec se
defendentem cum posset, nec fores claudi sinentem, sed or antem and ante altar
in genua procumbentem, gladijs nefandis (proh facinus) transuerberasse. Testis
est qui adfuit qui vidit, qui historiam scripsit, qui martyrem Christi rlnis
amplexus, brachium in certamine amisit, amputatum ab homicidis: testis (inquam
est) Thomam in martyrio ne gemitum quidem edidisse, nec in quatuor gladiorum
ictibus qui capiti eius inferebantur, vnquam manus aut brachia sitstulisse,
(quod homines naturae ductu and consuetudine facere solent) vt caput tuerctur,
sed haec tantum verba altquoties ingeminasse: Pro Christo Domino and ecclesia
libenter morior. O virum admirabilem, o vocem diuinam: vidcte (fratres met)
ducem praestantissimu^ viae vitaeque nostrae, videte magistrum intuemini
praecursorem. Pro Christo Domino (inquit) and Ecclesia libenter morior. quae
vox fortior? qnae sanctior? quae praesule Christiano dignior? quae vox Deo ad
gloriam, Angelis ad laetitiam, inimicis ad confusionem, daemonibus ad terrorem,
nobis ad imitationem, omnibus ad exemplu^, ipsi martyri ad triumphum cogitari
potuit illustrior? libenter (inquit) morior: and quidni libenter Thoma, cum
mors pro Christo sumpta, non sit mors, sed initium potius vitae, arrha regni,
sigillum gloriae, porta aeternitatis, and beatitudinis complementum? o
sanguinem been impensum qui pro Christo impenditur. quidni excitemur (fratrcs
mei) quid ni animemur hoc exemplo? vidimus labores huius martyris, breues illos
quidem: sed glorians sempiternam, and gloriam quidem, quae vera gloria est, qua
ille iam plus quam quadringentis annis in caelis fruitur nondum vidimus. has
vmbras gloriae, quae in terris habentur vidimus Thomae mirabiliter
multiplicatas, gloria^ nimiru^ miraculoru^, gloria^ sepulchri, gloria^
deuotionis, and concursus omnium gentiu^; sed inter caetera omnia, nihil ei tam
gloriosum in hoc mundo accidit, quam quod persecutorem suum Henricum, virtute
caelesli ad tantam poenitentiae humilitatem adegerit, vt nudis pedi bus
gemibundus ad sepulshrum eius venerit and infinitis effusis lachrymis, gemitus,
suspiria, and lamenta ediderit; humi etia^ prostratus, veni am petierit a
sancto Martyr, and poenitentiam ab episcopo pro delicto: denique post integram
nocte^ vigilijs, and verberibus tra^sactam, humo nuda residens, omnes ad sui
commiserationem, tanto spectaculo commouit. Quae mayor gloria? Quae martyris
vis diuinior?

O Domine Jesus, vita virtusque martyrum, vtinam placitum esset in oculis tuis,
hanc gratiam persecutoribus quoque nostris Anglicanis facere, vt ad te
conuertantur, and quod Henrico concessisti vnius Thomae martyris exoraetus
precibus, id Henrici filiae concedas, plusquam centum testium tuorum ab illa
occisorum placatus intercessione. O quam laeti ageremus tibi gratias de hoc
beneficio? quam solicit lauds tuas vbique decantaremus? verum si iustitiae
tuae seueritas hoc forte non permittat, hamiliter tamen te obsecramus, vt vires
saltem nobis tribuas ad praeliandum praelia tua in hoc agone quem nobis
proposuisti, it a vt neque vitae cupiditas a certamine, neque metus a
periculis, ueque ignauia a labor nos vnquam retardet: sed omnia impendentes in
tuam gloriam, patriaeque salutem, superimpendamus etiam nosmetipsos si opus
fuerit, vt sic aliquo modo respondeamus vocationi nostrae and infinitis
beneficijs a te acceptis: de quibus gloria tibi and gratulatio and gratiarum
actio in aeternum.

Thus was his ending, which in your language may thus I think in part be
expressed though not perhaps al thing so effectually as in the latin it runeth.

These things of S. Thomas his great austeriti A good life is needful before
martyrdo^.
in life, I have recou^ted (dear brethern and countrymen) to the end that
thereby also we may understand partly, what manner of life, ought to go before
martyrdom, and with how great indenour of discipline and holiness, this supreme
benifit and privilege to be a martyr is to be procured at Gods hands here
upon earth: and for that S. Thomas did excel in this kind of holiness, (as
now I have declared) no maruail if according to the excellency of life, so
excellent a kind of death was granted him also. Of which sacred death and
martyrdom, whereas now I would begin to say somvvhat, I see my self so
strayghtned in time, as there is not space to recount the very fact, wherefore
let it be sufficient to touch the rest that follows in one word, to wit
that king Henry after al these troobles, made feigned peace with the good
Archbishop, and restored him to his country and Sea of Caunterbury again,
after he had bine seven years abroad in banishment; where he was no sooner
aryved, but presently new quarrels and calumniations were devised and raised
against him again; and thervppon the king being then in Normandy incensed with
collar, spoke in his rage, certain doubtful words, vvherby it was conceived
that it should be gratful unto him, if the archbishop by violence were made
away: by which conce at, certain wicked courtiors of his own family, departing
from thence and rushing into Canterbury, even in this festiual days of holy
Christmas good hearers, set upon this servant of god, who nether fled nor
resisted, nor defended himself as he might, The man ner of S. Thomas martyrdom.
nor suffered the doors of the Church to be shutt: but praying and casting
himself before the high alter, on his knees, suffered himself most innocently
to be ssaine by wicked taytifes. Witness whereof, is he among others, that was
present when the act was done, he that savv it with own eyes, he that vvrote
the story, he that held the blessed martyr in his arms, while he was slain,
and had his own arm cut of by the murderers for his labor.

This man I say is witness under his own hand vvriting, how that S. Thomas
in all his martydome, never gave out so much as one groan or sigh, nor in four
blows stryken at his head, whereby his brains were beaten on the pauement, he
never so much as lifted up his hands or arms to defend his head (as men by
natural instinct in such cases are wont to do) but only repeated once or
twice these words, I dye most willingly for Christ and for his Church. O
admirable man, o heavenly speech, behold here (my loving brethren of this
college) behold here a most excellent Captain of this our life and course that
we are to follow: behold our master, behold our forerrunner, what spech more
valiant, what voice more holy? what words more worthy of a Christian prelat?
what sentence more excellent can be imagined, either to the glory of god, or to
the joy of angels, or to the terror of devils, or to the confusion of his
enymies, or for our imitation, or for the example of al posterity, or for the
edification of the universal world, or for the endless triumph of this martyr
himself.

I die most willingly (says he) for Christ and his Church o holy martyr, o
blessed Thomas, thou have great reason to die willingly in such a cause, for
that death suffered for Christ thy master, is no death at al, but rather a
beginning of a longer life, an earnest penny of an everlasting kingdom, a seal
of glory, a gate of eternity, and the very complement of al felicity. O blood
well spent that is spent for Christ, why should not we stir up our selves
(dear brethren) why should not we be animated and inflamed with this
example? we have seen the labores and toils of this martyr, though great,
yet short and sone ended, but his glory is everlasting. And yet the true glory
which he has enjoyed now above four hundredth years in heaven, which only
indeed is to be called glory, we have not yet seen. These shadows only of
glory, which on earth are to be seen, we have beheld most wonderfuly
multiplied unto S. Thomas: I mean (good hearers) the glory upon earth of his
infinite miracles, the glory of his Sepulcre, throughout al Christendom, the
glory of the universal concourse and devotion of al nations unto him. but among
al other glories and glorious accidents happned unto him, no one thing was ever
more glorious or admirable, then that soon after his death, by virtue from
heaven, he procured to King Henry his persecutor such grace and humility of
repentance, as that he came barefooted with many sighs and sobbes unto his
tomb, and there prostrating himself upon the ground with fluds of tears,
asked pardon of the blessed martyr and penance of the Bishop for his offenses,
and so after a whole night spent in watching prayer and beating of him self,
and lying upon the bare ground he departed, leaving all the lokers on most
deeply moved with his hearty repentance, what greater glory, what more heavenly
force of a Christian martyr then this?

O Lord Jesus, which art the life and virtue of al martyrs would it might
please thy divine majesty and infinite mercy to give this grace also to our
Inglish persecutors, vvherby they would repent and turn unto thee: and that
which thou did grant unto king Henry by the only prayer of thy martyr
saint Thomas, that his sins might be forgiven, thou would grant the same
unto king Henryes daughter at the intercession of above an hundredth of thy
glorious martyrs whom she has slain, that she might not perish: O how joyful
should we render thanks unto thee, for this so singular and desired a
benefit! oh how cheerful should we singe every where thy praises for the
same, But if perhaps the severity of thy justice, do not permit this, yet most
humbly we do beseech thee, to give unto us thy unworthy children, here present,
so much strenght and heavenly fortitude, as to fight manfully and hold out
cheerfully in this combat which thou have prepared for us, so as neither desire
of life, may stay us from this batail, not fear of death from peril, nor
sloth from labor in this thy cause, but that we bestowing our selves wholly
unto thy glory and to the salvation of our own selves, and of our country, we
may give our souls up also, and pay our blood in this holyvvork, if need
require, and thereby in some sort be answerable unto our vocation, and to the
infinite benifits which of thee we have received, for which both praise glory
gratulation and thanks giving be unto thee for all eternity. A men.

This was the end of his speech, and by this you may imagine of what tenor the
residue was. The effect of the second sermon in Spanish.
The other sermon made after mass in Spanish I vvil not repeat, for breuity
sake, and for that by this you may easily guess the effect thereof for it was
to give the people a reason of so many Inglish men's coming forth of Ingland in
these days, what were the true causes and necessities thereof, what there usage
was at home, what their end abroad, and what particular purpose and profession
these youths that came for study sake to Siuil had before their eyes: In all
which as there were many things of edification, compassion and tenderness in the
behalf of these youths, so were there also diverse points (though uttered
truly with great modesty) which pinched to the quick, and to hear them ^ould
not but give me exceeding grief for the many causes I have to houour and love
your. Country as you know. and truly I imagine that if the Queen or some of
her counsayl had bine present, it would have moved them much, and that perhaps
to a far other sense and meaning the^ you conceive, but now things grow to
further breach and exasperation every day, and god only knows what will be the
end of al.

I had almost forgotten to tell you of a certain fair paper set up this day in
the Inglish College Poemes ane devises of learning.
emongst other poemes, and learned devises of the scholars, which paper did
represent the antithesis or contrary procedinges of two King Henry's of
England, to wit, king Henry the second before mentioned, who persecuted S.
Thomas of Canterbury in his life, but after repented as has bin showed, and
king Henry the eight who four hundred years after his death cited and
condemned him and destroyed his sepulere which the other had built up and many
kings after him richly adorned: The devise was witty and the paper pleasant to
behold, being large and fayrely painted to the eye, and it drew many to look
upon it, and to take out coppyes thereof and by this time I thinck it to be
engraued and printed, and therefore in this place I will repeat the same unto
you briefly as it stood.

THE REPRESENTAtion of the two persecutions by the two King Henryes of
Ingland against S. Thomas of Canterbury.
IN the topp of the paper was vvitten this title Triumphus Sancti Thomae
Cantuariensis de duobus Henricis Angliae regibus, which is, the triumph of S.
Thomas of canterbury over two king Henryes ofIngland.

Under the title are placed the two king The first rank.
Henryes to wit, king Henry the second on the right hand armed and angry and
striking at S. Thomas that was painted before him, flying away and falling
down on his knees, and over the kings head is written Henricus Secundus
Angliae Rex, and between him and S. Thomas was written, Persequitur viuum and
fugieniem, he pursues him in his life flying from him: On the left side is
painted king Henry the eight very fatt and furious and S. Thomas lying before
him with the ensigns of glory, and over the king is written, Henricus octauus
Angliae Rex, and between them is written, Persequitur mortuum and regnantem. He
pursues him dead and rayning in heaven, and this is the first rank,
containing four pictures as you see the two kings and S. Thomas twice put
in the middle, once alive and then dead and glorious.

In the second rank are set the before said two The second ranek
kings again and in the middle the tomb and sepulcre of S. Thomas as it was
in Caunterbury, very rich and sumptuous, but the kings, are painted in
different manner, for king Henry the second is painted le^^e and repentant,
barefooted kneeling on his knees, and whipping himself seuerly before the said
sepulcre, as in truth the matter passed, and it is written between the sepulcre
and him. Ad sepulcrum martyris poenitentiam agit, he did penance at the
martyrs tomb; but on the other side king Henry the eight is painted more fatt
and monstrous them before sweating and chaffing and in great fury digging down
the sepulcre with a pickaxe and the writing is: Sepulcrum martyris demolitur,
and cineres dissipat: he breaks down the martyrs tomb and casts abroad
his as hes into the air.

In the third rank are painted under king Henry the second, many angels with
garlands and The third rank.
crowns in their hands expecting him to glory and salvation, for his penance
and hearty a mendment, and over there heads is written: Inuitat ad gloriam, they
do inuit him to glory, and under king heury the eigh are painted as many
devils with instruments of torments in their hands, and over their heads is
written. Expectant ad penam, they expect him to punishment and between both,
these in the middle is painted Queen Elizabeth beholding sadly the one and the
other example, and over her head is written Elizabetha Henricorum filia, for
that she is descended of both these Henryes, and the sentence written beneth is
E duobus elige, choose which you will of these two.

In the fourth, ra^ck are placed two Inglish students in their College
garments, one on the one The 4. tanck.
side of the paper and the other on the other, holding up the said paper, and
oming each of them six verses in Latin to Queen Elizabeth for explication of
their meaning in this representation, and over the verses is written this
title. AD ELIZABETHAM

Angliae Reginam Alumni Collegij Anglicani Hispalensis:



The first Scholar says thus. REgibus Henricis atauis proauis que Britaunis
Edita, and hoc ipso nomine, nata patre:
Cerne quid acciderit, bellum est vtrisque nefandum
Cum Thoma, at dispar finis vtrique fuit.
Hic gemitu vitam tulit, iste furore gehennam,
Quid speres, timeas, quidque sequaris habes.


The second Scholar in effect utters the same sense but in other words as
follows. Concipit Henricus scelus impium atroxque secundus,
At scelus octauus aggrauat octagies.
In Christi famulum fremit is, furit alter, at iste
Tetrius, hoc vitae finis vtrique probat.
^^ vtinam iusto perpendas pondere vtrumque:
Et spectes atauum, non imitere patrem.


It shall not need that I expound these verses unto you, and much less that I
put them into Inglish poesy seeing my skill and use therein is not great: the
sum is that they do propone unto ^er majesty, the acts and ends of both
these ^ings her progenitors, wishing her rather to ^ollow the example of king
Henry the second, that repented his sins, then king Henry the ^ight that died
in the same.

I do not remember any other thing that I have, ^o write unto you about this
college in Syuil except I should tell you how these scholars seem to shroude
themselves very peculiarly under the protection of our blessed lady the Queen
of heaven, against the persecution of your Queen of Ingland. For to this end
it seems there custom is to meet at the church, every day after dynner to
say our ladies letanies, besides the common letanies of the church which they
use to say after supper; and to the like end it seems the putting up of our
ladies picture serves over there gate at the very entrance of their first
court, where two scollers are painted kneeling before her with these four
verses between them for explication of these words written above. ANGLIA DOS
MARIAE.

INgland is the Dowry of our lady: the reason of which words these scholars
do yield in these verses saying. Prima dedit sceptrum conuersa Britannia nato
Virginis; hinc dicta est Anglia, dos Mariae.
Ergo tuam repetas matter sanctissima dotem,
Quique tuo repetunt iure, tuere pia.


The sense of which verses is, that for so much as Britanie now called
Inglande, was the first kingdom that wholly together gave it self and
submitted her kingly-scepter unto Christ Jesus the son and spouse of our
lady; therefore by a certain devout kind of speech, oul^ Inglish authors did
say Ingland to be the Dowry of our lady, which being so, these sco^^ in
consideration that her and al other sain^^ honor, is excluded from thence they
do beseech her to recover again this her au ncient dowrye, and so assist them
that go in her sons name and hers to negotiat the matter, by preaching and
teaching and offering their blood for regayning the same. Further does there not
come to my remembrance, any other news at this time to writ you out of these
pattes, of Spain, except I should tell you of the sundry books that Diverse
books written against the last Inglish proclams tion.
I have seen here printed of late, in diverse countries against the last
proclamation published in Ingland, upon the 29. of November the year past of
91. against Catholics and for their searching out and apprehension, which
proclamation is set abroad in many languages and many books written against
the same, printed as I have said in diverse nations, which do make both the
thing and manner of proceeding of your common wealth in this behalf, very
odious. Three books in Latin have I seen, besides sundry in Inglish which I
name not, the first was set forth by one Ioa^nes Pernius in Germany, Ioannes
Preuius.
and dedicated unto your Lord Treasorer whom he scowreth in particular, and by
a larg and sharp discourse refuteth the said proclamation, and sets down
the inconveniences of this your proceeding.

The second author that I have seen is of Andreas Philopatrus.
Rome and calls himself Philopatrus whereby it may perhapps be presumed that
he would signify himself to be alouer of his country and he sets down the
whole proclamation at large word for word, in five parts or sections, and
answers to every particular thing spoken in the same, as namely touching
the pope, the kings of Spain, and france, the Seminaries, and Inglish
seminary priests both abroad and at home, and the like, showing al my L
Tresorers accusations and asseuerations, touching these points to be evidently
false and founded commonly in layne lying, and this not only in matters of
religion, but also in all other public affairs and negotiations, which is a
sore blemish to so public a person for the which I can assure you this man
gives him many ways such rough hewing and utters so many particulers of the
present state of Ingland, and uses so often your own laws stories, and
cronicles to prove it, as it makes all sorts of strangers wonderfully
desirous to read it.

The third author which I have seen wrotte in flaunders as it seems, and is
named Dydimus Veridicus as a man would say Thomas tell truth, Dydimus veridicus.
who being a subject of this king as he pretends, and both witty and
eloquent and taking upon him principally to defend the king his masters
procedings toward Ingland, and to refute the particular accusations, laid
against him in the proclamation, he waxes very sharp many times not only
against my lord Treasorer as philopater does, but also against the whole state
which greaueth me to read.

As for example, at the beginning in the 9. page of his book, for that my Lord
Burley seemed to bragg in his proclamation of the most quiet state and government
of your common wealth for 33. years together, while other common wealths
round about you have lived in broils; this man takes in hand, not only to
prove that all these broils have bin procured by Ingland, but also that Ingland
it self is far of from al condition and nature of a true quiet common wealth
and thus he begineth.

The peace and tranquillity of a kingdom or common wealth, is not troobled only
by arms The words of Die dimus,
and open war of the public enemy abroad or at home, but principally and
most daungerously of al other, by the disorder and disagrement at home of her
parts and members among themselves, and by the violent proceeding of such as
manage the same, which three examples that ensew shall declare.

That house cannot in very truth be said to be commandments. Secondly that
Shipp cannot Didimus against that first point of your L. Tresorers proclamation.

And after he has persued many particularityes of the afflicted and dangerous
present state of Ingland, by reason of the division in religion, disuinon and
hatred between protestants, Catholics, and puritans, complaints and
discontentments on every side, incertainty of succession unto the crown,
poverty of the people for lack of trafique, breaking of merchants for the same
cause, burden of unnecessary and unprofitable wars, daily multiplying of
intolerable tributes, pestering the realm with innumerable renegat and
rebellious straingers, liberty of thieves by so long permission of piracy,
unjust vvarres, diffidence and distrust in the one toward the other, and open
domestical dissension in every town parish and particular house over all the
land, for one cause or other, After all this I say he passes on to compare the
estate of Ingland with other kingdoms and common wealths abroad showing the
great hatred and obloquie which your country is in for styrring vvarres and
rebellions on every side, but for no one thing more, the^ for so open dealing
with the Turk the public enemy of al christian profession, Dealing of
England with the Turck.
inuitinge and styrring him to turn his forces upon Christendom thereby to
hurt the king of Spain, which this man anoucheth to be evident, not only by
the often embassages letters and prese^ts sent unto this professed enemy of
Christ's name, from England these later years: but also by a plain letter
written by the Turk himself about three or fowers years agone, to the Queen
about this matter soon after the defeat of the spanish Armada, which letter
being intercepted in Germany and printed there both in the Latin and germane
tongues, was afterward published again, and inserted into an History of our
times, set forth by on Ionson Doccom of friselande, and now again laid abroad,
by this Didimus and the letter is word for word as follows, for that I
suppose you will be desirous to see it, thus then goes the title.

HONORATAE A DOmino The title of the Turks lettre.
legis christianae matronae, culmini castitatis, inter castissimas faeminas
populorum, qui seruiunt Jesus, etc.
In Inglish thus.
TO the honorable matron, honored by the lord of Christian law: to her that is
the hight and topp of chastity among the most chaste women of al people that
serve lesus: to her that is adorned with the glory of domination and
government, lady of many kingdoms, reputed of greatest, power and praise
among the nation of Nazarens, to wit, Elizabeth Queen of England to whom we
wish a most happy and prosperous end.

You shall understand by these our high and imperial lettres, directed unto you,
that your ambassador residing in this our high and noble court, did present
unto the throne of our greatness, a certain writing of yours which informed us,
how that for these four years past you have made war upon the king of
Spain, Informations given to the Turck against the kof Spain.
thereby to break and diminish his forces, by which he is become dreadful unto
the rest of Christian Princes, and has determined to make himself lord over
al, and monarch of the whole world besides: more over the said lettre does show
how that the self same king of Spain, has by violence taken away the kingdom
of Portugal from Don Antonio the lawful king thereof, lawfully created:
moreover that your intention is to let hereafter the navigations of this king
unto the Indians, whereby he is wont to bring home every year into spain great
store of gold and silver, spices and precious stones, worth many millions, by
which he is become so rich, as he has commodity to molest and endanger al
other Princes and if he should be let a lone he would grow to be so powerable
that at lenght it would be hard to resist him.

Upon which considerations your said Ambassador, did make humble supplication
unto The petition of the Inglish Am bassador William Harborn.
our greatness, that we should vouch safe in the beginning of this next spring
to send our imperial navy upon the said King, assuring us that he would not be
able to resist the same, for the great over throw and damage which he has
received by your navy of late: and seeing he is scarce able to resist your
forces alone, no doubt but that he would be overcome if of many sides he be
innaded at one time which would be greatly (as you say) to the commodity of al
Christian Princes, as also of this our high court, to which it appartayneth to
take the protection of such as fly unto the same for succor (as Don Antonio
does, being driven out of his kingdom by the said king of Spain) and
therefore, that we should give him help and succor, according to the custom of
our noble auncetours and predecessors of happy memory, (whose sepulcres God
almighty lighten) who were wo^t always to give royal assistance to such as
were oppressed and came for aid to their imperial highneses.

These things and many other did your said The Turks answer.
ambassador declare at large before our royal throne, al which we have
understood and laid up dilligently in our minds, and for the present our
answer is, that vvher as we have had war now many years in Persia with
intention to gain that kingdom, and to join it, to the rest of our ancient
Dominions, and to reueng our selves upon that accursed heretical Persian, that
holds the same: now by the grace of our great God, and by the help of our
most holy prophet Mahomet, we are very nere to obtain our purpose, according
to our desire, which being once done, al necessary provision shall be made out of
hand for performance of these things which you desire and demand, assuring
you, that if you do co^tinew this league of frenship puerly and sincerly,
with this our high court, you shall find no refuge more secure, nor any haue^
of love and good will more firm and sure then this of owrs, by which no doubt
all your wars with the spaniards shall succeed unto you according unto your
desire, under the shadow and protection of this our happy throne, and seeing the
king of Spain has gotten by fraud and violence, all that he possesses, no
doubt, but by the grace of god, al such fraudulent deceauers shall quickly be
destroyed.

In the mean space we do exhort you to lose no time nor occasion to do him
hurt, but The Turks exhortation to the Q.
to be watchful and diligent, and according to the couenaunts already made
between us, that you show your self a friend to our friends, and an enimye to
our enimyes, and that you signify from time to time unto this our high court,
what new wars soever be taken in hand in those parts, and what you can
understand, To be his spy.
concerning the King of Spain to our and your commodity, furthermore I am, to
advertise you, that this your ambassador having done his Commendation of the
Inglish embabassadour by the Turk.
duty, and fulfilled the function of his embassy with great care and
diligence, and having left here in his place for his co^missary and agent,
Edward Bardon he departs now with our license toward your kingdom, who for
his faithful service Edw. Bardon.
here performed deserves no doubt to be much esteemed honored and exalted
above others, and when he has gotten all those honores and preheminenses of
you, which he deserves, let him return again presently with your letters, or
some other principal man in his place, to be your ambassador here, and to
continue this office of friendship between us in this our high court, and thus
much we thought good to advertise you, by our own sovereign lettres and
seal, which you shall give entire credit unto. Given this fiftenth of Benedicti
Rhamaram.

Hitherto is the lettre of the great Turk unto your Queen, that is to say,
of that great proud and barbarous enemy of Christ's holy name and religion,
wheruppon this Dydimus does deduce diverse considerations of importance and
consequence, as namly first of al, about religion, Considerations upon the
Turks letter.
and conscience, saying who would have thought when England upon pretense of
purer serving of Christ, did first separate it self in religion from the rest
of Christian kingdoms, that it would have come in so few years, to that
pass, as to make recourse to Christ's open enemy and persecutor, and that
against Christians? as also that for the hatred of some one Christian Prince,
to seek to put into Christ's enemies hands, so many millions of his subjects
as are in Spain? and to put in hazard al Christendom besides.

The second consideration is of wisdom and policy temporal, for what wisdom
or policy in the world can there be in this, says he (though we set a side al
fear of God and religion) to call so potent an enemy as the Turk is, into
Spain, or to think that he would be a better friend to the state and subjects
of Ingland, that are Christians, then the king of Spain, that is a Christian,
or to imagine that when Spain should be lost, Ingland could be safe, or when
this ambicious tyrant should have enthralled the spainards, he would suffer the
Inglish to live at their liberty? was not Constantinople? was not Africa and
many other realms lost from Christianity by this most devilish and miserable
envy, of one realm and Prince against a another.

A third consideration is of honor and reputation, which seems excedingly to
be touched and distayned by many points in this lettre discovered, for what a
thing is it says he, that Ingland which was wont to be a kingdom of so great
honor, nobility, and valor in kingly proceeding, should now come to make such a
narratio^ to the great Turk, as here is set down, by the tyrants own letter,
to wit, that the king of Spain meant to make him self lord of al
Christedome, and monarch of all the world; that he has taken Portugal by
violence from Don Autonio the lawful king, and lawfully created, vvheras all the
world knows that the Kings title to Portugal was decided by the laws of that
kingdom it self, and by the approbation of the last king Cardinal of the same,
who also pronounced Don Antonio for an open known bastard, whom all the
nobility afterward refused and no man ever created him king, but only a few of
his own servants and some other of the baser vulgar people solicited by them
in Lisbone and other parts near there about: and yet that Ingland to the Turk
should aduoutch him plainly for a lawful king and put out by violence, exhort
the Turk to restore him by his forces according to the custom of his noble
ancestors who are known to have devoured so infinite christian blood and
have destroyed so inumerable christian estates wherein our Savior was long
honored and now Mahomet is adored: that Ingland should offer concurrance in
this devilish action, and should take a commission from the Turck (as in this
his letter is given) to be a spy against the rest of christianity, and to
aduertiz him of al new vvarres and affairs Great indignitye to England.
that pass among Christian Princes, and finally to be a friend to al his
friends, and enemy to al his enimyes, which is the highest infamye that ever
could fall upon any state realm or kingdom that bears the name ensign or
profession of Christian religion.

These and other contemplations has this author upon this matter, which I
pass over and do come to tell you that besides these books and tretises
written in Latin, I have also seen diverse pamphlets written in Inglish
against this proclamation no less stinging then the other in Latin, and al of
them both of the one and the other sort, translated commonly into other vulgar
tongues also, as Spanish Italian french and flemish, which do make the common
subject of ordinary talk in these days to be of your affairs in every
country.

And last of al, here has come forth a book Father Ribadeneyra against the
procli amation and new statuts.
in Spanish written by one father Pedro Ribadeneyra a man of very great
reputation in these kingdoms both for his learning gravity and eloquence in
this language, and this book conteyneth the storye of Inglish affairs from
the year eighty and eight (until which time he had set forth the said story
in Spanish before according to the latin story of the Inglishe Schism written
by D. Sanders and Riston and other aduertisments) and now he continues this,
even unto this year 93. And in this said story he lays forth also the said
proclamation at large, and afterward writes diverse large chapters for
explication of the same, where of the one is, (as I remember) that this
proclamation as it is supposed that this was by your Queen and council there.

Moreover this spanish book lays forth two The two last Statutes.
new statutes made about religion in your last parliament ended the 10. of
April of this present year, which seem to have come to the authors hands
even vvhiles the former part of this book was a printing, the one is
entitled an Act to retain the Queens subjects in their due obedience: and
the other for restrayning of popish recusants to certain places of aboade, by
the which two statutes and the strange provisions made therein, as also, by
the sundry books set out by authority at this very time against the puritans,
with the enditme^ts arraynments and strange answers of Barrow, Greenwod,
Studly, Billet and other Brownists: by all these things laid together (I say)
and by the act of three entyre subsides, and six fifteenes, and tenthes
exacted and granted, at one clapp in this parliament, for maynteyning of
wars abroad and your estate at home, this writter concludes, that never
commonwealth was in more miserable and dangerous plight for all kind of
miseries that can fall to a common wealth, then Ingland is at this day: and
consequently most far of from that condition of peace, tranquillity and security
which your lord Treasorer in this late proclamation would make men to believe,
vvheras himself must needs (says this man) see and know the contrary; as al
men also abroad do, that are of judgment or experience, and moreover do
discover his desperate devise of remeding the matter by massacring and murthing
all the principal catholics upon the sudden when soever he shall see no
other shift, for that to this end play nely seems to tend this last statute of
bynding all the better and richer sort of them to reside in certain known
places and not to depart thence further then five miles under pain of
forfeting vvhat-soeuer they have in this world, which is to fill Ingland full
of prisons and chains, as the flemish Didimus before insinuated: a divise so
strange upon so great a multitude as never was hard of before in any free
common wealth, nor practiced (says this man) either by Phalaris or any other
most famous tyrant. Whereunto if we add the second part of the statute vvherby
the poorer sort of catholics are appointed to be thrust our of the realm,
spovled and ransaked, of all that they have, it makes the barbarous desigment
more evident (says he) to wit, that these shall be driven to statue abroad and
the others be kept for the slaughter at home, when the time shall serve, but
god turueth lightly (says he) all such cruel and bloody intentions upon the
heads of the entendors and their posterity, and so does he think that it
will fall out with your lord Treasorer and his offspring and this is all that
I can write unto you from these parts.

THE SECOND PART of this letter, containing certain considerations of State
upon the former relation.
THis that goes before I hadd written in Spain to send to you from thence,
but afterward there being offered a good passage by sea, to return to Holland
with certain company that would needs have me go with them out of hand, I
took my papers and came hither, where meeting with diverse gentlemen, captains,
scholars, and others, as well Inglish, Scottish, Irish, and French, as also
some Italians and Dutch me^ both of this country and high Germany (for all
sorts you know do meet here now) we fell by chance into talk of Ingland, and
of Inglish affairs upon occasion of the former books published in all
nations, as has been said, against the present procedinge of your state, and
namely against your last proclamation and statutes, newly made about religion,
by which occasion also I told them what I had seen, and hard in Spain and
read unto them the former letter and narrarion which I had made ready to seal
up and send away presently unto you by the post, but afterward hearing
diverse politic and important discourses (as to me they seemed) which some of
these men made upon this narration of mine, and some considerations also of
state as they termed them, worthy the noting: thought good to stay the letter
by me for some days to the end I might send you also therewith the principal
points which I hard debated, and so now I do.

The chief subject or argnment of al their speech for diverse days meeting at
an ordinary table, was whether the present government of Inglish affairs,
setting a side al regard of partiality to religion: were in it self and
according The chief subject of the conference.
to reason, experience and law of policy, to be accounted, wise and prudent,
and consequently whether such as chiefly managed the same, and namely the lord
Burley, were in truth a wise ma or no? in which particular though some of the
company for affection to his religion, did for a time stand much in his
defense, yet so many were the arguments of the other side, as in the end they
seemed greatly to yield, and to vvish nothing so much, as that the said lord had
bin present but for one hour, if it had bin possible, or some other that were
privy to his councelles, to yield reason of diverse points there called in
question, which seemed scarce defensable, not only for lack of justice or
conscience (for that thereof they said they would take no regard) but that even
in nature of humane vvisdome and pollycy set down by Machauel him self, or by
any other of less conscience then he, they seemed erronions and of these are
such as hereafter do ensue.

First some of them said (though not al) that The first considera tio^ about
chang of religion.
supposing that nether the Queen nor Sir William Cecil, at the death of Queen
Mary had any great repugnance of conscience to follovv and continue on the
religion then settled in the realm, as both of them (but especially Sir William
Cecil) had oftentimes protested and ever showed by deeds during that reign:
it seemed a great oversight in reason of state to make so universal a change of
religion (which has bin the cause of al difficulties and dangers since)
seeing that without this change the Queen and he might have brought about,
with much more security, whatsoever they pretended by this other means, and
hereuppon, were brought again into consideration, al those reasons and
arguments of state which at that time Sir William Cecil and M. Bacon did or
could lay before the Queen, to move her to this change against both her own
inclination, and the opinious of the rest of her principal counselors which
reasons concerning especially (as is supposed and known) her Majesty's
affairs with the pope, about her fathers marriage, and her legitimation, were
found by every man's censure here present, to be but plain illusions, for that
much easier should her Majesty have bin able to compound those affairs with
the pope, if she had continewed in his religion, then by breaking from him, and
for all other temporal matters, both for her own person and the realm they
had proceeded (no doubt) most prosperously, and never come into these brakes and
breaches vvherin now the whole world sees them to be. And as for M. Cecil and
Bacons own particular aduancements (which is persupposed were principally
respected in this persuasion) there would not have wanted occasions enough to
further the same also in a catholic estate, as we see by so many advanced
and set up by catholic Kings of our country in former ages, and the two late
minions Joyous and Pernon, exalted in our days to so great dignityes by the
last King of fiance. And Rigouez of a page made a Prince, and two of his sons
Dukes with diverse others to like preferments advanced by the king of Spain
that novvis, and that with much less envy, hatred and abomination, and with
much more security of Continuance to their families, then the greatness of Cecil
and Baco^ is like to find, say these men, that was procured by so great a
conunlsion of the whole common wealth, and therefore in this first point and
entrance to all the rest, they are thought to have been neither wise nor lucky,
as one day their posterity vvil testify to the world, and this is the first
point that was discoursed of.

The second ensewing on this first, was, that The 1. consideration of chang of
religion to a different from all others.
supposing that change of religion had been the best, and surest way for those
intents that were designed, to wit of her Majesty's state and these men's
preferments, yet said most of this our conference, it had bin a matter of far
more wisdom and policy (seeing policy was their foundation) to have made
this change to some other religion received in the world abroad, and thereby to
have joined with some other party, or to the communion of some other people or
prince, when they brake from that of the Catholic, so strong and general over
al Christendom, rather then to set up a party alone, agreeing with no other
what soever. As for example, if they had councelled her Majesty to admit
Luthers doctrine and religion as it lies, and is practiced by the followers
thereof they had consequently joined with some Princes of Germany, as nam ly
with the Duke of Saxony, King of Denmarck and others that make profession of
that religion. Or if they had persuaded her grace to have embraced the religion
of Calvin plainly and entirely as he taught and exercised the same, then had
they entered thereby into communion and frenship with Geneua and diverse others
states of Swizerland, as also with the Princes of the religion, called the
reformed in France Flanders and Scotland, and by these means, at least had they
gained some new party to be assured to our realm, by this band and union of
religion, which is the strongest and most durable of al other.

But now for them to put down the old state of religion that was so universal
and so well backed, and in place thereof to put up a new of their own only
devise, that has no stay or trusty friend at al, out of your own realm, for
that it agrees with no state, people, nation or common wealth christian
besides your selves: was such a piece of work (say these men) as a man may
rather wonder at the boldness of the deuisers then any way commend their
judgments considering the inco^ueniences that daily do ensew thereof and must
do every day more and more, and is impossible in man's reason, that it can
continue.

And albeit in Ingland simple people are often told and many do believe, that al
new religions No religion this day agrees with Ingland.
sprung up in these days both in Germany, france, Scotland, flaunders and at
home, if they be against the Catholics, and namely those of Luthera^s,
Caluinistes, and protestants are but one religion in effect, for that they al
do join in league and friendship for the present, to resist the stronger, yet
that is as plain an error, and deception as if we should say, that the Turk,
Persian, Jew and Infidels, which do join easily against the Christians when
and where they see him the stronger, are al of one religion, or not enemies
among themselves when they see their own state free from danger of the other.

Even so, fares it in this cause proposed, the Lutheran, puritan, and
protestant that have taken each one his part of the dominion which the
Catholic possessed, and yet seeing him left so strong and potent in
Christendom, that every day he hops and seeks to recover again the
possession that he has lost, no marvel though they join together, and will
seem one for the resisting of so universal and dangerous an adversary: but if
you would see, how these men would agree or be friends together, if once the
Catholics were extinguished, consider not only their difference in doctrine,
whereby the one part The lutrans and Caluinistes and pu rita^s great enimyes.
does censure the others religion for heretical and damnable: but much more
mark their manner of proceeding in government, where either part has authority
at will: as for example, in those parts of Germany where Luthers religion is
established, is there any use of Caluins religion permitted? no truly, nor the
professois thereof so much as tolerated to live in that estate or to be buried
in the same churches or church-yeards with them, but are cast out even into the
common feilds, as people accursed, and excommunicated, vvherof in particular
your Inglish merchants that live and trafique in Hambrough or any other towns
under Lutheran gouerme^t can well bear witness. Or if contrary-wise in Ingland
or Geneua at this day, any company of people would put up the exercise of the
Luthera^ mass, defend the real presence in the Sacrament, bring in the use of
painted or carved images in their churches, practice confession, hold three or
four sacraments as the Luthera^s do: should they not (think you) be pursued
and punished? yes no doubt, and that with reason, seeing the state of Ingland
allows not this doctrine, nor practice of germayne religion, whereby we may
gather what true accord and frenship there is or may be, between these
professions, or how these people would or could long live together in unity if
they had no common adversary.

And this of the Lutheran and reformed religion so called in those parts of
Germany, where it is received: But if we consider the other party of reformed or
new religion planted by Calvin and Beza in Geneua, France, Flaunders and
Scotland, albeit the state of England do follow more points thereof in doctrine
then of the other before named Lutheran: yet how many and great irreco^ciliable
differences there be, is abundantly set forth in the multitude of books written
of late the one against the other, and especially by that set out now presently
by order and authority of the bishops entitled. A suruay of the pretended The
like (...)
holy discipline, wherein the puritans or sincere Caluinists doctrine is
detested discredited and made heretical, and seditions, yea Calvin and Beza
themselves much disgraced and impugned. Whereunto, if we do add the blood of
such as lately they have put to death in Ingland, for (...) Penry.
defending of this doctrine, and the others resolution to suffer the same: we
may easily see what would become of these two parts if things went to their
own wills, to wit, that either the puritan had so full power to revenge
himself of the protestant by sword, as he defyeth him in word, or that the
protestant were so free from suspicion and danger of the catholic, as he had
leisure to extirpat the putitan as he desires.

By this then do we see evidently said these me^, that the particular choice
and form of religion which Sir William Cecil and M. Baco^ mad and persuaded
the Queen unto at the beginning, was no wise or considerate choice: for albeit
it seemed at that time, to serve fitly their turns for to put down the old,
and bring al matters into their own hands, to place new bishops, Deanes,
Atchdeacons and other like dignityes under the name of the Queen: yet was it
most dangerous and prejudicial to the weal public, in that it was peculiar,
solitary and differet from al other, as has bin declared, and consequently
must needs expect a perpetual war and contradictio^, and that, not only at the
catholics hands, but much more and sharper at the other two parties above
named, if the catholic party could be extinguished, so as the laberinth of
Inglish state and religion, seems hereby to be inextricable, and much
approved was the saying of S. Christopher S. Christo phor Hatto^s saying.
Hatton late chauncelor, to a certain secret friend of his a little before his
death, that the clew t^yned up by these devises in Ingland, was so Intanged, as
no man possibly could untwist the same but by breaking al in pieces, which he
spoke to the great grief both of himself and him that heard it.

A third consideration was of the manner of A third consideration of the manner
of proceeding by co^p^^^lo in matters of religion.
proceeding to hold up and set forwards this form of religion, chosen for
Ingland: in which point also these men found much defect of fore sight and
policy in these that were the first s^tters up thereof: for if her majesty had
bin persuaded at the beginning, to have followed the course of Germayne states
and Princes, which was to give liberty of conscience to al, and to press none
by violent means, to be of their religion, but only to inuit them with
rewards of preferment: it is very like that matters had passed as quietly this
day in Ingland as they do in Germany, where al are quiet, and the princes safe,
and little contradictions or falling out for such affairs. And seeing that
Inglish men do come of Germayne race, it may be they would have followed them
in this point also, but howsoever that be, most likely it is that matters had
never come to those open broils, hatreds and mortal enimyties that now they
are come unto in Ingland: for men being not pressed, many would have had little
care of being zealous or heddy on either part: and preferment only would have
moved infinite people to follow that whereby they might have profited: and
others not stinged or compelled to the contrary, would have remained doubtful,
but yet quiet in their consultations, what way to follow, and so should her
Majesty have bin served of al, and hated of none, and aduauncments sufficient
would have remained for all such as would have bin fotward in that her Majesty
had most favored.

But now by this other course, that has bin taken, of tormoyling, tormenting,
and beating men to their religion, the state is grown to be both odious a
broad, and dangerous at home, and not durable. First, for that as the poet
saves. Nitimur inuetitum semper, man's natural inclination, is to esteem and
desire that which is denied him, and to reject that, which is thrust upon him
by violence. But yet in no one thing so much is this seen, as in matters of
religion, which of al other affairs, is the point that most requires liberty,
both of judgment and will, and least bears the force of strayning: and so we
see by experience, that her Majesty at the beginning, entering and reigning for
some years with mildnes, found no difficulty, (to speak of) on any part though
at her entrance the whole realm was, settled in an other religion. but now
after twenty years pressing men with restraints, imprisonments, loss of
goods and lives, the number is found every day more greater of them, that
openly make resistance, and do less respect and reverence both prince law and
gouuerme^t: and so every day will be more and more, both of Catholics and
puritans for the reasons before said. Which thing certain pollitick counselors
of, Julian the Emperor surnamed the Apostata observing by experience of all the
rigorous courses of former Emperors before him, they persuaded him to change
that course of forcing, into alluring, and so he did, and wrought more effect
in few years by that means, then the other had done by the contrary in many,
and would (no doubt) have done much more, if his life and reign had not bin so
short.

To this discourse said one of the company, if An objection.
this be so, how then do catholics use rigor in punishing them that are not
of there religion, and do prevail therein, as we see by experience of Spain
and other countries, wherofte^ times these new religions beginning to budd up
have bin kept down and utterly extinguished by punishment.

To this answered an other saying, they will The answer.
say that the cause of this is the truth of their religion, and the falsehood
of the other, and that it is peculiar to their religion, by promise of Christ,
to endure for ever, and triumph over al sects: but for that this is not
granted by all but remains in dispute, (I will quoth he) yeald an evident
difference heerof in policy and reason, which is, that Catholic Princes
which by force and punishment, have extinguished other religions, and sects
that began to spting up in there realms, did take those new blossoms at the
beginning whiles they were yet grene, and not well settled and their followers not
many, and so I do confess that all religions may be rooted out, saving only
the true which Christ himself defends, and so many do think that if Charles
the Emperor had apprehended Luther at his first seeing him in Augusta, (as many
of his counsel persuaded him) he had crushed perhapps his doctrine in the very
kyrnel, and the like may be said of Calvin and Beza, as also perchance of the
puritans in Ingland if rigor had bin used toward them at their first rising:
though this last of the Puritans be very doubt full, for that their foundation
being (as after shall be showed) the very doctrine it self that by public
authority is set forth, taught, and maynteyned now in Ingland: it must needs
continually rise out of the same, as the heat from the fire so as it is
impossible to nourish the one and extinguish the other.

As for the Catholics in Ingland, the reason Catholics not easily
extinguished.
is far different, for they being no new beginers but old possessors of the
realm, they were so many at her Maiestyes first entrance to the crown, as
they could not well be al extinguished together, except the land should have bin
left wast, nor can be easily at this day extinguished by force in any reason of
state or probability that I can see: for I do not comprehend those only by
this name, which are recusants and discover themselves unto the world (for
those might easily perhapps be made away as many do suspect is meant by the
late statute of restrayning them to certain places) but much more do I
understand by this people those also, who go not so far forwards as to
discover their religion (at least wise to put themselves within danger of
laws) and yet in mind, will, and judgment, are they nothing behind the rest,
yea so much the more fervent inwardly, against the state, by how much more they
are forced by fear to dissemble outwardly their judgments, and keep in their
affections, and these are also of two sorts, the one known or suspected,
though nothing ca^ be laid against the^ by law, but the other not known nor
suspected at al, but of good authority in the realm, and so much the more
dangerous when occasion shall be offered.

Against, al these then, what does the course of severity prevail? those few
that are known recusants may be vexed and tossed, as they have bin these later
years, and some particular courtyer may be advanced by begging their goods
and lands, but what is this to the common wealth? none or few of them are
converted, there number grows every day rather then deminisheth, and if any do
or shall yeald to go to the church, what is gained thereby? they change not in
judgment, nor come with their hearts, but with their bodies or tongue only,
their inward auersion is so much the more increased toward the state, by how
much more violent this outward compulsion is: and in the mean space their
friends and kynred are more exasperated, their fellow catholics not yet
recusants alienated: the people seeing their afflictions more moved to
compassion toward them, forrayne princes more egged to take their parts, what
then in the end is like to come of this.

And if you put the^ to death or drive the^ out of Inconveniences by putting so
many me^ to death for religion.
the realm, as many have bin these latter years, what profitt also is there
like to come of this? let us guess of the time to come by that which is past:
those hu^dreths that have bine put to death, have they done the state good or
hurt? abroad we see the^ published for martyrs, in all books, tables,
pictures and stories that are written, and no one thing ever moved strangers
so much to admire, England as the sight and knowledge of this.

At home their estimation and parties do increase hereby, seeing there is none
that either is banished or put to death for this cause, but is either esteemed
as a martyr or co^fessor, by them, and so either in respect of his holiness or
in hope he may return again to do them good one day, or for desire of revenge
for his hard usage, there is no father, brother, son, nephew, kinsman, friend
or acquaintance of his left in Ingland which by this is not made a mortal
enimye to his persecutors, and how far this may reatch and extend it self in
such an Island as Ingland is, or what effects it may work in time to come, I
leave it (says this man) to your wiser considerations.

Moreover (says he) I would have you to The increase of seminaries.
consider that before order was given in Inglish universities at home, to
examine scholars and press them to oaths, the Inglish scholar was scarce
hard of in forrayne schools and vniuersytyes, neither was there mention of
Inglish seminaryes to be erected in straynge countries, but after that upon
molestation at home, scholars began to repair over to Doway, and then upon
the practice from Ingland to drive them from thence, they fledd to Rhemes and
increased greatly in number (though al left not Doway but for one remained two
places of recourse) and then again upon dealing with the king of france for
their expulsion from Rhemes an other Seminary also was erected by the pope in
Rome, and after that again when this was pursued from Ingland by many
edictes, an other was erected in Valhodolid in Spain, and after an other
proclamation set out against that, an other Seminary presently was set up in
Seuil, as before in the narration has bin touched, and out of these have and do
come every year into Ingland Priests in such abundance, as my Lord Tresorer
himself confesses that for one that came into Ingland before, there comes
now seven, and perhapps he might have said seventeen, and albeit above a
hundredth of them have bine put to death, yet more hundreths grow of them every
day, and in the mean space her Majesty waxes old, the realm grows to more
dissension and confusion in religion, the Puritans become very hot and heady,
the people wearyed and amazed, whith these manner of procedings, what the^
shall be thee end at le^ght of this course think you?

Truly quoth one of the company for this point of the Catholics, I know not
what to say, the event being doubtful, for the causes and experience which
you have now alleged: but for the puritans I have hard some men of discourse
avouch in Ingland, that they will certainly be extinguished, if the Queens
Majesty live any number of years for that the whole council seems fully bent
thereunto, and were it not for my L. Treasorer who is thought to favor them in
secret, men judge that it would very quickly be brought to pass.

Tush, you are deceived said the other, nay Whether the Puritans may be rooted
ont or not in Ingland.
much more possible and likely it is that the puritan shall overcome the
protestant then the contrary: for that the puritan buyldeth directly upon the
protestants first grounds in religion, and deduceth thereof clearly and by
ordinary consequence al his conclusions, which the protestant cannot deny by
divinity, but only by policy and humane ordination, or by turning to
catholic answers contrary to there own principles: and therefore it is hard
for any man sincerly to be a protestant, but that he will easily pass on also
more or less to be a puritan: and only they in effect will be against them, who
are interessed in the other side, as Archbishopes, Bishopes, Archdeacons,
chanons, notaryes, registers, civil lawers and the like, for not leesing their
co^modityes, and some few counselors also perhaps for not offending the
Queen, who above al others is interessed in this affayre, and yet al these,
being but the lesser number in respect of the multitude (though of most power
for there present authority) it shall be impossible to extinguish the Puritans,
except they extinguish first the principles and foundations of protestants
religion, upon which puritans do ground.

Which thing my L. Barley I vvarrant you well understands (says he) and for
that cause secketh now to hold so great a hand with them, whom he contemned
for some years past, when they were weaker. And albeit in this last
parliament, to content the Queen, my L. of Canterbury, and some others of the
council that favor them not, and to get others to stick the less at yelding
to the statute against catholics, he was content also to let pass an act
against the puritans: yet is it so qualified with favorable clauses in their
behalf (put in diverse of them by his honor as is thought after the parliament
ended) as is easily discovered that he wishes them well, and the very last
clause of all the act, wherein it is said, that the whole act shall endure no
longer then until the next session of parliament, plainly declares the great
fear which the whole state has of them, and that the council walks on
thorns and stands doubtful as yet what the event will be, and how this first
act against the puritanes will be taken and digested by them, and according to
this, assure your self the execution of the statute shall be, and consequently
fear you not, the extinction of the puritans, but rather let the protestants
look well to themselves who have by this proceeding of my L. Tresorer brought
both puritans and catholics on their backs. And vvittely spoke Sargeant Owin
of late in my Sargeant Ovvins speech of late.
opinion, at the Bar against Barrow and Grenewode, that were araygned and
executed, that puritanes and papists were like dangerous pioners, that began
to digg at the two ends, and would enclose at the length the protestant in the
middle, and meet at the very heart of the realm, vnderminyng the same before
it could be remedied: which no doubt by all humane reason of state and common
wealth, must be so. and cannot long hold out in this course, that now it
follows and consequently they were no great wise men that began the same.

To this discourse al held their peace for a while, looking the one upon the
other who should answer, until at length one said. As for the puritans (Sir
quoth he) I am fully of your The probilities that puritanes will prevail.
opinion, that it will be a hard piece of work to root them out, but rather
that they are like to overcome in the end, both protestants and papists: the
protestants, for the reasons you now have given, that they do buyld upon the
very first grounds of al Inglish protestants, that follow Caluins doctrine,
and do seem to pretend but only the perfection and true use thereof, and
consequently that reason of yours has much fitted my understanding, that their
can scarce be a zealous Inglish protestant (for I meddle not with Lutherans in
Germany) but that he vvil pass easily to be a puritan, if some particular
interest do not hinder him, which cannot be presumed of the mayor part, and so
in time if this religion hold in Ingland, it must needs be, that this party
also of the Puritan vvil certainly forward in like manner, and prevail against
the other, but especially if once a Prince should enter that did favor them
indede, as easily may be imagined, that any other protestant Prince lightely
vvil do, after her Majesty, who shall not be so settled in this manner of
government as her Majesty is, nor so persuaded against these men as this Queen
is, and has bin hitherto by all her counselors, and by none more perhapps in
time past, then by my L. Tresorer who now being of an other mind and
designement (as is presumed) though he dare not utter it perchance to this
Queen, yet vvil he easily find reasons to persuade the same to an other
Prince, that shall come after, if he live to that day as perhapps he may hope to
do, alleging and Reasons for the puritan religion.
laying before him that now times causes and circumstances are altered, and
seeing the puritans now so strong it may be dangerous to resist them, and that
their religion is not to take any thing from the Prince, but rather to bring
unto him, for as the protestants religion brought abbyes, Nunryes, and other
religious houses to the temporal Prince, so this will bring Archbishop rikes, As
lands also of colleges in time.
Bishoprics, Deanryes, Archdeaconryes with other semblable good morsels of
wealth, by which reasons it vvil not be hard, to persuade any other Prince, that
has not the auersion imprinted in him as this Queen has, to enkendle his
zeal to be a puritan. And this is the likelyhoode that I conceive that puritans
will prevail in time against the protestants: and this time I believe is not so
far of as that you shall ever see this act now made against them continued, or
renewed, in any other parliament and so it is likely that those of their party
well understood it when they let this statute pass in this parliament,
rather to awaken the puritans thereby in deed then to seek their redress or
conformitye in religion. For what? do you think that any Puritan in the world
will ever be forced to make that form of recantation and humiliation to the
protestant, which is set down in the statute? to wit, that I do humbly
confess and acknowledge that I have grievously offended god in using and
frequenting disordered and unlawful conuenticles under pretense and color of
exercise of religion, etc. Nay I think verily the protestant shall first make
him eat his communion book which he so much deresteth) before he shall drive
him to make this recantation. It may chance drive him to buckle with the
protestant de summarei, somewhat sooner then he had thought before, thereby to
try which of them shall have the upper hand to force the other to recat, but
him I think, verily they shall never bring under, but rather by egging of him
put him sooner up, who first or last will rise above the other, at leastvvise
this is my judgment of the matter take it as you will.

And as for the papist, me think the difficulty of victory is much less
against him, either for putitan or protestant that will be ridd of him, seeing
that now by this act of parliament (as has bin said) they have him by the
leg and so tied up and limited, as they may either ruin or weary him at their
pleasure, whenever occasion or need shall require.

To this an other replied, that as the puritans An other opinion that puritans
shall not so easily prevail.
had great opportunity to grow and go forvvard while the Queen and council
were occupied in repressing papists, so did not he think notwithstanding that
their victory was so suer or easy on either side, that is to say, either
against protestants or papists, as this man made it, for as for the state
present (says he) it is certain that authority is so bent against them, for
seeing the ruin that by them is iminent, as it is like, they vvil never cease
to pursue them: and whereas you say, that there is never a protestant of zeal
but vvil easily pass on to be a puritan, except he be stayed by interest, it
may be so in many, who do only run forwards from point to point of new
doctrines and religions, with such heat and greedines, as they never look
further but to that which is before them, but in many others it may breed
perhapps a contrary effect, to wit that they vvil rather draw backvvards
again, considering there is no stay, not end, nor certanty in running so much
forward, as we have seen in our days, from papists to Lutherans, from
Lutherans to Svvinglians, from Swinglians to Caluinists, from Caluinists to
puritans, and now last of al from puritans again of a mylder sort, unto heddy
Brownists, and this effect it is thought this consideration may work,
especially in diverse of the privy council it self, who being men of wisdom and
ryper discourse will sooner fall into such an account.

And this for the state present of Ingland: but as for any other Prince
protestant that may succeade Of the Prince that shall follovv.
hereafter, the matter is uncertain how he would be inclined in such a case,
and the reason which you alleged, that the puritan religion will take nothing
from him, but add much unto him, as bishoprics deanryes and the like, it is
very doubtful, with me how it would synck into him, and to his council. For
first it is evident, that the puritan religion takes from the Prince al his
primacy and authority ecclesiastical, which in a protestant government is one of
the chiefest pillars and foundations of all the rest. The Brownists also do take
away his authority to make laws, appoint orders, and subiecteth him to the
excommunications and censures of vulgar ministeres and mutinous co^gregations,
and the practice thereof we se partly in Scotland where the king is tossed and
tumbled by troblesome people as it pleases the ministers without heads, to
blow into their ears, so as neither he nor they have any certainty of stay at
all.

The reason also of adding bishoprics and other ecclesiastical livings to the
crown is very doubtful and ambiguous with me, for seeing they are already at the
Princes disposition, I see not what great gift or addition it can be to him,
if any man will pull them down to his hands: nay it is now by experience of
some years brought in question, whether it were profitable eue^ for temporal
respects unto king Henry the eight, to pull down the monasteryes altogether and
distribute there possessions to particular men as he did, or to have permitted
them to stand, and now and then to have fleezed them of there wealth, seeing many
are of opinion (and so am I also) that it is more gain full to sheer every
year a sheep and now and then to pull of fruit from a tree, then to take at
one time the woll and flesh of the one, or the fruit and vvood together of the
other, and this for the protestant.

In like manner I do not think the puritans victory against the papist is like
to be so easy as The Catholics not so easy to be extinguished.
you imagine, for as for the massacre (if any such thing should be mtended as I
would think rather no) at least it is not probable that it will be suffered in
this Queens days; first for the troble and peril that such an act might bring
unto the common wealth: and secondly for that thereby the puritan should be
strengthened and much armed to oppress also the protestant, if once this
cou^terpoyze of the papist were cut of.

And as for after her Majesty's death, vntrl an other Prince be settled, of the
many that are like to pretend it may be thought, that the Catholic vvil
provide sufficiently for himself, not to be oppressed by any sudden violence;
which the more easily he shall be able to do, for that it is impossible any such
matter to be executed generally without some former desigme^ts conferences and
consultations, seeing that many must be the executioners thereof, and as
impossible it is, to have any such consultations or desigments, but that some,
notice vvil come to the catholics before hand, seeing there is no coure
council, camp, or company lightly in Ingland, but that it has some or other,
either by conscience, religion, kindred, alliance, frenship, obligation or
affection devoted to some of them, yea the very parties themselves that must be
executioners of this act in every shire, if it be done, let them be as forward
other wise in any religion as they vvil, yet is it impossible but for some of
the before said causes they will show some frenship, as it is easily seen in all
the searches that commonly are commanded, which being concluded never so
secretly, are yet commonly fore known more or less by the Catholics, and
much more will be so bloody and boy sterous an actio^ as a massacre or general
slaughter would be: and therefore my opinon is, The conclusion.
that these three parties and factions of protestants, puritans, and papists,
vvil buckle together longer yet, then you do imagine, and which part shall have
the upper hand in the end, God only knows: and therefore if my L. Burley or
Sir Nicholas Bacon, might have anoyded this garboyle in the beginning (as some
here have affirmed and it seems evident) or might have tempered the same
sithence, with a more mylde manner of proceeding without bringing the matter
into this disperate contention, or the state into so evident dainger: no doubt
but (as you say) they nether were nor are to be accoumpted men of grear
vvisdome, or government: as some have esteemed them, thus much was spoken of
these affairs.

Sundry other points of government came Other points touching the Lord Burly.
in question at this time, and were disputed to and fro, and my L. Tresorers
prudence therein discussed, as namely and among other things his proceeding
with the nobilitye, whether it were true policy or no to proceed so with the
nobility as he has done, pulling down the principal and holding the rest out
of gouerme^t, and doings, which was the fall and ruin of Crumwell, as also the
holding so many chief offices together in his own hands, which must needs
be a most odious point, from which in policy an ambitious man has to fly for
better establishing of that which he gets, but in these things there were so
many reasons alleged on the one side and the other, as it was hard to give
judgment which was to be preferred in Filijs huius Saeculi.

Other points there seemed of more importance Other consider ations.
and consequence as the open breaking with all the old leagues of Ingland, the
spending of so infinite treasure in forrayne and unnecessary wars, for which
any Prince that shall follow must needs by all probabilyty call him or his unto
account. The authorizing of so open and ordinary piracy by which the honor,
substance, and subjects of the realm are so notoriously damaged, the multitude
of straingers drawn into the realm which devour and impouerish the natural
inhabitants: the many books pamphletts and proclamations which he has put
forth with out consideration, which have given advantage unto the enemy: al
these things (I say) though diverse reasons and considerations were alleged to
defend or excuse them: yet inclined the mayor part of this conference, to note
them rather of some want of judgment then otherwise.

But of al other things the matter of succession The Queens not marrying.
and her Maiestyes not marrying, was thought by all men's verdicts to make
demonstration of grear and notable wants in Sir William Cecil and M. Nicholas
Bacon at the beginning, not only of mature fore sight and wisdom, but also of
true love and respect toward their country and fidelity toward her Majesty,
for that seeing their only end in this great affayte to persuade her Majesty
not to marry, under presence of more fiedome and liberty, and less subjection
to her person, could be no other in truth, but only for their own greater
power and hand over her, (which they well saw could not hold so absolute if
she had ever taken a husband) this consideration ought not to have prevailed so
much with them, either in conscience, reason, or policy, but that they should
have looked to the event which now draws on, to wit the peril of universal
destruction to their country, wherein them selves, their children, and
posterity (for whose advancement they committed this error) are also contained.

Truth it is (said one of the company) that The L. Burlyes gain by the Queens
not marrying.
they two men and especially my L. Burley, has had as long and large and
uniform a reign under this Queen as euet lightly councellor or courtyer or
favorite had under any prince, and perhapps the like is scarce to be read of,
especially so uniform (as I have said) that is, so constant and like it self,
and still with increase without ebbes and flows, rysings and fallyngs as other
wise is accustomed to happen: and certain it is that the chiefest grownde of
all this, has bin the Queens being a sole woman, who thereby has bin enforced
to give her self wholly into his hands, and any husband that she might baue
had must needs have a bridged much of this absolute sway, by taking into his
own hands or to his friends, some part of the government, which this man now
has possessed wholly, having bin to the Queen both husband, and master,
counceller, and governor these many years. Bnt yet seeing that the continuation
and confirmation of these things, and namely the conservation of titles, honors,
and riches by these means gotten to his posterity, depends wholy of the
succession of the crown (seeing her Majesty cannot live ever) it cannot be
thought wisdom in my L. Burley that for the respect of his present particular
sway, he should suffer the public (and there with also his own for the time
to come) to fall into such desperate terms of open peril as now we see them in,
by occasion of her Majesty's not marrying.

To this one of the conference said that he could not imagine that this matter
of succession A bont the succession.
remained so doubtful and dangerous in the judgment of my L. Tresorer, as it
seemed to us and other men abroad, but that he had some secret and sure
designement and plot contrived in his own head, to put in execution so sone as
God shall take her Majesty from us, as the Dukes of Northumberland and Suffolk
had in time of King Edward the sixte, though other men knew not thereof, and
especially when they saw the King, not like to live long, and so when all men
looked for a Mary Queen, they came forth with a Queen Jane, and so may this
man says he with some Arbella Queen or the like, when least it is expected.

No doubt (said another) if his designme^t may take place, the lort shall fall
upon some woman or child, whom he may govern as he has done hitherto, for
under any male Prince of age, he will never willingly live, seeing hither to he
has bin master of wards, both to the realm, Queen, and council for so many
years together, and for that there be so many pretenders now to the crown as
men do say (for the fame goes there wants not three or four at the least)
his Lord ship shall not want store to make his choice of.

And that is our misery said a Ge^tleman lawyer newly come forth of Ingland,
that there be so many pretenders to this garland, which only one can wear: and
whereas you say that there be three or four, I can auoutch unto you that there be
more then three times three which by interest of succession may pretend
thereunto and stand in hope to get the same.

You mean (said an other) by order of succession The multitude of compititors
to the crown.
in long time to come; nay says he, I mean immediately next after the Queen
that now is, and in the first degree. For albeit there be among them (as of
necessity there must) diners and different degrees of descent; yet every one of
them has particular reasons to persuade himself and others, that he ought to
be next in possession, and justly may stand not only in hope, but also in
defense thereof by the sword if he be able, or otherwise by negotiatio^ of his
friends, and the more part of them are in such case, as they must neades take
arms for trial of their title, though they would forgo it, for that no
security of peace can be made by them with their fellow competitors, but with
arms in their hands, and then imagine you (quoth he) when so many of the blood
royal shall atme themselves, what shall become of Ingland and Inglish men.

To this speech of the Gentleman, all that were present stood very attentive,
marueling much to hear him name so great a number of competitors to the
crown, affirming that they had never hard that there we are so many, or so
resolute every man to make good and set forward his particular title. Some
said that in Ingland they had hard in times past, that the Queen of Scots had
a title, which men understood commonly, was cut of by her late attainder: some
talk also there had bin of the Earl of hertfords children, and now lately of
one Arbella whom men say that the Earl of Licester went about to have
married her to his son, and so to have made her Queen, some speech there has
bin also of an old title of the Earl of Huntington, which commonly men thought
was little to the putpose: but of so great a numher as this man speaks of, and
that every part should hold so pregnant hope of preuayling, they said they
never imagined: and desired the Gentleman very earnestly to imparte with them
more in particular what he knew in that affair, and so did especially a
certain Ciuilian Lawyer newly come from Italy Spain and France, where he had
both trauayled and stndyed as also he had done in some parts of Germany, and
seemed much given to matter of state, and therefore made instance to the
Gentleman to say some what of this argument, and subject, offering also to
adioyne his verdicte where any thing should offer it self within the compass
of his profession reading or experience.

To which the Gentelman answered, this is a matter (quoth) he that I have
studied diverse years and conferred in Ingland with men of diverse factions and
affections in this behalf, who though the statute forbid treating of these
points, yet in secret do they discourse very largely thereof with men whom they
dare trust, and notable packing and negotiation there is under hand about this
business in secret, every part for his prince pretended, and nine or ten plotts
I have hard of, for so many persons that do or may pretend it, all which for
that you request me says he, and do promise to say your oppinions also as
occasion shall be offered, and we are now fallen into that matter, and the the
time serves convenient enough, I shall here very willingly impart with you by
way of discourse, not fearing the statute of treason for determinyng any man's
right in succession to the crown, both for that this place is out of Ingland,
as also for that I mean to determyne nothing at all, bur rather to follow the
Academical Philosophers in this affayre whose profession was to argue and
dispute on every side, and to conclude nothing: nay my very purpose shall be
(said he) to show you that I do not know what to conclude, and that the matter
is so doubtful ambiguous, and disputable, on every side, as God only and the
sword must make the conclusion, and this in my opinion, is the chiefest and
most certain and very vvorst point of al other in this great business.

If this be so, (said one of the company) why is there not order taken by
parliament for so great an inconvenience, and how comes it to pass that we
hear out of Ingland that some were committed to prison this last parliament
for offering to treat in this affayre? No marvel Why it is for bidden in
Ingland to treat of the succession.
said the Ge^tleman, for that to treat of this matter now, when there is none to
succed that may be presumed by the neernes of blood to desire more the Queens
safty then there own commodity, (as it would be if she had children of her
own) wear to put her Maiestyes state and person in no small danger, which
she prudently foreseing has for bidden to have the question debated in her
days. Wherein no doubt (says he) she has great reason in allawe of policy:
for that she having no kynred so near in blood as obligation of nature may
assure her Majesty of there fidelity, it were a perilous point to make
determination of her succession now, for it were to put up altar against
altar, and a rising son against a falling son: It were to fill men's heads
with new discourses hopes and designme^ts, to move passions fears enuies
hatreds Ielozies and ambicions, it were to breed new practices negotiations and
canuasses, and to fill the realm with unquiet humors. And for her Majesty, it
were to give her matter of perpetual care, solicitude and danger for it were
in dead to treat of her burial whiles she is yet in health, and to divide her
patrimony whiles she is yet in possession, whereunto I maruayle not if she be
unwilling to yield.

To this may be added also for justifying of her Majesty's proceeding in this
point, so highly mislyked by diverse sorts of men, that it is not probable that
this provision if it should be made by parliament, for the next successor, and
at this time, and as things now stand, would be greatly auaylable either to
the realm, or to the party in whose favor it should be made, not to the
realm, for that we see by many experiences of acts of parliaments made for
succession both in King Henry the eight his time, and much more before, in time
of controversy between the two houses of Lancaster and York, as also before
that again in King Richard the first his days, for the succession of Artur
the Duke of Britany, and other the like, acts, that they were never observed
or respected afterward, when a stronger pretendor came to plead his cause, so
as those acts served for nothing else but to exasperate more the competitor
against whom they were made.

To the party also for whom they should be made, they do sealdom any good at
al, but rather do put him in far greater dainger then before; and namely they
would do so now in Ingland, things standing there as they do, to wit, the
Prince in possession being so far of in kyndred as she must needs live in
Ielosy of that party, and the other competitors being so many, strong and
apparent in there pretenses, as they may be egged heerby to work the destruction
both of the one and the other: for all which respects and many other that may be
alleged, I think this order taken in Ingland, not only needful, but
reasonable also and commodious, said this Gentleman.

No doubt said the Ciuilian, but it is commodious if you respect the present
only, for that it does eschu both garboyles to the realm and cares and periles
to both parties as you have said, I mean both to the Queen and her heir
apparent that should be declared, who must needs be a mortal enimye unto her
Majesty the very first hour that he is declared, for that his next desire
after such declaration once obtained must needs be, that her Majesty were
quickly dead, and he or she in her place; and for that her Majesty must needs
know and fear this, and the other must needs imagine, that she knowing and
fearing it, would seek to prevent the same, between these fears I say and
hopes, these hatreds and suspicions, these ambitioris and Ielosyes, no peace
frenship or long endurance could be expected. And for that the Note this point.
hopes and hearts of men, are set commonly much more upon the Prince that is
to come o^ rising, then upon him that is in fading, the greater dainger were
like to fall upon the present possessor, whereof I could give (you said he) if
need weere, diverse examples out of storye of our profession, I mean
pertaining to the study of our emperial laws, by which is mad^ most evident,
that more Caesar's (who vver^ heirs apparent to the empire as you know have
put down Emperors, then Emperors have been able to restrain Caesar's albeit
them selves were able to make them, so as to the Prince in present possession
it is (no doubt) very secure and commodious to have this prohibition, and that
the right of succession do hang obscure and doubtful, and no less profitable
is it also in my opinion to all the competitors, for that by this means they
have time every man to prepare his friends and work his cause underhand,
whereas if any should be declared the rest should be injured and thereby also
exasperated and him self putt in place of envy and dainger without power of
defense, as has been said, but after her Maiestyes death, if he put up him
self, it is like he will have a party to stick by him to enable his demand.

And this is for the present during her Maie^ties life: but as for the future
time it must needs be a terrible threatening of extreme calami^ye to the
common wealth to have so many lie ^n wait to assail her, as you have signified
do ^retend the crown, which truly I confess says he) with the residew here
(though ^omevvhat perhaps I have studied and read more then every one of this
company) that I ever esteemed to be so many in number, and much less of such
consideration for their titles, ^s you seem to hold them, and therefore I pray
^ou defer no longer to begin the discourse which you have promised and we al
desire.

The Gentleman answered that he was content, and so began presently, and for
more perspecuitye sake he reduced all the present pretenders to the crown after
the Queen that now is, to three principal heads or branches, to wit^ to the
house of lancaster a part, to the house o^ Yorck a part, and to the last
conjunction of A division of the prete^ders to the crown.
both houses in King Henry the seventh, assigning three compeditors of the
first branch, and three of the second, and four of the last, of a whose titles
he discoursed largely at diueres metings for three or four days one after an
other, and the Ciuilian also said his part, and some others put in their
verdicts as occasion vva^ offered, but the two former spoke most and showed
great reading, and had not the Gentleman showed himself somewhat to partial
some times against the Catholic in matters of religion as one that had been
brought up only i^ Ingland he had fitted greatly my humor, bu^ yours he would
have fitted the more for thi^ but in truth his speech in this matter of the
succession was very pithy, and founded in great reason and authority without
partiality to an^ party, and I assure my self that you would have liked it
extremly well if you had hard it, and presuppose that some of the company has
taken it in paper though I know not well yet, nor have I now any time to
enquire the truth, for that the post is upon his departure and I will not
keep this letter by me any longer and now it grows to some bigger buick also
then at the' beginyng I had intended it, wherefore I shall here make an end,
and if I can get the other discourse hereaster concerning the succession you
may perhapps have A discourse of the succession promised.
a sight thereof also, for I know it will yield you very great contentment. God
keep you, at Amsterdam in Holland this first of September 1593.

FIN.

