PANDORA, The Musyque of the beauty of his Mistress Diana.

Composed by John Soowthern Gentleman, and dedicated to the right Honorable,
Edward Deuer, Earl of Oxenford. etc. 1584. June. 20.

Non careo patria, Me caret Illa magis. printer's or publisher's device

Jmprinted at London for Thomas Hackette, and are to be sold at his shop in
Lumbert street, under the Popes head. 1584.

To the right honorable the Earl of Oxenford. etc. Ode. 1.
Strophe. 1.
THis earth, is the nourishing teate,
As well that delivers to eat:
As else throws out all that we can
Devise, that should be naedefull fore
The health, of or disease or sore,
The household companions of man.
And this earth, has herbs sovereign,
To empeach sicknesses sudden,
If they be well aptly applide.
And this earth, spues up many a breuage,
Of which if we knew well the usage:
Would force the force Acherontide.
Brief, it lendes us all that we have,
With to live: and it is our grave.
But with all this, yet cannot give,
Us fair renowmes, when we be dead.
And in deed they are only made,
By our own virtues whiles we live.
Antistrophe.
And Marbles (all be they so strong,)
Cannot maintain our renowmes long:
And neither they he but abuses,
To think that other things have puissaunce,
To make for time any resistaunce,
Save only the well singing Muses.
And the fair Muses that provide,
For the wise, an immortal name:
Do never garnishe any head.
With Laurel, by hearesay of Fame.
Nor every one that can rhyme,
Must not think to triumph on time.
For they give not their Divine fury,
To every doting troop that comes.
Nor the touch of every ones thommes,
Is not of an eternal durie.
Epode.
No, no, the high singer is he
Alone: that in the end must be
Made proud, with a garland like this,
And not every ryming nouice,
That writes with small wit, and much pain:
And the (Gods know) idiot in vain,
For it is not the way to Parnasse,
Nor it will neither come to pass,
If it be not in some wise fiction,
And of an ingenious inuension:
And infanted with pleasant trauaill,
For it alone must win the Laurel.
And only the Poet well borne,
Must be he that goes to Parnassus:
And not these companies of Asses,
That have brought verce almost to scorn.
Strophe. 2.
Making speak (her with a sweet brute)
The ten diverse tongues of my Lute,
I will Fredone in thy honor,
These renowned songs of Pindar:
And immitate for thee Deuer,
Horace, that brave Latin Harper.
And stand up Nymphs Aganapide,
Stand up my wantons Parnasside,
Stand up wantons and that we sing,
A new dittie Calaborois,
To the Iban harp Thebanois,
That had such a murmuring string.
For I will shewt, here with my verees,
(Following the ancient traces)
As high up to the air this Hymn,
(With a strong bow and arms, presumpstous)
As Deuer is both wise and virtuous,
And as of my Harp, he is digne.
Antistrophe.
Muses, you have had of your father,
Only, the particular fauer,
To keep fro the reeue enfernall:
And therefore my wantons come sing,
Upon your most best speaking string,
His name that does cheerishe you all.
Come Nymphs while I have a desire,
To strike on a well sounding Lyre,
Of our virtues Deuer the name.
Deuer, that had given him in part:
The Love, the War, Honor, and Art,
And with them an eternal Fame.
Come Nymphs, your puissaunce is divine:
And to those that you show no favor;
Quickly they are depriude of honor,
And slaves to the chains Cossitine.
Epode,
Amongst our well renowned men,
Deuer merits a silver pen,
Eternally to write his honor,
And I in a well polisht verse,
Can set up in our Universe,
A Fame, to endure for ever.
And fylde with a Furiae extreme;
Upon a well superbus ryme:
(On a ryme, and both strong and true)
I will (Deuer) pushe thy louanges,
To the ears of people estraunges:
And rauishe them with thy vertus.
But in truth I use but to sing,
After the well intuned string,
Of eyether of the great Prophets,
Or Thebain, or Calaborois:
Of whether of whom yet the voice,
Has not been known to our Poets.
Strophe. 3.
But what shall I begin to touch:
O Muses what have I begun,
But speak wantons, what have I done:
Take it of the charge is too much.
No, no, if I would there were made,
I could take an entyre Iliade,
Of only his noble antiquity.
But his virtues would blushe with shame:
If I should not by his own name,
Give him a laud to our posterity.
But if I will thus like Pindar,
In many discourses Egar,
Before I will come to my point:
Or, or touch his infinity
Of virtues, in this Poiesie,
Our song will never be conioint.
Antistrophe.
For who marketh better then he,
The seven turning flames of the Sky:
Or has read more of the antique.
Has greater knowledge in the tongues:
Or understands sooner the sownes,
Of the learner to love Music.
Or else who has a fayrer grace,
In the Centauriane art of Thrace,
Halfe-horse, halfe-man, and with less pain,
Does bring the Coorsser, indomtable,
To yield to the raynes of his bridle;
Vaulting, on the edge of a plain.
And it pleases me to say too,
(With a louange, I protest true)
That in England we cannot sees,
Any thing like Deuer, but he.
Only himself he must resemble,
Virtues so much in him assemble.
Epode.
And naught escapes out of my hand,
In this Ode, but it is veritee:
And here I swear Deuer it is thee,
That art ornament of England.
Vaunting me again of this thing:
Which is, that I shall never sing,
A man so much honored as thee,
And both of the Muses and me.
And when I get the spoil of Thebes,
Having charged it on my shoulders.
In verses exempte fro the webbes,
Of the ruinous Filandinge systers:
I promise to bullde thee a glory,
That shall ever line in memory.
In mean while, take this little thing:
But as small as it is: Deuere.
Vaunt us that never man before,
Now in England, knew Pindars string.
Non car^^ patria, Me caret Illa magi^.
Sonnet to the Reader.
THou find'st not here, neither the furious alarmes,
Of the pride of Spain, or subtilnes of France:
Nor of the rude English, or mutine Almanes:
Nor neither of Naples, noble men of arms.
No, an Infant, and that yet surmounteth Knights:
Has both vanquished me, and also my Muse.
And were it not: this is a lawful excuse.
If thou hearst not the report, of their great fights,
Thou shall see no death of any valliant soldier,
And yet I sing the beauty of a fierce vvarrier.
And amore alone I must strike on my Leer,
And but Eroto I know no other Muse.
And hark all you that are like us amourous.
And you that are not, go read some other where.
Sonnets. 1. To his Mystresse Diana.
It Is first to you Dian, that I have togethers,
Given me and my voice, making you the Idol:
To which I offer both the body and soul,
Of these tears of my eyes, that fall here like rivers.
But in some things fabelons, you must be content
To see what it is, of us Lovers the flame,
And read you must under a Goddesses name,
Of your beats the delycate ornament.
And where as these which are to apayse your cruelties:
Shall not proscribe well, your excellent rareties.
Excuse me Nymphe, as you would have in some ^s^te.
Of heaven your fair semblance: for I do not mean,
To sing you now: but Dian, when you have been,
More gracious unto me: I will sing you better.
Sonnet. 2.
THe Greek Poet, to whom Bathill was the guide,
Made her immortal, by that which he did sing:
And (were it so I know not but) of Corine,
We feign the patron of the Latin Ouide.
And since them (Petrarque) a wise Florentine,
Has turnde his Mistres into a tree of Baye.
And he that soong the eldest daughter of Troy,
In France has made of her, an astre Divine.
And like these known men, can your Soothern, write too:
And as long as English lasts, immortal you.
I the pen of Soothern will my sayre Diana,
Make thee immortal: if thou will give him favor:
For then he will sing Petrark, Tien, Ouide, Ronsar:
And make thee Cassander, Corine, Bathyll, Laura.
Sonnet. 3.
THat death that despises at all kind of beauty.
And would make all love, go into Charons passage:
Would have hit the eyes, wherein I live in seruage:
The eyes both to fair, and too full of cruelty.
But Cupid that still in those eyes was indompted:
The infant knew well, where after this death sought:
And began to cry (death) if thou end thy thought,
We shall neither of us, be again redoubted.
But (death) if thout let me live in these eyes still:
Thou shall see (O then) how nobelly I will.
Hoyse thy honor? for I have not half thy might*
And yet in these eyes, I conquer all the world:
Death hearing this, let him line still in the sight:
Fro whence he shewteth such sharp arrows of gold.
Sonnet. 4.
WHen nature made my Diana, that before
All other Nymphs: showld force the hearts rebell^nt:
She gave her the mass, of beauties excellent,
That she keep since long, in her coffers in store.
And at her framing, Paphae came fro the skies,
with the sweetness, and graces, of Eryceene:
And swore that it should make her so fair (...) Queen,
Of beauty: that the Gods should dwell in her eyes.
But she hardly was come to us. fro above:
Though? but my soul was inflamed with her love.
And I serve her in spite of the troop Celest.
For tell me? why did not they likewise ordain:
That in reward of my love, she showed again,
Esteem me only, and only, love me best.
Sonnet. 5.
OF stars, and of forests, Dian. is the honor:
And to the seas, to the Goddess, is the guide:
And she has Luna, Charon, and Eumenide:
To make brightness, to give death, and to cause horror.
And my warrier, my light, shines in thy fair eyes:
My dread is of thee, the to great excellence:
Thy words kill me: and thus thou have the puissaunce,
Of her that rules the slodes, and lyghines the skies.
And as silver Pheb, is the after, most clare:
So is thy beauty, the beauty, the most rare.
Wherefore I call thee Dian, for thy beantee,
For thy wisdom, and for thy puissannce Celest.
And yet thou must be but a Goddess terest:
And only because of thy great crueltee.
Sonnet. 6.
OF Pyladeus, and of Oresteus, we have
made many disputes, in the temple of death:
And in the Church of Troy, we pro^ue Choreb's faith,
Who made for Cassander, his h^rn^s, his grave.
And there is one, on the mountain Cancasein,
With an Eagle, on his heart Philosiphall.
And there is a stone of a mad Cisyphall,
Least always behind him, and carried in vain.
These temples, and this rock, is in my object:
The church is my soul, the slint is my subject.
My verses are the labors of Sisypheus:
And for willing show your fair beauties, its vain.
Of Promet, for not canning. I have the pain:
Th'Eagle's cruel, and (Nymphe) you are rigrous.
Sonnet. 7.
I Am not (my, cruel warrier) the Thebain,
That my infancy, should be strangled with Serpents:
Nor neither did my nurse give thee any torments:
nor I sucked neither Vropae, nor Elthain.
I came not (my warrier) of the blood Lidain:
Nor neither am I of the race, of Ixion:
Nor Jove, neither bare my mother, affection:
Nor I am no infant Egier, nor Danain.
Nor I am neither the nephew of Atlas,
That made the earth drunk, with the blood of Arguss:
But yet I know wherefore I have all my wounds.
I am none of these which I have said (Dian)
But I am that very miserable man,
Who for regarding thee, was eaten of Hounds.
Elegia. 1. To the Echon.
O Doleful voice, that do answer,
The weepings of my care:
And that here in these mozie groves,
Have pity on my dolanc^.
And th^^ of whom she empty mouth,
(At least) does make a semblaunce,
To seele my wounds that proceed of
Two eyes, to green, and fair.
O speak since thou can not live except
I shall give the brethe:
And since my grievous voice, is only
the nurce of thy steme:
I crying Dian, why make thou
Dye John, answer again:
Would thou I lou'de no more,
Or do thou Prophecy my death.
O noble Nymph tell me, or do
Thou now inflame again,
With the antiqueus amor, that
Thou louedst so in vain.
Or is it that remembering my
Love, I should pity thine.
For the like dollor that thou had,
Even the like do I suffer:
And the like amore that thou had,
The like to me does offer:
Save that thy love was not so fair,
Nor so cruelly as mine.
Elegia. 2. To the Gods.
WHen the eye of the world does wash,
his golden shining heaire,
In the large Occean seas: and that
They have couerd the light:
Amurmuring repose, and a
Restfull and sleepy night,
Is spreded both over the earth,
The waters and the air.
But I change nature then? For than,
Does my brightest Auror,
In a sweet dream present her self,
O dream, no dream: but well,
The Ambrozie, the Nectar, and
The Manna, Eternell.
And to be brief, a vision that
I like a God adore.
Wherefore farewell, day of nights, and
Welcome night waking day:
And farewell waking, of my sleep,
Welcome sleep, living joy.
But what say I, my wealth is false,
And my evil verita-ble:
And I plain of them both, for I
Have in neither delight:
Except ye Gods will short these days,
And eternishe this night:
An^ that God that will do it, shall
be a God charita-ble.
Elegia. 3. To his Diana.
IF the secretnesse of my thoughts,
Were opened to you,
Or if else my dolorous heart,
Had of speaking the usage:
Or (warrier) if my constancy,
Were painted in my visage:
Or that if ye knew my torment,
How it is great and true.
Or, or if any golden words,
In well composed verse,
Could liuelelie show the picture,
Of an amourous rage:
Then should I without doubt amolishe
a Tigers courage.
And move to pity (warrier) if
it were the vniuerce.
But since words, neither can prescribe
My amore, nor my pain:
Time shall it self, witness how much
Both are in me certain:
And that of my passioned soul,
The Divine great loyalties:
Do the sacredness of all others,
I of the Gods pass:
And more then the silver majesty's,
of your Crystal face,
Underneath, the other Phebes, do
Excel all other Beutaes.
Sonnet. 8.
THough I wish to have your favor, which is such,
That it is but for Gods, think you my Audace,
Like his that in your steed, did a cloud embrace:
Or his that was a heart, by seeing so much.
Or would you else because of my hautaine thought,
That I might augment the Sepulchers of Thrace:
Or that I were as the giant Briaras:
Or paid like the wagoner so euelie taught.
No? liberty, Rome, thy wrath the seas (Dian)
Gree^e, Pirates? thy merry Must save Arion.
Or if thou wylt none of these aforesaid things:
Because thou say that my minds are set so high,
If thou think I begin like Icar to ^lie:
Since the eyes are my son, let thy love be my wings.
Sonnets. 9.
IT is after our deaths, a thing mani-fest.
we both go to hell, and suffer hellishe pains:
you, for your rigor, I, for my thoughts haultaines,
That attempt to love a Goddess so Celest.
But as for me I shall be little afflicted,
It Is you (my warrier) that must have the torment:
For I that but, in seeing you am content:
you, with me, I Will bless the place so much detested.
And my soul that is raued with your fair eyes,
In the midst of hell, will establishe, a skeyes:
Making my bright day, in the eternal night.
And when all the damned else are in annoy:
I Will smyle in that glory, seeing you my joy:
And being once there, go not out of our sight.
Sonnet. 10.
THe heavens willing show favor among our pains.
And to make both run, of my weeping the stream:
And also eternal, your rigor extreme:
turned your heart, to rock, and my eyes to fountaynes:
And Cupid does bache him in my silver ryuers:
And being come out, of the flodes, of my ill:
He flies to your rock, where as upon a hill,
The little wanton, does prime, and rowse his feathers.
But when thy winter comes, and that thou art old,
Felling thy rocke-hart, under his tallons cold:
He Will bid thee adieu with an eternal farewell.
And then thou have fair to say Love is a rage:
Old folk say so, cause Cupid does abhor age:
But were they lou'de then, I doubt th'ed not be cruel.
Elegia. 4. To the prisoners.
Cupid has swelde my stomach, with
On such a sacred poison,
And I am in Queen Venus fetters,
so well entertained:
That like a captive, languishing,
And with dolor, tormented,
I think my self well happy, to
Be in a Woman's prison.
Now? As for you wretches that nothing,
but yrons can punish,
If you list you may have a hope,
to be at lyber-tie:
But as for me? I tell you, I Will
die in captiui-tie:
Consuming here in the quicke-siluer-fayre-eyes
of my Goddess,
And well I am contented indeed,
with her extreme rigore.
Swearing, that I never fell in
My soul so great a dolor,
As when I think for her likewise,
Some other should have passion.
And with all this too, yet I have
Neither lost all my judgment:
For we say that man is happy,
only, that is well content,
And I tell you, (you wretches) it
is all my contentation.
Elegia. 5. To his thoughts.
MY thoughts, to full of thought, to thoughtfull
thoughts give now? Repose,
Both to my doleful soul, and to
my hope that is in vain:
For well though my tears drop, fro my
eyes like a swift fountain?
Murmuring my Alas: she hearkeneth
not to my propose.
My thoughts, too full of thought, and too
Far engrau'n in my heart.
My thoughts too full of thought, that give
me over to my dolor:
My thoughts too thoughtfull, if you propose
yet any more langore:
My thought full thoughts, (O Gods) do advance
therewithal my mort.
And Opinastres thoughts the causers
of my extreme pains.
And thoughts that boil this sulfer humor
in my drooping veins.
Speak thoughtfull thoughts, why feed you me
With this Abist esperaunce.
When possessing the joy, of which
I have had such desires:
And for Idolling the fair eyes,
In which are my plasyres:
In the end thoughts, for reward thought
Does breed me a repentance.
Elegia. 6. To his Diana.
MY hope does fell me, that after
This great rigor, of you:
I shall with sacred guerdons,
Be recom-pensed for wrong:
Showing me that I merit it,
Being patience so long.
But this imagind hope, (my cruel
warrier) is it true,
My hope does tell me too (Diana)
That your Divine beau-tie,
Cannot be accompanied with
Such cruelty as thine.
But what is it (my angry warrier)
That yeeldes this plague of mine:
Fortune? or the origene of
The cause of cru-eltie.
My hope does tell me too (my warrier)
that my doleful langore:
Will in a passient end, amolishe
your extreme great rigore:
The which all if it can, when your
Mothers gone we shall try,
But if it cannot do it then,
But would yet feed me still,
With presses of time: I Will give over:
And eu'r after I will,
Esteem our Fortune, too much low,
For a hope set so high.
Sonnet. 11.
HE that was the first, that put these little wings,
On the back of a more, that high God immortell:
He might better have had employed his pensell,
To paint hopping butter-flyes, or Genny wrens.
But if in place of them, the doting fool had
Painted his fierce how, and his rigorous draftes,
And shewde what kind of things, are his golden shaftes:
Then had he been apt to have painted a God.
And you that paint next, you must use other color:
wherewith you may better show his divine rigore:
And for his bow, give him a great harquebous.
Or believe you not, go and look on Dian,
And having seen her fair eyes. I estee me than,
you will give him some thing more then it rigorous.
Sonnet. 12.
AEneas, Orpheus, Cephall, and Demophon:
Of Pocris, of Eurydice, Phyllis, and Creuse:
Have made complaints, as they have been amorous,
Saying, their mistresses, did do them all wrong,
Though they themselves to their loves, did all amiss.
For one gave Phyllis, a poor mournful se-quell,
And the other, left Procris, in the vall's of hell,
And with to others fault, di-ed Euridice.
Aeneas, the last was thought to have least fault.
Though the presumpsion is yet great for all that.
But (Dian) you knoe (Dian) your amourous,
Has not learned like any of them Prote.
Though you are Demoph, Cephall, Orpheus, Aene:
And he be Eurid, Phyllis, Procris, and Creuse.
Sonnets. 13.
HE that will be subject to Cupidos call,
Is chaungd every day. I do not knoe how.
And of this, I my self have made proves enowe.
As Metamorphosd, but wot not wherewithal,
First? I was turned to a wandering Heart,
And saw my stomach pierst with a doleful arrow.
Next? Into a Swan, and with a note of sorrow.
I foresong my death, in Elegicall art.
Since that, to a Flower, and since withred away:
Since that, to a Fountain, and since. I am dry:
And now that Salamander, live in my flame.
But ye Gods, if ever I have my own choice,
I will be turned, into well singing voice:
And there in louange, the fair eyes of Ma-dame.
Ode. 2. to his Diana.
Strophe
AS the little Melisset flies,
(Wanton enfantines of the Skies)
With their theeuishe pretty tongettes,
Take the best of the fairest blomes,
Masoning it on their thyettes,
And therewith build their honny commes.
Euenso with a sprite vigelant,
I rob here, the most excellant
Blossoms: in. the garden Thebein.
And will that through the vniuerce,
The honny destyld in my verce:
Bear out these fair green eyes of thine.
And I will that our England see,
By this Nectar, that I let fall
On thee to anoint thee with all,
What kind of beauties are in thee.
Antistrophe.
All the superbus frontispisses,
And all the threatening ediffices,
And all the high buildinges are lost,
Of Corinthia, in pride extreme.
But that which their Poets did bost,
will ever triumph over time.
I I gold is Eliths Palase:
And gold is the Church of Parnasse:
And those that can enter therein,
Happy are they, and ever shall
Tread on the black roof enfernall,
Living with the enfant Troyen,
That fylles the Nectar Olympien,
Into the great coope of the God,
that thondred the menacing head,
Of the high Orgullus Phlegren.
What, what, my too cruel Diana,
A number have excelde in Beautae:
And yet it is only Hellina,
That lives: and where in save in Poisae.
Epode.
But thou for whom I writ so well:
And that I will make eternell.
And thou for whom my holy pains,
Does chase ignorance held so long:
Conioyning in a vulgar song:
The secrets, both Greeks, and Lataines.
Think thou it is nothing, to have
The pen of Soothern for thy trompet.
Yes, yes, to whom Soothern is Poet,
The honor goes not to the grave.
And Juno, it is an other thing,
To hear a well learned voice sing,
Or to see works of a wise hand:
Then it is to hear our doting rimors,
Whose labors do bring both dishonors,
To themselves, and to our England.
FINIS.
Four Epytaphes, made by the Countes of Oxenford, after the death of her young
Son, The Lord Bulbecke, etc.
HAd with moorning the Gods, left their wills undone,
They had not so soon herited such a soul:
Or if the mouth, time did not glotton up all.
Nor I, nor the world, were deprived of my Son,
Whose breast Venus, with a face doleful and mild,
Does wash with golden tears, inueying the skies:
And when the water of the Goddesses eyes,
Makes almost alive, the Marble, of my Child:
One hyds her leave still, her dollor so extreme,
Telling her it is not, her young son Papheme,
To which she makes answer with a voice inflamed,
(Feeling therewith her venime, to be more bitter)
As I was of Cupid, even so of it mother:
" And a woman's last child, is the most beloved.
An other.
IN doleful ways I spend the wealth of my time:
Gold, the best of all mettelles. Nightingale, the sweetest of all birds. And
Roses the fairest of all flowers.
Feeding on my heart, that ever comes again.
Since the ordinance, of the Destin's, has been,
To end of the Saissons, of my years the prime.
With my Son, my Gold, my Nightingale, and Rose,
Is gone: for it was in him and no other where:
And well though mine eyes run down like fountains here,
The stone will not speak yet, that does it enclose.
And Destins, and Gods, you might rather have tanne,
My twenty years: then the two days of my son.
And of this world what shall I hope, since I knoe,
That in his respect, it can yield me but moss:
Or what should I consume any more in woe,
When Destins, Gods, and worlds, are ll in my loss.
An other.
THe heuens, death, and life? have coniured my ill:
For death has take away the breath of my son:
The heuens receue, and consent, that be has done:
And my life does keep me here against my will.
But if our life be caus'de with moisture and heat.
I care neither for the death, the life, nor skies:
For I Will sigh him warmth, and weat him with my eyes:
(And thus I shall be thought a second Promet)
And as for life, let it do me all despite:
For if it leave me, I shall go to my child:
And it in the heuens, there is all my delyght.
And if I live, my virtue is immortal.
" So that the heuens, death and life, when they do all
" Their force: by sorrowful virtue they are beguild.
An other.
I Dall, for Adon, neu'r shed so many tears:
Nor Thet', for Pelid: nor Phoebus, for Hyacinthus:
Nor for Atis, the mother of Prophetesses:
As for the death of Bulbecke, the Gods have cares.
At the brute of it, the Aphroditan Queen,
Caused more silver to distyll fro her eyes:
Then when the drops of her cheeks raised Daisyes:
And to die with him, mortal, she would have been.
The Charits, for it break their Peruqs, of gold:
The Muses, and the Nymphs of Caves: I behold:
All the Gods under Olympus are constraint,
On Laches, Clothon, and Atropos to plain.
And yet beauty, for it does make no complaint:
For it lived with him, and died with him again.
Others of the four last lines, of other that she made also.
11 My Son is gone? and with it, death end my sorrow,
12 But death makes me answer? Madame, cease these mones:
13 My force is but on bodies of blood and bones:
14 And that of yours, is no more now, but a shadow.
An other.
11 Amphions wife was turned to a rock. O
12 How well I had been, had I had such adventure,
13 For then I might again have been the Sepulcure,
14 Of him that I bare in me, so long ago.
FINIS.
Epitaph, made by the Queens Majesty, at the death of the Princess of
Espinoye.
WHen the warrier Phoebus, goth to make his round,
With a painful course, to too there Hemisphere:
A dark shadow, a great horror, and a fear,
In I knoe not what clouds inueron the ground.
And even so for Pinoy, that fair virtues Lady,
(Although Jupiter have in this Orizon,
Made a star of her, by the Ariadnan crown)
Morns, dolor, and grief, accompany our body.
O Atropos, thou have done a work per-uerst.
And as a bird that has lost both young, and nest:
About the place where it was, makes many a turn.
Even so does Cupid, that infaunt, God, of amore,
Fly about the tomb, where she lies all in dolor,
Weeping for her eyes, wherein he made soiourne.
FINIS.
Verses taken out of his Stanses, Hymns, and Elegias: all dedicated or sent to
his Mistress Diana.
Elegia.
IN which you ask't my name (confess
your self, if it be not so)
And whether I before, had ever
been in love or no.
My name, quoth I, is Soothern, and
Madame, let that suffice:
That Soothern which will raise the English
language to the Skies.
The wanton of the Muses, and
Whose well composed ryme,
Will live in despite of the heuens,
And Triumph over time. etc.
Elegia.
But how far are the words contrary
to the deeds of men.
The self same night I went where I
admyred you again.
Your silver Phebes eyes, and your
Well set and crisped heair:
Your Venus port, and your countenance
of the God of war:
Your Iban throat, your marble brow,
With your soft cheeks of Roses:
And your Straberie lyps, wherein
Your teeth of pearl reposes.
Brief, I saw you (Dian) in whom
The Gods did all their best,
To see what they could do, when they
Would frame a work Celest. etc.
Elegia.
But how vain and short are the delights
and plasires human.
And of the solace of this world:
What else does there remain,
Saving but repentance: and what
Is it that bears breath,
But by the having life, it is
Subjected unto death. etc.
Himne.
The more stronger the Castle is,
And harder to be won,
The more eternal honor has,
The man that can get it.
And virtue never will give over,
Without a great conflict. etc.
Himne.
To judge a Human heart it is a
Labyrinth, much vnwide,
Wherein we loose us, if we have
Not experaunce for guide. etc.
Elegia.
The woman nere so constaunt, or
the Castle nere so strong:
If the one will hear, and the other speak,
They do not endure long. etc.
New kind of verces devised by him: and are a woeful kind of meter, to sing a
love, or death in.
LIke the doleful bird languishing,
the which does sing,
Her fatal song in sweet accordes,
Betaking her self to her death,
weary of breath:
On Meander her story bordes.
And even so I, without hope that
it helps me ought,
Bedew thy hands, here with my tears:
For I perceive by thy rigore,
that-to my dolor:
The Gods themselves have stopped their ears.
Though speak Dian, what might thou mean,
by this extreme.
Cruelty, having such Divine
Fair eyes: Do thou think that when death,
has took my breath:
That I will end these cries of mine.
No, no, thou art deceived for then,
my sprite again,
Shall follow thee fro place to place,
Exclayming on thy cruelty,
void of pity. etc.
FINIS.
Ode.
COme, come Simonid, and Anacreon,
Come and lay your money to mine:
And let us go and find out Corydon:
And be once drunk with new wine.
Boy: bring hither the greatest glass,
And fill, though it run till to morrow.
Here hold my Anacre-on quasse,
When we are droonke, we have no sorrow.
But first I would thy Bathyll were
Come with her Lute, that we might dance.
And that our old Ronsard of France,
With his Cassandra too were here.
And what say Simon'd shall we send,
For our Wenches, now at beginning:
Ha, he that loves not Wine, and Women,
Will never make a wholesome end.
Odellet.
DIan, if it might come to pass:
Or that I might have my desire:
I would to the Gods that I were,
Turned into thy looking Glass.
Or to the pillowe of this bead:
Whereon thou layst thy dainty head.
Or to water, that I might wash thee:
Or to thy roabe, that thou might wear me:
Or that hang here on thy teatine,
I would I were these pearls of thine.
Or my Dian, to tell thee true,
I would I could be but thy show.
Odellet.
SOme will sing the great feats of Arms
Of Rome: some other the alarmes
of Thebs: and some other of Troy,
And both the siedge, and the efroye.
But what have I to do with warriers:
Meddle I then with those that fit:
No, no, I nere hurt any yet:
Nor nere men to come among soldiers.
I care not for the Thracian God:
I am no man that seeks blood:
But like the old Poet Annacron,
It pleases me well to be Biberon.
And thus in a Sellor to quaffe,
So that some Wench be by to lauffe.
And with Bacchus, and Citherais,
I mean to spend all my whole days.
Odellet.
BOy: reach hither the bottle, that
I may taste of thy crimson lycor:
For when I am in any dolor,
It only reioyces my heart.
The devil made money I think:
For without money, what a living,
Have we that serve covetous women:
And without it we can not drink.
Learning is not now worth a penny,
And these wives care for no fair looks,
And what shall a man do with Books.
Faith hang, if he can get no money.
Odellet.
But why since, death will not retard,
For any gift that we her offer:
My Dyolle, what helps it to guard,
This gold, a rousting in a coffer.
Is It not better that whiles we live,
We give our selves to learning: when
Better then ought else we can give,
(Dead) it makes us to revive again.
FINIS.
Stansse.
DIeus que ie hay (ronsard) qui rien nese propoze,
Qu'a tromper vne amor d'un language allechant,
Dian ie vos pry aiez loreille e cloze,
Affin de n'ouyr point la doulceur de son chant.
Non ie hay plus que mort sa Casandre implacable,
An caeur ou le Burin d'une douce Pitye,
Ne seut grauer benin un seull trait d'amytie,
" Car on doibt payer l'amour d'une amitye semblable.
Quadran.
Lon ne peut inger lesant dans le visage,
Sy l'amant est fidelle, ou volage, en amoure:
Pour le scau^ir an vray fueilletez le Courage,
" Car la durable amytye ne se'preuue en un ioure.
Quadran.
Non non, Ie ne tiens point pour guerrier valeureux,
Vng tas de ieunes sots qui ventant leur Vaillance,
" Au fruit on congnoist larbre: a la perseverance,
" Lon remarque anssi tossed un gallant amoureus.
FINIS.

