St. Saiuour of Southvvarke.
A rate of duties belonging to the Corporation of the Churchwardens of the
Parish of St. Savior of Southwarke, in the County of Surrye, as well in the
right of the said Corporation, as also in respect of their title to the Rectory
of the said Parish, agreed upon by the general consent of the whole vestry,
and confirmed by the Ordinary of this place, in Anno Domini 1613. As follows,
Viz.
Marriages with license.
IMprimis, It is ordered and agreed that the Churchwardens shall have for every
couple that shall be married with license. -- viij. d And for the service of a
Minister -- iij. s And for the service of a Clarke -- xiiij. d And for the
service of a Sexton -- vj. d Sum v. s. iiii. d.
Marriages without license.
Item that every couple married without license in the accustomed time of
marriage shall pay to the Churchwardens -- iiij. d Item for the service of a
Minister -- xiiij. d Item for the service of a Clarke -- viij. d Item for the
service of a Sexton -- iiij. d Sum ij. s vj. d.
Marriages without license at extraordinary times.
Item every couple married at extraordinary times shall pay to the
Churchwardens -- vj. d For the service of a minister -- xx d And for the
service of a clarke -- x d And for the service of a sexton -- iiij. d Sum iij
s. iiij. d
Offerings at weddings.
Item that the Churchwardens shall have for every offering -- xij. d And for the
Minister -- nihil And for the Clarke -- nihil And for the Sexton -- ij. d And
for the conductor -- ij. d Sum xvj. d
Marriage of women out of the Parish.
For those women that shall be married out of the parish and did dwell in the
parish the Churchwardens shall have -- as above said. For the service of a
minister as above said For the service of a clarke -- as above said For the
service of a sexton -- as above said
Certificat of banes asked.
The Churchwardens shall have for the seru^ce of a minister for every
certificat. he shall make of the bands asked -- xij. d
Chrisams.
For every Chrisam the Churchwardens shall have -- j. d
Churchings.
Item that the Churchwardens shall have at every Churching -- v. d And for the
service of a Minister -- ij. d And for the service of a clarke -- ij. d And for
the service of a Sexton -- nihil
Burials in the Chuch.
Item that the Churchwardens shall have for the ground for every man or woman
that shall be buried in the church, with an afternoones knell, or without it
-- xx. s And for the best black cloth -- xij. d And for the second black
cloth -- viij. d And for the third hearsecloth -- iiij. d And for the worst
cloth -- ij. d And for the service of a Minister if he fetch the corpse -- xvi.
d But if he fetch not the corpse -- viij. d And for the service of a Clarke if
he fecth the corpse -- xii. d If he fetch it not -- vi. d And for the service of
a Sexton if he fetch the corpse -- viii. d If he fetch not the corpse -- iiii. d
The grauemaker -- xvi. d The conducter -- iiii. d The four bearers whether
they bear the corpse or not, so they give attendance -- xvi. d
Burials in the Chauncel.
Item for the ground for every man or womam buried in the chauncell with a
knel, or without, the churchwardens shall have -- xxvi. s. viii. d And for the
services of a Ministet and rest of the officers as abouesaid.
Burials of strangers.
Item for the burial of strangers the Churchwardens shall have double duties,
and every other officer double also.
Burials of children in the Church.
Item for every child buried in the Church being under the age of twelve
years, the churchwardens shall have -- vi. s. viii. d In the chauncell -- x. s
For the service of a Minister if he fetch the corpse -- xii. d If he fetch it
not -- viii. d For the service of a clarke if he fetch the corpse -- viii. d If
he fetch it not -- vi. d For the service of a sexton if he fetch the corpse --
vi. d If he fetch it not -- iiii. d The grauemaker -- xii. d For such as shall
die in this parish and be buried in an other parish, shall be paid such like
duties to this parish, as if he or she had been buried here in like manner,
Burials in any Churchyard next the Church.
Item the Churchwardens shall have for the ground for every man or woman that
shall be buried with a coffin in any churchyard next the church -- ii. s
Without a coffin -- xvi. d For the service of a Minister if he fetch the corpse.
-- xii. d If he fetch not the corpse -- viii. d For the service of a clarke if
he fetch the corpse -- viii. d If he fetch it not -- iiii. d For the service of
a Sexton if he f^tch the corpse. -- vi. d It he fecth it not -- iiii. d The
grauemaker if there be a coffin. viii d If no coffin -- iiii d The four
bearers as before said. For the clothes as aforesaid.
Burials of a child in either of the said Churchyards next the Church.
For the ground buried with a coffin. viii. d Without a coffin -- iiii. d For
the ministers service if he fetch the corpse. -- viii. d If he fetch it not --
iiii. d For the clerks seruise if he fecth the corpse -- viii. d If he fetch it
not -- iiii. d For the Sextons service if he fetch the corpse -- iiii. d If he
fetch it not. -- ii d The grauemaker if there be a coffin -- iiii d If no
coffin -- ii. d
Burials in the College Churchyard of man or woman.
For the ground if there be a coff^n. -- xii. d If no coffin -- viii. d For the
Ministers service if he fetch the corpse. -- xii d If he fetch it not -- viii. d
For the Clerks service if he fetch the corpse. -- viii. d If he fetch it not --
iiii. d For the Sextons service if he fetch the corpse -- vi. d If he fetch it
not -- iiii. d The grauemaker if there be a coffin -- viii. d If no coffin --
iiii. d The four bearers as aforesaid. For the clothes as aforesaid.
Burials in the College Churchyard of a child.
For the ground if there be a coffin -- iiii. d If no coffin -- ii. d For the
Ministers service and other officers as aforesaid in the other Churchyards.
The Churchwardens duties for the Bells.
For an afternoones knell with the great Bell, if the party be not buried in
the Church. -- iiii. s For an hours knel with the Lady bell -- For an hours
knel with a lesser bell viii d To the Sexton for an afternoones knel with the
great bell iiii. s For an hours knell with the Lady bell -- For an hours
knell with a lesser bell iiii. d For the passing bell if it be with the great
Bell -- xii. d With the Lady bell -- viii d With the lesser Bell -- iiii. d To
the Minister for every child baptized Item the Clarke is to have for registring
the name of the child baptized -- ii. d Item, it is ordered that the
grauemaker shall make every man and woman's grave (if there be a coffin) five
foot and an half deep if the ground will serve, if without a coffin, four
foot and a half. Every child's grave with a coffin four foot deep, without a
coffin three foot and a half. For burial of the poor of of the College and
all other ordinary weekly pensioners of the poor of this pacish -- nihil
Saving to the grauemaker and bearers two pence a piece. Item it is ordered that
the Clarke shall make a bill of the charges of every burial, and shall deliver
the same bill to the party that is to pay the charges if it be demanded. Also
it is ordered that the Clarke shall bring every such Bill to one of the
Churchwarde^s, to the end the Churchwarde^ may set his hand thereto, that so
the party may know it to be a true bill.

