A DECLARATION OF SVCH GREIVOVS accidents as commonly follow the biting of mad
Dogs, together with the cure thereof,

BY THOMAS SPACKMAN Doctor of Physic.

mad dog

LONDON Printed for John Bill 1613.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFUL Sr ROBERT WROTH Knight, health and happiness.
SIR,
Having collected out of many learned Authors, sundry special notes and
observations, showing what strange and cruel accidents, do usually or very
often, follow the bitings of mad dogs, and knowing that among us sometimes
(though not so frequently as in hotter countries) this mischeife happens to the
great danger both of man and beast: I am bold to present them (handled and
disposed as they be) to the general view, (I hope) for p^^licke good, and to
your particular self in respect of your worth and neighborhood. Our language
(for ought J know) has never yet said so much of this subject. Therefore if
any by this shall take occasion to search further, or speak more for a greater
general good, J shall be glad to be a whetstone to such an edge. Jn the mean
time, seeing this familiar animal, the Dog, is the servant of poor men, the
delight of great men, and a companion of most men: to prevent inconveniences
that may fall, Pecori, pecorisque magistro, both to this kind cattle, and
their loving keepers, as also to prepare (if need require) a convenient remedy
for so disastrous a mishap, J have thought good, thus (as J can) to forewarne
their negligence that think slightly of such a wound, and to reform their
ignorance, that may be (when time is) to seek for needful help, and make
bold to direct these my simple labors, first and cheefely to your courteous
acceptance, not as thanks for any benefits received, (for J am a stranger to
you) nor as means to insinuate for future favors (though it now be my hap to
be your poor welwishing neighbor) but both for the popular and well deserved
speeches the whole country does aforde you, and also for that J know your place
and pleasure is, to keep many Hounds for Hare and Dear, and Spaniels for land
and water. Accept therefore worthy SIR, this worthles) though perhaps not
altogether fruitles) labor, as it is intended, a slender token of the good
affection and respect J bear to the just report of your reputation. And so
with my best wishes of health and happiness to you, I rest.

Your worships in all good will, THO. SPACKMAN.

OF THE MAD DOG: together with the Cure of those most dangerous wounds and
fearful accidents, happening to man and beast through their bitings.
OF poisons incident to the outward parts of man or beast, there is none that
in the end induces or procures more cruel accidents, and fearful
affections, then the biting of a mad dog, though in some more or less then
in other, partly by reason of the complexion and constitution of the body that
is bitten, and partly by the manner of the biting.

As for example, if a choleric body of large veins repleate with hot humors,
be bitten through the skin by a mad dog, that with his biting casts forth
store of that virulent some or matter contained in his mouth, being sharp and
hot, he will become mad commonly in the space of one month after he is bitten,
and some time sooner, as within a week, especially if it be in the heat of
summer, and copled with other bad causes, as an apt disposition of the body,
thereto etc. If timely prevention be not used. And the worser constitution of
body a man is of, the more dangerous is the biting: but if the bitten body be
of a cold complexion, such as are the phlegmatike or melancholic, or the
biting but slight, or the venomous matter proceeding from the dog, but small
in quantity, or not very malign and pearcing, then is it longer before the
bitten body be tainted with madness. And by this reason it has come to pass,
that some after the biting have felt no hurt (more then a little ache and
smarting of the wound) till a quarter of a year after. Some not in a year or
two, (...)
or three, or 7. yea (as Galen reports, some not till 16. years after, or as
Guanerius, not till 18. years after, which he verifieth by a story of one that
so many years after he was bitten, fell mad and died so within three days
after. For such is the condition of this poison, that when it has lain lurking
in the body long before it be perceived, it breaks out, when it begins to
stir, with much more violence, and makes a quicker dispatch, then otherwise.
Which if we duly consider, it is no wisdom for any man, be he never so
lightly hurt, or feel as little present pain as may be thereby, to be secure
and careless in seeking present remedy upon such a chance. For by often
experience it has been seen, that not only the biting is of force to cause
madness, but even the foam or slauer of a mad dogs mouth, if it touch any bare
part of the body, and be not speedily wipt or washed away with salt water, or
the ^ine of a boy, or such like, especially if any skin be broken where the
slauer abides, or the body bitten be tender, thin skinned, weak or repleat
with bad humors; such being the subtle and pearcing nature thereof, that it
speedily passes through the poores of the skin, and then by little and little
makes it self way into the small veins, arteries and sinowes, and so in
process of time assaileth the heart, and disturbeth the brain.

Now then if so great hurt may proceed from dogs, why do we make them so
familiar companions with us, and use them with so great delight, seeing we may
endanger our selves thereby sooner and sorer then we imagine? Surely the reason
is, because the dog is so necessary a beast as men cannot well tell how to
want. For the Mastife dog is a most trusty servant in a country house, a
Butchers one hand, and by his admirable hardines makes many great men in love
with him, for the delight and pastime he gives them in combating with the
terrible Bull and merciles Bear. Yea some of them be so full of audacitie,
that they will adventure on the Lion the King of beasts. But therein I commend
them not, because it sauoureth of a rebellions nature, then which nothing can
be more odious in a common wealth.

Beside the Mastife, we have other dogs of pleasure, as the land and water
Spannels, the one necessary for such as delight in hawking after the partridge
and fesant, the other for water sowles: the gentlemanly Greyhound for coursing
Bucke, Stag, Otter or Hare: the Talbot or Buckhound, more regarded of noble
personages: the hounds of ordinary Gentlemen and Yeomen, for Hare, Fox, and
Badger. Besides these, we have dogs, as of lesser spirit and courage, so less
seemly and necessary, and yet well liked of many, as the Shepherds curre,
which he would not change for the best hound the King has, and sundry other
country curs, which some keep only to be as watchmen in the night, to lugge a
Hog and eat up their superfluous crusts and parings. And lastly, we must not
forget the fine Lady dog that fares of the best, lodges warm and soft, and is
trickt up with silver bells, carefully kept from flees, washed and combed with
great curiosity, and has more of this worldly pleasure then many a
substantial and honest housekeeper.

Hear we see such use and acceptance of all these sorts of dogs, as we cannot
well spare any of them, who beside, make themselves the better to be liked,
because they carry so true and hearty love toward such as they serve, as no
brute creatures may be compared with them. As I remember a story of which Saint
Augustine is reported to be the Author, wherein is shown an admirable love of
a dog to his Master. The story is thus: A certain Priest that had a loving
dog, on a time travailing by the way, was met by a thief that bereft him
both of his money and life, casting his dead body into anod corner out of the
way, and so departed. The dog would not leave his Masters body though dead, but
lay by it howling and crying day and night, till by this doing the dead body
was sound, which being laid openly to be viewed, the dog still gave his
attendance thereon. At length, among other beholders thereof, came the thief
that robbed and murdered him, making show of as great sorrow as any other:
but the dog having spied him, ran at him, and would never leave assayling and
barking at him, till the rest of the beholders by noting the dogs demeanor and
his former attendance on the dead body, became suspicious of him that he so
fiercely assailed: whereupon causing him to be thoroughly examined, he
confessed the fact, and was dealt withal according to his desert.

Scaliger also, Exercit. 202.
makes mention of a certain huntsman that by extremity of cold, was found
dead on the top of a snowie mountain, by whose dead body lay a great dog,
keeping it in such sort, as he would suffer no man, neither the dead man's
friends nor any other, not so much as such as the dog before did know and was
acquainted withal, to touch or come near it.

But having no need to seek so far for ancient and foreign stories, Thomas
Lupton in his notes of memorable things, makes report of no less love in a
dog than this, that served an Inkeeper of Ware, a through-faire village in the
way to and from London. This dog loved his Master so exceedingly, that after he
was dead, he sought him up and down certain days, with so great sorrow and
mourning, as nothing could comfort him, neither would he eat or drink at all.
At length, not finding him whom he so carefully sought for, he laid himself
down in the hot coals in the chimney, from whence being plucked diverse times,
he notwithstanding would do so still, till he had burnt himself to death.
Though many wives love their husbands dearly, yet I think very few of them
would adventure to make demonstration of their love by such a conclusion.

As by these examples, the exceeding love of dogs toward such as they serve, is
noted for one special cause of the regard that is made of them, so are they
besides this, much esteemed for their ingenuous and witty capacity in
learning many pretty and strange things.

But as for these and such like causes we love and like them, so if we would
consider well the great hurts they often do, and may procure both to man and
beast by their madness, which no creature is thought so subject unto as they,
we should rather prouidently have an eye to them and beware of them, then so
familiarly entertain them as we do: especially, if we did bethink our selves
that this familiarity betwixt us and them, makes us the less circumspect in
preventing the hurt which in a moment we may catch by them. For some Writers
affirm, that there is no means to help or cure either man or beast, that by
the biting of a mad dog are become mad. Lib. 5. cap. 3.
And Paulus Aegineta says, he nener knew above one or two cured of this kind
of madness, and those not immediately bitten of a dog, but bitten of such
persons as were fallen mad by the biting of a mad dog. Now if any desire to
know into what kind of passions such do fall as are bitten of these creatures,
and not helped before they be grown mad, let them mark these stories
following.

One Baldus of Trident, Doctor of both laws, and a very famous man in his
profession, had a little fine Lady dog, that he did take much delight in, and
would often play with him. This dog on a time (as Mathiolus reports) snapt
his Master by the lip, yet so lightly as he made none account of the hurt,
neither had the least suspicion that might be of the dogs madness. But
hereupon, about some four months after, this famous Lawyer became so
lawless, so unruly, so outrageous, and so far beside humane sense and
behavior, that notwithstanding all the means which were used for help, he
died in that madness very miserably.

This may be an admonition to all such fine Ladies and Gentlewomen as take
pleasure in playing with their beloved chamber-dogs, to have a regardfull eye
to their chaps.

Andraeas Baccius Elpidianus a learned Physician, writes thus of a Patient of
his that was bitten by a mad dog, although with so small hurt and offense, as he
regarded it not, having the wound healed up within the space of three days.
But about a month being past, finding himself more sad and sorrowful than he
was wont to be, together with a loathing of himself, and wondering how it
should so come to pass, he sent for me (says Baccius) inquiring the reason
and cause thereof, and I finding him weak spirited and lompish, advised him to
be careful of his diet, to feed upon comfortable meats and easy of
digestion, and to drink wine for the better strengthening of his spirits, more
plentifully than he had used to do. To which he answered, that he could
neither cat nor drink, whereupon I offering him drink, and noting his
impotencie in receiving it, opened his mouth, but found no cause there, of his
weakness or refusal. Then after long bethinking my self what might be the
cause thereof, I asked him whether at any time he had been bitten by any dog.
To which he answered, yes, but yet without any great hurt, as he thought.
Whereupon, after some words of comfort, I acquainted his wife and other of his
friends privately, what danger he was in, wishing them to boat him over the
river Tiber, by which he dwelt, and suddenly to throw him in, and sowse him well
in the water, which they did, himself being very willing thereto. But this
practice profiting nothing, I made trial of other means used in such cases,
but all in vain. For the same day toward night, he began to rage, and though
tormented with intolerable thirst, and a troublesome fever, yet could he not
be forced to drink any kind of drink or water, (which is a common accident
in this disease.) Then was he strongly bound to a post, yet so great was his
fury and madness, that he had almost broken the cords, with a desire to run
upon the bystanders, crying away, away; and sometime howling like a dog,
gaping wide, tormented with thirst, and as it were holding his mouth open for
drink, but when it was cast into his mouth with a spout, he would tremble and
quake for fear, continuing in this manner most cruelly vexed with insufferable
thirst and hellish heat and burning, until the second day from the beginning
of his madness, was near ended, and then he yielded up the ghost in
wonderful torture, and no less terror and astonishment to the beholders,
being the 36 day after his biting.

Iulianus Palmarius also writes, that he knew a man of the country bitten
with a mad dog, who in like manner became mad, and so furious, that he was
bound with cords for restraint of his fury, and the hurt he was like to do
unto others. Yet sometime this man found intermission of his fits, in such sort
as he then would speak and talk sensibly, and would yield to reason. And on a
time, in such a kind of intermission and sensiblenesse, making account he
should die very shortly, he desired such as were about him, that he might take
his leave of his children: which being permitted, he embraced and kissed them
very lovingly, and very shortly after, he yielded up the ghost. But about 7
days after, these his children became as mad as their father, and being vexed
with the like tortures, died within few days very pitifully tormented.

Hieronymus Cardanus in like manner shows that one Alexander Brasca, a
nobleman of Venice, Lib. 2. Conten. Medico. Tract. 5.
having a dog fallen mad that he exceedingly loved, which for his madness
was taken to be hanged, this man in a foolish kindness, would needs kiss his
beloved dog before his execution. But such was the sequel of this kissing, as
himself became mad also in very short space after, and died very miserably.

Matthaeus de Gradibus says, Cons. 82.
that one John Coqueran, by the only putting of his hand into a mad dogs mouth,
became mad himself thereby. And P. Andraeas Matthiolus testifies, that he saw
two men vexed with this kind of madness, by the only sprinkling of a mad
dogs slauer upon them, without being bitten at all.

Baptista Codronchus a late writer, Iab. 1. de Hydrophob. cap. 5.
says he knew a certain rich man of Saint Peter's castle in the dition of
Bononia, who seeing a little dog of his that he dearly loved, enraged so
with madness, as he ran up and down gaping and foaming at the mouth, he
supposing that some bone had stuck in his mouth or throat, would needs try
with his hand, the plucking out thereof, but was for his kindness so bitten by
this his darling, that thereupon he became cruelly tortured with the fear of
water and conuulsions, and the seventh day after in great misery and torment,
took his leave of this world. He was twice or thrice cast into the water and
enforced to drink it, but without any relief at all. Hereby we may see, not
only the cruelty of this kind of poison, but also learn to take heed of it
in time. But though the foame or slauer of a mad dog be by all men's consent,
of a most virulent nature, yet Petrus Salius Diuersus a very learned and
intelligent Physician, cannot be persuaded, that by only touching of the skin
of ones body, it can be of force to procure madness, except the skin be
broken in that part which the foame touches. Yet surely I for my part do
verily believe, that if it be suffered to lie long upon the sound skin, it will
work such an effect in the end, in some sooner, in some later, according to
the constitution and disposition of the party bitten, and the poisonous degree
of such filthy slauer.

Philostratus an ancient writer, Hist. 6. lib. 18. in vita Apollonij Tyanei.
has a story of a young man, that being bitten with a mad dog, was within a
little while after so altered from all humane manners and conditions, that he
became altogether dog-like in his behavior. For he would bark, and sit on the
ground like a dog, and when he offered to go, it was still upon all four,
using his hands as his feet, as apes do, continuing in this wretched estate
the space of thirty days together, Julian Palmarius before named, affirms
that he had seen horses, oxen, sheep, and other cattle become mad upon the
eating of such straw or hay, as mad swine had tumbled in.

Yet this is a mischief that few people hitherto have greatly made account of;
which slight regard of a thing so full of peril, has been one special
cause, that has moved me to publish the danger thereof, in such manner as by
the beholding of other men's harms, the readers hereof may hereafter become
more circumspect and wary, and when occasion serves seek remedy with speed.

This kind of madness is called in greek (...), or (...), in latin Rabies,
or Furor, of the Greek verb (...). 1. Rabie percellor, insanio. The greek
word (...) does also signify furorem, fury, but that is such a manner of fury
as belongs to reasonable creatures, rather the^ bruit beasts. And Rabies
taken rather for doggish-madnes, then furor, has this property attributed to
it, that although the sick thereof be extremely tormented with thirst and heat,
yet do they so wonderfully abhor and fear the sight, yea (as some have
observed) the very noise or speech of water and other drink, as they will in
no wise taste thereof, but tremble and quake when they look on it, and
therefore by all means avoid it. Some in stead of rabies, call it hydrophobia
that is to say water-feare. But this seems rather a consequent to rabies, and
to come upon the stage in the very last act of this tragedy.

My purpose was not in a matter of such a subject, as may be shut up in so small
a room as this, to stand curiously upon any bookish method for the handling
here of; but rather as compendiouslie without multiplicitie of words, as I
could, to set abroach the knowledge thereof in our vulgar language, in manner
of a caveat or watchword, to al such as have use and dealing with dogs:
though notwithstanding I think it not amiss, here to show some definition or
description of this infirmity, for the plain explanation of it: although very
few have vouchsaued so much in the treaty hereof: and therefore for avoiding of
tediousnes I will produce only one, which in my conceit does more significantly
express the nature of this infirmity, then any other that I have read, which
is thus out of Baptista Codronchus.

Rabies, Lib. 1. de hydroph. Cap. 1.
That is to say, Doggish madness, is an affect beside nature, engendered or
bred in a living creature, of some certain peculiar poison, and communicated
or imparted to man with a vehement detestation of all liquid things, but
especially of water.

Hereby we may see the original of this proceeds from such kind of poison,
as by the peculiar property thereof, induces a greater loathing of liquid
things, then any other manner of poison is known to do.

Petrus Salius says he has known some of these mad people, that would eat
bread and flesh, but especially sugar, in great quantity, while they were
tortured with their madfits, but if the sugar were dissolved in wine, broth, or
water, they would in no wise taste thereof. And many of them will howl and
bark like dogs. Though this manner of madness be accounted so peculiar and
proper to dogs as no creatures are found so often afflicted therewith as
dogs, and such as have been bitten with dogs, communicating the poison
thereof one to another by contagion: yet Palmarius says, he saw twenty
woolues at one time enraged with this kind of madness, that ran forth of a
wood together, biting and murdering great numbers of all sorts of cattle. But
what are woolues indeed, other then a kind of wild dogs?

Howbeit Andraeas Baccius affirms that the kind of Weasils called Martynnes,
and Apes also, have primarilie (that is without the biting of any other
creature) been found mad. He makes mention also of a woman that being bitten
by a cat, fell mad, and died within 14 days after.

And again he says, that he knew a certain Gardener, who upon the sudden
was assailed with an old red cock, and bitten by him on the left hand that it
bled withal. Which Gardener, the very same day showed his teeth and grinned
like a dog, and straight after he offered to leap like a fighting cock, at
such as were near him, with fierce and staring eyes, and the third day after
his biting he died in torment to the terror of the behoulders. But it is like,
in mine opinion, that both this Cat and Cock were first bitten by some mad
dog, and this last the rather, because he made a grinning and show of his
teeth like a dog.

Aristotle also says that Camels, Horses and Mules have been found mad in
like sort, Lib. 8. de Hist. animalium.
and my self knew a Mare of great worth, that was mad, but she had been
bitten by the nose by a mad dog. And swine I have known mad upon the like
occasion, and so I am persuaded that the other creatures named by Aristotle,
gat their bane also from mad dogs. Yet Petrus Salius shows some reason to
prove that this kind of madness may be caused in man or beast, by some internal
principle inbred within them, with out the biting or contagion from any other.
And to that end he produces a story of a woman his Patient, in manner
following.

A certain woman about 36. years of age, sick of a fever, Lib. de affect.
Particula. Cap. 19.
sent for me craving my help. Being come, I perceived that she was vexed with a
pestilent fever, whose cure I take in hand, and the 11. day after, I left her
restored to health. About so many days after, she fell sick again of a
bloody flix and a fever withal. Whereupon she sent for me the second time, and
hereof I holpt her in the space of 7. days, saving that a light or mild fever
still remained, of whose cure I did deliberate. But before I could effect it,
the woman fell into a great loathing and abhorring of all liquid things, and
that so exceedingly, as she would neither receive any her self, nor could
abide to see any other body drink before her, it being in the midst of
summer. Whereupon I supposed her to be sick of a doggish madness called rabies.
Yet she was well in her wits and understanding, complaining of nothing so much,
as the detestation of drink or liquid meats, the sight or imagination
whereof, ministered so great horror unto her as was wonderful. Otherwise she
was very quiet, and would talk very sensibly. Whereupon I asked whether she
had not at any time been bitten of dogs? To which she answered no, neither
did ever keep any dog in the house. Then I asked her Mother also whether she
had not been bitten when she was a little Girl or Infant? who also answered
the like. Upon consideration whereof I began to doubt whether any body might
fall into this kind of affliction or hydrophobie by some inbred beginning or
occassion, without contagion from any other. The woman could not be cured
hereof, but the eight day after died in this manner of passion. The reason of
this hydrophobie or water-feare in this woman, I leave to be discussed of the
learned. But in mine opinion this was the less like to proceed from the biting
of a mad dog, because it was not accompanied with any other of such accidents
as are usually wont to go with it. And though this example be ex raro
contingentibus, in a manner matchles, yet Soranus seems to parallel this of
Salius by a history that he reports of a child, whom he saw so fearful of
his nurces breast-milke, that it would not abide to taste it, yet no note or
knowledge of doggish contagion going before.

Causes of this infirmity.
IN searching out the causes of this doggish madness, diverse learned writers
both old and new, have been very industrious, producing reasons agreeable to
the opinions they were of, which here to set down in order, would be more
long and tedious, then pleasing and profitable, and therefore I will show
breefly such as seem most probable and truth-like. Of which some are immediate
and inward: other some mediate and outward. The immediate and inward cause
hereof, is a most pernicious and deadly poison engendered and bred of such
corruption of humors and notable malignitie, as peculiarly forteth and most
agrees to the nature of such creatures, as are afflicted therewith.

Corruption and prauity of humors, is the mediate inward cause of such manner
of poison, as the excess of heat and cold, a hot and dry region, or such as is
extremely cold and dry, are the mediate outward causes. All which argue that
the temperature and complexion of dogs, is not any efficient cause of this
infirmity, though like enough to yield some furtherance thereto. For if dogs
(being very angry beasts) be restrained or kept much from drink, choler does
so boil in them (as some think) that it joined with the peculiar property of
their nature, helps forward the breeding of such a malignitie as forces them
to madness. Which may happen at any time of the year, but especially in the
heat of Summer, and that chiefly in the dog days, or in the extremity of
winter. For both these constitutions of the air, though contrary, may work
the same effect. For as the extremity of heat is of force to scortch the
blood, so the extremity of cold, does thicken and congeale it in such sort, as
for want of difflation it be comes gross and black, and thereby infected
with so evil a quality, as gives occasion of madness. And therefore in these
regions where the Summer season is most hot, and the winter most cold, are
commonly found most store of such dogs. But the very true cause indeed why a
dog is more quickly and easily turned mad then any creature else, is his
peculiar and natural property and inclination to such a malady, more then of
any other living creature.

Among outward causes contagion or the biting one of an other is the chief.
Their feeding also upon carrion, especially such as have died of any murrion or
rot, or been stricken dead with thunder, or poisoned by the biting or stinging
of any venomous beasts: or their eating of corrupt, rotten, stinking or very
salt or spiced meats: much sorrow for want of their lost masters: for hereupon
many times, they hunt up and down so long, without eating or drinking, that by
their restles travail, want of meat and drink, joined with mourning and
grief, their blood is so chafed and distempered, as it ministers great
occasion of breeding this kind of fearful passion. For as dogs do
exceedingly love those whom they serve, so will they as much grieve for the
loss of them.

A dogs love says Ascanius Mancinellus has this peculiar property above the
love of other creatures, that the more his Master beats him, the more
entirely he will love him, and thereupon in a merry conceit, he seems to
prove a woman's love and a dogs to be contrary one to the other, in that (as
he says) If a woman be beaten but once by her husband, she will do her
uttermost to repay it again a hundredth fold.

Aetius out of Rufus and Posidonius, Tetru^. 1. Ser. 2. cap. 24.
says, that dogs being hot and dry by nature, do get an other kind of heat
and dryness in the Summer time, by the ambient air, and by the immoderate
intemperature thereof do become mad.

Galen says, that no creature is troubled with this kind of madness, but
only dogs. Which speech of his, has tried the wits of many men in searching
out the truth thereof. Of whom, some think it understood by Galen, for the most
part, or none so mad as dogs, or none vexed with such a kind of madness
primarily, that is, from their own peculiar nature, as dogs be, but that such
as are infected with this kind of madness, have it commonly from dogs by
contagion. (...)
Galens words be these: Cum enim reliquorum animalium nullum rabie capiantur,
solus canis co affectu corripitur.

Thomas A Viega commenting upon these words says: Lege (nullo alio capto)
solus: significat manentibus alijs multis sanis, canem corripi ob
promptitudinem temperamenti: non quasi alia non rabiunt.

Petrus Salius, says, Credatur hoc ab eo fuisse factum ob non habitam ab eo
rei experientiam etc. That is, Let it be supposed that Galen spoke thus, not
upon any experience he had of this matter, which if he had seen, or heard any
faithful testimony thereof, he would surely have revoked this opinion, and
not have avouched, that only dogs and none other creatures are taynted with
this manner of madness.

Ascanius Mancinellus endeavoring to explane Galens meaning, says: Quando
Galenus dicit canem solum etc. That is, When Galen says that a dog only is
troubled with this kind of madness called rabies, it is to be understood,
first and principally, by reason he is more apt thereto than any other living
thing, but other creatures by a secondarie means, and accidentally: for that
this rabies, which infers the terrible passion of water-feare, seems to
be the proper passion of dogs, as a thing more often and rather afflicting
them, then other living creatures. Which seems the more probable, for that of
other creatures, not one among a thousand is found to be affected with this
manner of madness; and such things as so seldom happen, are esteemed as though
they never happened. Beside this, the truth hereof seems more apparent, because
I never found in any author or expositor, that the signs and notes
accompanying this disease, have been described and spoken of in other mad
beasts, or that such as have been bitten by them, have fallen into the passion
of water-feare, as it falls out in those that are bitten by a mad dog.
Therefore we may very well conclude, that this kind of affection belongs
properly and principally to dogs, and secondarily to other creatures, and
thereby it may seem no absurdity to say, that their madness is not vera
rabies, because it wants the right notes of rabies, but rather a kind of fury
caused by adustion of humors, according to part, and not according to the
whole. And this I think may suffice for the explaning of Galens meaning,
though more I could produce.

Signs of a mad Dog.
WHen a dog is become mad, Iacobus Grenious, lib. 1. de Venenis, cap. 35. and
alij.
he is commonly altered in the whole habit and temperature of his body, growing
lean, dry and thirsty, yet refusing drink, and fearing or flying from water
and bright things. He is sad and pensive, hanging down his head, or bearing it
more toward one side than another: his eyes be red and fiery, his countenance
horrible and very unpleasant; and Paulus says he is altogether dumb and
seldom able to bark. Yet some say, he will now and then bark at his own
shadow, but with a very hoarse voice. His ears hang down, he dreueleth and
fometh at the mouth and nose, his tongue hangs out, being of a red or
blackish color, he blows short, refuses both meat and drink, his tail
hangs loosely, or is clapped betwixt his legs: he goes drowsily, and when he
runs, he reeleth to and fro, yet runs he then faster then he was wont;
he knows neither his Master, nor any of the household, but will bite them as
soon as any other. What creature soever he meets, either wild or tame, he
will offer to bite it. In his running or going, he will stop sometime upon the
sudden. All other dogs are afraid of him, and run from him if they may: but
if they meet him on the sudden, they will crouch down to him and flatter him
for fear.

These are noted to be the signs of an absolute mad dog, but many mad dogs
want some of these signs.

Therefore when one is bitten with any dog whatsoever, because Galen says,
Lib. de there. ad Pison. cap. 16.
that the biting of a mad dog, is like, and nothing different in show or
feeling, from the biting of one that is not mad. Oribasius, and other ancient
Writers, set down this for a trial, namely, to take the kernel of a Wainut
well bruised, and lay it upon the bitten place, according to the Greek
writers, a day and a night, but Isaac and Haly abbas, think a night
sufficient, Auicen, only an hour, of which opinion is Gentilis, if the
kernel be applied presently after the biting, but otherwise not. Some again
say, if the wound be great and bleed much, that an hour is sufficient, because
that in great wounds a nut will much sooner drink up the poison than in small.
Therefore the smaller wounds require a longer time. When it is taken of, cast it
to Hens, who if they eat it and dye the next day after, it is a manifest sign
that the dog was mad; or as some say, if they refuse to eat it. Or take a piece
of bread, wet in the bleeding wound of one bitten, then offer the same to some
other hungry dog to eat; if he refuse to taste of it, that is taken for a very
had sign. Yet some think that these are not sufficient trials to repose
trust upon, and therefore it were better to note diligently whether the biting
dog be afraid of water or not, for that is accounted a certain sign of
madness, if he fear and refuse the sight of it. This kind of fear is named
of the Greeks, (...), and is for the most part, an inseparable sign of a mad
dog, or of any other thing that is mad by the biting of a dog. Neither can they
abide the sight of any thing that is bright, as to behold a looking glass, or
such like.

Among dogs, such are noted to be most apt to become mad, as are swiftest of
foot, fullest of agility in body, leanest of constitution, and in color red or
black.

A man bitten of a mad dog, first becomes sad and full of imaginations, after
the poison begins once to work, muttering and talking to himself, and
being asked a question, answers little to the purpose. He is afraid, where is
no cause of fear, his sleep wears away, he feels gry pings in his
stomach, and shunneth the company of men; his countenance becomes wild and
ghastly, he is exceeding thirsty, his voice grows hoarse, his eyes red and
fiery, flying the light, and sometime weepeth without any manifest cause; his
face swettie, he is very prone to anger more than he was wont to be, his
mind is far out of order. For the venom having made it self a way through
the small veins and arteries into the great, in process of time gets up to
the brain, where it peruerteth and corrupts the imagination, reason, and
memory. Yea sometime it so infecteth the synnowes, as he is vexed with
grievous crampes, and cruel convulsions, and in the end forces him so far out
of his wits, as he will offer violence both to himself and all that he is in
company withal, especially with his teeth like a dog, and will howl and
bark after a doggish manner, fearing the sight of water, or any bright thing,
and (as some Writers affirm) imagining that therein he sees a dog, which
of all creatures he fears and abhors most.

Beside these remembered notes, Salius mentions one, which he avouches to be
infallible, although never observed before by any but himself: which is a
feeling of some kind of pain in the bitten place, though the wound have been
healed long before. For when the bitten body begins to grow into madness,
he sensibly feels a pain, though not very great, in the place that he was
bitten in, which creeping from place to place, about three or four days after
it begins, or a little more, ascends to the brain, where it causes a
kind of giddynesse and a certain manner of confusion withal, whereby the
sick body begins to stagger and reele this way and that way, and shortly
after, falls stark mad.

This sensible feeling of pain in the bitten place when the mad humor
begins to stir, which Petrus Salius calls an infallible note of this
malady, never before observed by any but himself, as he says, seems to be
verified by a story of a mad body, related by an excellent Physician called D.
Abel Roscius of Lausanna, in an epistle of his to Guiliel. Fabritius that
notable Surgeon of our time. The story as he has reported it, is, as
follows.

A certain very honest Matron, the daughter of a famous Doctor, and married
not past two years before to a Nobleman, one well known to me, and very near
allied, as she passed one day through the city, Anno Domini 1581. was suddenly
set upon by a mad dog and bitten in the left arm. The neighbors and other
that were in her company, being much grieved at this mishap, killed the dog
presently, and without delay were learned Physicians sent for, who prescribed
exquisite remedies, causing them to be applied to the part affected
accordingly, not omitting the administration of wholesome antidotes and apt
preservatives inwardly. The bitten arm was straightly bound about the wound,
and local medicines of drawing faculty for the bringing forth of the venom,
were applied. After which a Surgeon seared the place with a hot iron, so
that within a few days space the woman (as it pleased God was quite healed) or
seemed so to be, no hurt appearing in her arm, nor scarce any scarre
perceived, neither was there any suspicion of the least jot of poison
remaining. But mark I pray you what followed. In the seventh year after it
was healed, she was afflicted with much more cruel and grievous accidents: In
the arm that was bitten she felt a most intolerable pain, like as it had
been torn and gnawed with the teeth of dogs: Very shortly after, she became
furious, distract in mind, full of grief and sorrow, void of sleep, vexed
with unquenchable thirst, and after this with a fever and exceeding decay of
strength, abhorring meat extremely, but not drink, neither did she refuse such
liquid things as might assuage her thirst. We thought her hard at deaths door
because we saw no hope of life or health in her. Yet so notable remedies were
with all diligence administered to her by Physicians, and so well she was
attended by her domesticals, as beyond all hope, she recovered health again
in few days. Seven years after this invasion, and in the fourteenth year
after the dogs biting, and in the third year after the death of her husband,
she began again to be most miserably tortured, her fit still beginning in her
left arm. She felt extreme pains, was vexed with vomiting and incredible
belching, enduring all the symptoms that are wont to proceed from burnt
choler, want of sleep and exceeding thirstinesse. In the bitten place she
felt most cruel prickings shootings and exquisite pains, yet by good means
she was again helped, I being still present with her, and seemed perfectly
cured. Howbeit, I deemed that her griefs were rather dulled and as it were
brought a sleep, then quite extinguished, although she continued in this good
state six years together, as afterward it appeared. For in the twentieth year
after her biting, her former griefs returned again, which being yet then also
assuaged, they vexed her the next year following, and the very next year
after this she had to grievous fits thereof, and the next after that, three,
and this last year two. Her fits in the three former years were oftener, but
shorter. In almost every one of the mutations of these times, her pains still
began in her bitten arm, I fear it will be her death shortly. Of all this I
am a witness, and have been still present, etc. Thus far D. Abel Roscius.

This story is produced as a thing of rare contingence. The chief cause of the
so often redintegration of these mad sits in this Gentlewoman, (in mine
opinion) was, for that the wound at the first curing thereof, was healed up to
soon. For it should have been kept open and from healing, the space of forty
days at the least: and again, because the hot iron was applied before
sufficient abstertion and correction of the venomous matter contained therein,
by convenient lotions and the application of ventozes or horseleeches, to the
place affected.

Aetius, an ancient writer, reports a story of a Philosopher, that being
bitten with a mad dog, and at length perceiving his growing into that
infirmity, went to wash himself in a bath, wherein he thought he saw a
dog. Whereupon musing a pretty while, at length he took courage and lept
into the bath, saying, what have dogs to do with bathes, and striving against
the growing infirmity, drank his belly full of the bath water, and so holpt
himself.

Dotage, or idle talking, has been noted to be one special accident that
usually follows such as are growing into the extremity of this cuill, though
always it falls not out so. For Peter Salius before named, who had good
experience of this bad malady, says, he knew some in great extremity without
any show or token of dotage, and so sensible, that being persuaded to drink at
such time as they have trembled at the sight thereof, have requested the
offerers of it, that they would close their eyes or blindfold them, that they
might not see the drink or water offered them, and then bad them cast into
their mouths what they thought good, or any thing else mixed with their drink
that might be for their help. And when they grinned or gnashed with their
teeth, and after a doggish fashion, were forced by the strength of the poison
working in them, to offer to byte such as were near them, they would pray the
bystanders, to hold or bind them fast, that they might not hurt any body by
their biting, wishing them not to put their hands, or any part of their bodies
to their mouths, lest they should snap at them; for so the poisonous infection
enforced them to do. These, says he, I have known to lament their own
misery, being greatly grieved, that they sought not for help in due time,
committing themselves in all things to Gods mercy, craving of him forgiveness
of their sins, etc.

If a man that is fallen mad by the biting of a mad dog, do byte an other
man, woman, or child, they likewise will be mad in time, except by good means
it be speedily prevented. Yet this madness caused by a mad man's biting, is much
more easily prevented and cured, then the madness of such as have it
immediately from a dog. Howbeit, the biting of some mad men or women, that is,
such as be black or red hayred and freckled, is worse than the biting of other
colors: and among other, such as be fasting.

It has been much debated among Writers, which should be the chief and most
special place affected in this malady; some thinking that the synnowes were,
because of the grievous convulsions that the sick have been vexed with
sometimes. Other, that the brain, in which rests the seat of the reasonable
soul. Some, the mouth of the stomach, observing their manner of vomiting,
yexing, and insatiable thirst. Some, the heart only. But others (whose opinion
likes me best) do believe that not only place or part of the body is
affected therewith, but many, as the heart, stomach, midrife, head, etc. For if
the venom do first pierce the veins or arteries, it passes directly to the
liver and heart. If it first take possession of the synnowes, it mounteth
thereby to the brain and the membranes or skins enclosing it, whereupon follow
such terrible convulsions as they are many times afflicted withal, and by
consent from thence the mouth of the stomach and consequently the heart. For
they are not troubled with any fever till the heart be touched, which indeed
is the part that all manner of poison either mediately, or immediately does
invade.

Now if I be asked why mad dogs do so greatly fear water, The cause of
hydrophobia or water-feare.
For answer I will produce the opinions of sundry learned Writers concerning
this point.

Hieronymus Capinaccius out of Galen de theriaca ad Pisonem, brings this for
one reason: Namely, because a mad dog is so exceeding dry, as he has great
need and desire of moisture, but being distract in his mind and perseverance,
despises it, and flies from that which might do him good.

This, and diverse other opinions of ancient and some modern Writers, are
learnedly disproued by Baptista Codronchus, who afterward yields his
approbation to others more like to be true.

But why do men which are reasonable creatures, fear also and tremble at the
sight of water or other moisture or liquors, when they be mad by the biting of
a mad dog?

This says Capinaccius, proceeds from the great abundance of melancholy,
that sends up a dark black vapor to the brain, whereby the animal spirit
is made so thick and cloudie, that the action thereof is hurt and perturbed.

But why do they fear water more than any other object?

Because of the want of moisture, which is in such a manner, as the moist form
of water has gotten a fearful impression hereof in the brain.

But if water be brought them, why is their fear sometime increased, and
sometime they be ready to vomit at the sight thereof?

They be always in fear, though they see no water, but when they see it,
their fear is much more increased at the beholding thereof; calling sometime
to mind their biting, with an imagination that they see a dog therein: and
they become apt or ready to vomit, because the mouth of the stomach is
affected with poison, whereby is stirred up therein a certain heavy and
grievous sense that is imparted to the inward sense, and is a cause that from
the brain is imparted that loathsome and hurtful desiring power: whereby,
like as if the animal spirit be rightly offered from the brain to the mouth of
the stomach, the appetite is good, and thereto agrees the attractiue power of
the stomach: even so while there is offered from the brain, a vicious or
corrupt appetiting faculty, there follows loathing and aptness to vomit,
whereto assenteth the expulsive faculty: which is the cause that they vomit up
such water as they drink.

Heerewithall may reason be inferred for the reconciling of two famous
Physicians that seem to have uttered contrary opinions or doctrines: that is
Galen and Auicen: This man says, that mad men die upon the drinking of water,
and Galen, contrariwise says, that the drinking of it is good for them. To
which it is answered, that if the madness be in the beginning, the drinking of
water is wholesome: but if it be far gone, and the fear continues, then do
they die by drinking thereof, because the vital spirit is almost wholely
dissipate, so that upon small occasion and very speedily it is extinguished.

Julian Palmarius thinks, that (whatsoever the right cause of their fearing
of water may be) there is some extreme antipathy or contrariety betwixt that
madness and water, because (beside this exceeding fear of water) it has
been observed by experience, that if the new bitten wound be but washed with
water, the bitten body can afterward very hardly or never be cured and freed
from madness: for that the water by this antipathie drives and forces this
kind of poison so deeply into the body, as it cannot be fetched out again, or
very hardly. Therefore it behooves such as be bitten, to take heed of washing
the wounds with fresh water. This opinion of Palmarius seems very truth-like.

Petrus Salius very little differing in opinion from Palmarius says, that the
poison of doggish-madnes follows no peculiar temperament, but is a poison of
the whole substance: which being communicated to man, very slily or secretly
polluting the humors without any sense or perseverance of hurt, and by little
and little creeping from part to part, as soon as ever it touches any
principal part, it disturbeth and greatly vexes it, causing great
thirstinesse. At which time, if the sick do drink or take any liquid thing,
they are tormented very extremely in their inward parts. This cannot be by
reason of any temperature, because they feel one kind of torture whether they
drink hot liquor or cold; but by the peculiar nature of that kind of poison,
which as it is a poison hurtful to man for the whole substance thereof, so
has it an antipathie or contrary disposition in it to all liquid things, by
which it becomes so exasperate and cruel, as the inward parts by the
terrible pangs and grypings thereof, are more miserably vexed then otherwise
they should be. This says Salius, I have noted to be the cause from whence
they have even from the beginning abhorred liquid things, because all with one
consent, have affirmed that by the drinking of them, they have been exceedingly
afflicted. After the trial whereof, they have loathed and detested all sorts
of liquors so greatly, as the only sight of them, has given occasion to turn
them into the like tortures, and sometime worser.

This opinion seems so well to be liked of Codronchus, that he nothing
dissenteth from it. But otherwise, so different have been the opinions of other
Writers, as the true cause of this Hydrophohie or water-feare, seems so
secret and hidden, as the most learned and ingenuous have been and are
encombred by the search thereof, and therefore for brevity I leave it, and
pass to the cure of this miserable and fearful kind of madness.

The Cure.
WHEN one is bitten of a dog, and rests doubtful whether he were mad or
not, it were good to make a trial, by moystning a piece of bread in the bloody
wound, and offering it to a hungry dog, which if he refuse to eat, it is very
like that the biting dog was mad. For this trial has been found more assured
than the giving it to Pullen. For so exquisite is the smelling sense of dogs,
as they are able to discern thereby that poisonous infection which they are so
apt to be hurt by. But hens and poultry have been seen to eat such kind of
bread or nut kernels as have been moystned in the wound, without any hurt
thereby.

It were good also to note or hearken, whether he did byte any other creature
else, or whether he were noted to be afraid of water, or the sight and
beholding of looking glasses, or other bright things.

If the biting dog were known or found to be mad, and the wound that he has
made be great, suffer it to bleed well a good while together, that some part of
the poison may come forth with the blood. But withal let the bitten member be
presently bound about, three or four fingers breadth above the wound, with a
garter or such like thing reasonable hard, for the better restraint of the
poisons piercing. For this kind of practice by the testimony of Galen, and the
experience of others, has been found very profitable in prohibiting the speedy
piercing of poison by the bytings of serpents and venomous creatures. Yet if
the part bound do grow benumbed and senseles by the hardness of the binding,
let it be slackned somewhat, lest the bound member might thereby be mortified.
But if the bitten wound be in such a part as cannot be handsomely bound, then
let some astringent medicine be applied some reasonable distance above the
wound, such as this: Take oil of roses and myrtils, each an ounce, of bole
armenake, sanguis draconis, myrtils and sumach, each half a dram; Temper these
together with the white of an egg well beaten, and a little vinegar, then
spread it upon a linen cloth, and bind it above the wound, moystning it with
vinegar, or laying to fresh when it is dry. Or if the rest cannot presently be
gotten, then in the mean time till they may be gotten, use the white of an
egg beaten with a little vinegar. Yet always provided, that these or such
like astringent medicines, be applied quite beyond the place of the poisons
abiding: For if the poison have gotten beyond them, they may be a means to
force it further into the body.

But if the wound be small and nothing perceived but the foame or slauer about
it, then wash away the foame with the urine of a boy, or with lie, or such
like, and then dilate or enlarge it, by paring away the flesh round about,
that the hole may be round which some call circination. For by this means the
wound will the more easily be kept open, and not heal so soon as otherwise it
would. Which manner of practice Galen does approve. Lib. de theriaca ad Pisonem.
Cap. 16. Some only scarrifie or scotch the skin round about it, that it may
bleed reasonable well. After the use of circination or scarificatio^, let
ventozes or cupping-glasses be set on with a good flame, and then either
cauterize it with a hot iron or rather with a cauterie of gold, except the
place be sinowe and very sensible. This cauterizing is commended by all writers
as the most sure remedy for the extinguishing of the virulent matter contained
in the wound, which though it be terrible to the eye, yet the pain thereof
continues not so long as that which is caused by a potentiall cauterie. This
must not be slightly done, but strongly set on and deeply pressed in, as
Guilielmus Fabritius a famous and singular Surgeon upon his often experience
herein, seriously advises, saying, I speak by experience. For the more the
wound is put in a heat and inflamed, the sooner will the poison be drawn forth.

After it is seared, let the escharre or crust be caused to fall as soon as is
possible, by often anointing it with a mixture made of liquid varnish, the
white of an egg and fresh butter. Or with fresh butter of it self as hot as
the party can endure it. And if the crust by these means come not off within
two days space, then may it be removed by some instrument and handy operation,
lest by the long continuance thereof the venomous matter that remains
unconsumed, may get a new strength, and the ulcer be sooner cured then is
convenient for this malady. For it should be kept from healing the space of
forty days at the least.

Or after the ventozes be removed, there may be set on horse-leeches for the
more effectual drawing forth of the venomous blood, and then to cauterize as
is aforesaid.

But if the bitten place be of exquisite sense, or in tender bodies, these
means ought rather to be used to the parts next adioining then to it, laying
or apply-more mild things upon the biting. As if the bitten body can get one
that will suck out the venom with his mouth, that is the gentlest way, most
harmless, and yet very effectual. But he that sucketh the wound must look
he have no raw or skynles, or vlcered part in his mouth, lest he catch hurt
himself while he does his good will to help another. And though his mouth be
whole, yet it is good for him to rinse or moisten it with some sweet oil,
before he go to sucking. For so he shall keep the venom from taking hold on
any part thereof. Next to this, is commended the application of the fundaments
of live cocks or hens, having the feathers plucked from about them and held to a
good while together, and if one die thereby, then set to another presently,
holding their b^^ close that they breath not. For so they will draw the more
forciblie, continuing this as long as any dies by the strength of the poison.
Some rather like that these fowls or young pigeons, should be split through
the midst alive, and so laid to one after another or young whelps in like
sort.

Such as cannot abide the searing with a hot iro^, called an actual cautery,
may have some potential cauterie applied to the biting, after the washing,
scarrifying, and cupping thereof as before has been declared, among which
kind of cauteries, argentum sublimatum tempered with some cooling ointment is
much commended, as a most helpefull medicine, and the crust which it causes,
does commonly fall off within two days, if it be often anointed with butter.

Aetius commends the laying of stamped leeks, or bread tempered with salt or
onions or garlic upon the bitten place, but especially this composition. Take
of sal fossile, an ounce, of aerugo russa, as much, of the seeds of Horehound a
dram. Let these be kept dry in a box of brass, use them first dry, til a crust
be grown on the wound, then use them tempered with the oil of roses till the
crust fall off.

In very tender bodies, some lay to the wound a plaster of pigeons dung and
green rue stamped together. Or mustard seed stamped with wall-nut kernels,
garlic, salt and honey laid to plasterwise.

Ambrosius Paraeus affirms that treacle dissolved in aqua vitae, or generous
wine excels all other remedies, to rub the green wound withal hard till it
bleed, and after the wound is clean wipt and dried, to lay liniments to the
place tempered therewith; after the removing whereof it is good to lay on
garlic or onions beaten with salt and turpentine. With this only remedy he
cured one of the daughters of the noble Lady Gron, that was bitten in the calfe
of the leg with a mad dog.

I have read great commendations in an old written book of this medicine
followings as sure remedy to help the biting of a mad dog.

Take wormwood, rewe, honey, and salt stamped well together, and lay it
plaster-wise to the bitten place, and it will draw out the poison, sease the
pain, and take away the swelling.

The very like is noted also by Leuinus Lemnius Lib. 3. de occult. naturae
mirac. Cap. 13. And by Ioh. Huera. de capitis morbis. Cap. 13.

Dioscorides prescribes an emplaster made of garlic, onyons, and
wheat-cornes chewed in ones mouth, which has been proved very effectual for
the poorer sort of people and robust bodies. It draws forth the pison and
dilateth the ulcer, but many times it causes very great pain, which will be
somewhat amended by tempering it with oil of Hypericon, or oil of worms. If
it be laid to every other day, it will suffice.

Galen lib. de theriac. ad Pison. affirms that he has applied plaster-wise,
only treacle mixed with oil of roses, with very happy success.

It is much commended, to dress the ulcer daily with precipitata as a thing
that both keeps it from healing, and draws out the poison.

Or mix precipitata with any convenient ointment or emplaster, and some use it
alone, because it is very forcible to draw the poison from the depth.

All these remedies do cause pain more or less, but Guiliel. Fabritius
says, he regards not the pain they cause, so that it be not excessive,
because pain in this case is very profitable; for with the attraction of his
humors, it draws the venom outward to the mouth of the wound.

His manner was after he had cauterized the wound, to lay upon it bombaste
moistened with aqua-vitae that treacle has been dissolved in, and after that
to lay on this plaster following being spread upon linen.

Take of onions somewhat roasted in the embers of leven, and the powder of
mustard seed, each an ounce, of treacle half an ounce, of the leaves of rue
and scordium each half a handful, mix them in a mortar by adding a little
honey. The next day after this manner of dressing, he separated as much of the
crust as he could with a penknife, and then again applied the same medicines,
til the crust were quite removed, and then to prohibit the closing up of the
ulcer, he thrust a pease into it twice a day, and by this means kept it from
healing as long as he thought good.

Some to keep the ulcer open, and draw forth the venom, lay on a plaster
made of garlic, onions, and the powder of mercury beaten together.

If the ulcer be about to dry up, Rhasis advises to lay on a piece of the
salt fish called Tunnus, or salt beaten, or to sprinkle it with vinegar. But
never let it be washed with fresh water, but rather with pure wine, as Paulus
advises, or with hot foamentations of camomile and lapathum, that is dockes,
boiled in water, to procure it to bleed, sucking it first, or rubbing it
strongly with the hand, or with scarification, or by setting to of horseleches
or ventozes.

It is said that the ashes of a fig tree cast upon the bitten place, being
closed up, will open it again. But for the more surety, it were good withal
to scarrifie it.

This plaster following is much commended to lay on the sore. Take of the ashes
of crabfishes burnt, of garlic, mynt, gentium, aristolochia rotunda, each two
drams: bay berries, bole armeniake, each a dram. Temper them with the ioyse of
mynts and make a plaster, and wash the place often with the urine of a young
boy.

This powder following, is very excellent to be cast on the ulcer twice or
thrice a week. Take of the powder of precipitata, of bezer-stone, and the
powder of angelica roots each a scruple. Mix them together. This does
wonderfully draw forth the malignity, and is of great force against poison.

Inwardly also must be used Antidotes that have virtue against such kind of
poison, as that which is mentioned of Galen, by the prescript of Asinius, made
in this manner. Take of fresh water crab fishes dried and beaten to powder, ten
drams; of gentium seven rams; of frankencense, one dram. Mix them, and give the
bitten body every day three drams in water to drink, for the space of 40.
days together. Aetius puts but five drams of gentium to the rest.

Another mixture very like this is set down by Diofcorides in this sort. Burn
crabfishes with the twigs or proinings of vitis alba, that is white brionie,
and reserve the powder of gentium roots thus: Take of crabfish powder three
drams; with which may be mixed the powder of gentium one dram and half; of
pure wine six ounces. Let so much be drunk four days together, which being
ended, let the double or triple quantity be drunk certain other days.

Some compound them thus: Take of gentian roots two drams, of crabfish powder
three drams; of terra sigillata half an ounce. Mix a dram of this powder with
some five or six ounces of the decoction of crabfishes, and give it every day
to drink. This composition I like very well, and so do I this which
follows, described by Joseph Quercetano.

Take of gentian and valerian roots, each an ounce and half; of Consolida
minor (which some take for the herb called Self heal, but other for the
daysie) of dry rue and penny-royall (that some call organy) each a handful; of
mummia, and crabfishes calcined each an ounce. Boil these together in wine. Of
this decoction give the bitten body, about two or three ounces in the morning
fasting, for the space of eight days together.

Until things of greater efficacy can be prepared and made ready, it is
thought profitable to give the bitten body some of the mad dogs liver burnt
to ashes, and enjoin them withal to a convenient diet, as meats of good
juice, and rather moist the^ dry, and that the body be loose, and prepared
with opening roots that have virtue or power to procure urine.

Aetius commends the giving of Treacle, about the quantity of a filberd nut,
the three first days, saying that he never knew any fall into hydrophobie,
that is the fear of water (which is the extreme and last act of this
tragical infirmity) that used to drink treacle. And Petrus Salius also upon
his own often experience, gives it the price above all inward medicines that
ever he made trial off. The powder of hearts horn burnt, and the bezour-stone
are very good also to be used herein.

Some beside treacle advise also the use of mithridate, or the confection
called Diatessaron, (which specially is commended against the biting of a mad
dog) to be given also, after the poison is spread into the veins and
arteries, because they think that the inward parts are hereby fortified.
Howbeit Capinaccius says, that the great Antidotes (among which these are the
chief) should not be given at all, after one is attached with madness,
although before that time they ought to be used with all speed tempered with
sorrel water, or the decoction of lapatium acutum, which some call
herbe-patience, or some other apt or convenient liquor.

There is no remedy more usual or better hoped off among the vulgar sort,
then presently after the biting, to wash the bitten body two or three days
together in sea water. Which has been found very effectual in some bodies of
good complexions, or in light hurts, but it is not catholicon, that is to say
it seems not in all persons. Nether will it do any good at all, after the
first three or four days, from the biting.

This practice was first devised and used by such as dwell near the sea,
whereupon such as have dwelt farther from thence, in imitation of these, have
cast their bitten bodies into brackish water, which is so far from doing good,
as it is indeed exceeding hurtful, by reason of the antipathie betwixt his
kind of poison and fresh water, from which it is very little different.

Nevertheless Corn-lius Celsus advises that such as be entering into
hydrophobie, should suddenly be cast unawares into a poole or river of water,
and if they be unskillful in swimming, to suffer then to sink into the water,
as it may run well into their mouths, and then to raise up their heads again.
But if they have skill in swimming, then to sowse their heads sometime under the
water, that they may drink whether they will or not. For so both their thirst
and fear of water, will be amended, as he says. But in this practice he wishes
one thing to be looked unto, that is, least their weak bodies be caught with a
crampe or conuulsion, which if it happen, he wishes them to be put into a
vessel of hot oil, after they have been taken out of the poole. But how weak
a remedy this is, has been by example declared before, out of Andraeas Ba^cius
Elpidianus.

Some put the bitten body into a bath, and make him sweat therein, as long as
he is able to endure it, the wound being kept open that the poison thereof
might the more easily be soked out, then do they make him drink a good
draught of pure and unmixed wine, which is esteemed a thing contrary to all
poisons. This being done three days together, they think the bitten body safe
from all danger. This practice is somewhat agreeable to that which the
Philosopher before spoken of, used on himself, that Actius makes mention of.

But Oribasius would not that any should adventure to bathe themselves, before
20. days after the biting, were expited, and some 40. days: and Auicen
admits it only in the declination of the evil, that is, after all other
medicinal practices, which indeed is most agreeable to reason.

Petrus Salius says that the vulgar sort of his country people, put so great
confidence in the virtue of holy bread and holy water, that whosoever eats
and drinks thereof from the hand of a Priest, shall need none other remedy
then only this for his cure. But of what force this superstitious remedy is,
he shows by an example of one bitten by a mad dog, who very orderly and
devoutly had taken this sanctified bread and water, and had the wound well
healed up, as he thought. Yet about two months after, catching a great blow or
brusing upon the botome of his belly, he was presently vexed with a fever, and
a doggish madness, with all the symptoms and consequencies, that usually
accompany this manner of madness, and very shortly after, in great wretchedness
and misery, took his leave of this world.

After the first three or four days from the beginning of the hurt, if the
venom be perceived to be of so quick operation, as it is dispersed through
the body, let purging be used, or if it seem to be of slow proceeding, as in
flegmatike and melancholic bodies, whose humors are gross, and passages
narrow, let a longer time be past before purging, having yet a care to apply
convenient remedies to the bitten place. And when purging is perceived to be
needful, then let it be performed as the occasion shall seem to require,
although the matter be neither concocted, nor do boil or move in the body.
The like consideration some hold of phlebotomie, though Salius can in no fort
like of this in any body tainted with any kind of poison. And indeed the
ancient Greeks, as Dioscorides, Galen, Or^basius, Paulus, and Actuarius, where
they speak of this infirmity, do show by their silence or not mentioning of
phlebotomie, to dislike thereof: and some excellent men of the late writers, as
Fracastorius, Fernelius, and Capinaccius, do dissuade the practice of it. But
such as do approne it, do withal advise, that it be not in any wise put in
practice in the beginning, least the poison that remains then about the
bitten place, might thereby be drawn from thence into the inward parts of the
body. Nevertheless, when such practice has been neglected, as ought to have
been used at the first, and the venom is perceived to be spread throughout the
body, then is it advised as very requisite, to open a vein, especially, if the
body be plethoricke or full of humors, whether it be in the biting of a dog,
or any other venomous beast.

Or for a more general doctrine this may pass, that in bodies cacochymicke,
(that is) where the humors be corrupted, or badly tempered (purging should
rather be used, then letting of blood. But in plethoricke or full bodies,
letting of blood rather then purging. And where is both corruption of humors
and plenitude, there should both be used, the conditions still being observed
that have been before advised.

Baptista Codronchus seeing the diversity of opinions concerning this point,
and the reasons pro and contra, Lib. 2. de Hydroph. Cap. 6.
as a man not well knowing whether part to approve, concludes with these
words. Nos igitur in hoc ancip^ti casu etc. That is to say: We therefore in
this doubtful case, having a respect to both, would persuade that there should
be euacuation by blood, though not by cutting a vain, but rather by ventozes,
set to the lower parts, by which may be drawn out more or less blood as we
list, according to the ability of the body, and so may both the plenitude be
abated, and the venom be diuerted and drawn from the upper, down to the
lower extreme parts.

But now returning to purging. The tenderer bodies may be purged with
purgations made of sena epithymum, polypodium, black hell^bor, and such like.
But the stronger, with pills made of hellebor, elaterium, veratrum album, and
the most vchement medicines, as antimonium, and such like.

Petrus Salius (a man of great experience in these doggishmaladies) prefers
the use of Elleborus albus (prepared in such sort as he sets down) before
any purgers whatsoever, in these affects, Lib. de affect. par. ium. cap. 19.
except in weaklings, fearful and extenuate bodies, straight brested, or
trobled with a cough, or other affects of the breast. His manner of preparing
and using it, he has set down at large, and therefore for breuities sake I
pass it over, referring the Reader to the place in the Margent cited. This and
other strong purges before named, beside their forcible expelling of the
poison, have also a secret quality, like either to the offending humors, or
the doggish poison, by which they deliver the body thereof.

This following, is a very good purge in this case: Roast a great onion in the
embers, (having first made a hole in the top of it, and filled it with good
treacle) then stamp it, and strain out the juice with water of pimpinella, or
carduus bene^ictus, and mix therewith a sufficient quantity of extractum
elleb^ri, and a little of the confection of Hamech, and so give it for a
purgation.

Elaterium may be given to the quantity of their grains in both, or some
proper decoction. Or the seeds of Cataputia.

Some to purge also by urine, make a medicine of Cantharides, mixed with equal
quantity of hulled lentils, and give thereof half a scruple at once, many
days together. This is esteemed profitable, by reason that the poison hereby,
is led to the bladder, and expelled with bloody urine.

But Rhasis, and Ioh. Damascenus, two famous Physicians, prepare cantharides as
follows. Separate from them, their wings, heads, and feet, and infuse them a
night and a day in sower butter milk, then dry them, and mix them with the
flower of lentils and wine, and so make them up in trochises or little round
cakes, of a scruple-weight apeece. Of these little cakes, they gave every day
one, in some convenient liquor, many days together. And if it chanced by the
use of these, that the sick did piss blood, they gave him new milk to drink,
which did amend the acrimonie or sharpnes of the urine, remedy the bleeding,
and so did they prevent the fear of water. Yet some of good judgment and
practice, be very jealous and doubtful in giving cantharides into the body,
though never so skilfully prepared.

In the beginning of the disease, cantharides are very profitable to lay to the
bitten part. But into the body ought none of these vcheme^t purges by stool
and urine, be given in the beginning, while the poisonous matter rests in the
bitten part only, or near it. Nether is phebotomie then to be admitted, as
has been noted before, least the hurtful pollution be drawn thereby from
the outward to the inward parts, and therefore better to be used with the
latest, than with the soonest.

If in any diease Extrema extremis, according to the rule of Hippocrates, ought
to be put in practice, then surely in this, as most, both of the ancient and
modern Physicians have counseled. For after the poison hereof is once
dispersed through the body, then will it not (as they say) be vanquished
without the help of extreme and very violent remedies. All which ought to be
used before hydrophobie. For that having once gotten the possession, most men
are of opinion, that all physic comes to late.

Now concerning the government and diet of the bitten body, it is thought
best to lodge him in a chamber that is hot and very lightsome, for the better
euocation of the spirits and blood to the outward parts of the body, and never
suffer him to be alone, but accompanied (if it may be) w^^h such as with
pretty pleasing tales, and merry jests, or instruments of music, or both, are
able to give refreshment to his dulled spirits. Let no means be used to put him
in fear, nor to make him sorrowful. His diet must be in a mediocritie,
neither very plentiful, nor slender. Emptiness or want of eating, increases
the evil quality of humors, which is a very pernicious thing in any
malignant ulcer. He may eat of veale, mutton, hens, chickens, or capons flesh,
and such other as breed good juice, being seasoned with the juice of orenges,
limmons, citrons, which he may eat by themselves also. And the powders of
tormentill, pimpinella, mary-golds, borrage, and such other like herbs, very
good to straw or sprinkle upon his meat.

Rabbi Moses forbids the eating of pigeons, because, says he, they be very
exceeding hurtful for such as be thus affected, through a special property of
substance in them. But contrariwise he commends the mutton or flesh of rams,
though it breed but bad juice, for that it has a secret property to do good in
this infirmity.

All writers with one consent approve and counsel the use and eating of fresh
water crabfishes, for the native and inbred property they have against the
poison of this malady, as often experience has proved.

Creuises also boiled in good wine, are approved.

Paulus Aegineta, advises, that such meat and drink should chiefly be used,
as is of force to dull and extinguish the strength and working of the poison,
and keep it from spreading it self through the bottom of the stomach: both
which properties he says, are performed by drinking of pure wine that is
sweet and old; or by drinking of milk, and eating of garlic, onyons or leekes.

Aetius approves the eating of garlic, and such other sharp and hot meats
in the beginning, but not after, least the poison thereby might become more
forcible, but he forbids the drinking of wine.

Nevertheless, most writers do esteem it very medicinable to drink strong
wine at the very beginning, as well as to eat hot and sharp meats. And some
like of gross and slimie meats also, that by increasing of obstructions, may
the better hinder the piercing of the poison to the principal parts.

But after five or fix days be past from the beginning, then will it be best
to reduce all to mediocritie, as was said before, and forbear very hot meats
and drinks. Then will it be good to use drink of mean strength, in which are
steeped the leaves of pimpinella, that is burnt, and the flowers of marygolds.
A Iulep also made of firupe of cichorie, and the decoction of sorrel and
barley, is good to drink.

This Iulep following, is very goodalso to use. Take of the juice of limmons
and citrons, each half an ounce, of the juice of sower pomgranates, two
ounces, sorrel water and rose water, each an ounce, spring water boiled, as
much as will suffice. Make hereof a (...) according to art, of which it is
good to drink often.

Roast meats are not so good to be used, as meats boised, especially in some
liquor that opening simples apt to procure urine, are sod in.

Their bread should be made of the best wheat, and well leuened.

Of fruits they may use, walnut;, sigges, and almons, and some say that
chestnuts have a property to do good.

Let such as accompany the sick at their meat, take heed they can not of any
meat they have tasted. And some think it dangerous also to drink in the cup
or glass that they drink in, except it be first very well washed,

The use of vinegar and sower fruits or herbs, is thought good.

Some admonish the bitten body, not to touch the cornell tree, nor rest within
the shadow of it, or the tree called Sanguinaria, which is the female cornell
tree or shrubbe, nor to sleep under the sernice tree, but to shun them for
the space of a whole year, because these trees are reported to have such a
kind of property in them, as will quickly hasten forward their madness.

Sleep, especially if it be much, is hurtful, till the strength of the poison
be well abated, or till the sick be much distempered for want of sleep.

Venerious actions should be forborne a year together.

It were very requisite that the sick body should be kept indifferent loose or
soluble, all the time of his sickness or infirmity, and to go once or twice
in a day to stool, and piss freely, if he can.

Now for the better dilucidation of the manner of curing this kind of malady,
I thought it good here to insert the method and means which Franciscus
Valleriola, a very learned Physician used, in curing one far gone toward
madness, by the biting of a mad dog.

This man was bitten a little above one of his ancles, Obser. lib. 3. Obser. 3.
and thereupon was carried by his friends to a village called Les Saints
Mary's, which of the vulgar sort is accounted a place sacred or hallowed for
the curing of such as are bitten by mad dogs, where he was washed and
bathed in the sea the space of nine days together; after which he was brought
home again to Arles where he dwelt, the wound being grown very grievous. He
looked with a writhen or warped countenance, using little speech, and seemed
full of meditations like such as be troubled with melancholy. The wound was of
a pale or ashie color, and full of venomous matter, and therefore speedily to
be taken in hand. Finding his body very costiue, he caused this clyster to be
prepared for him.

, Malnar. althaeae cum suis radicib. matrum violar. branc. vrsin. mercurialis,
melissophylli, ana M, j. flor. chamomel, melilot. rorismarin. ana, P, j.
epithym. ss. furfuris macri, P, j. Fiat omnium decoctio in iure capitis
castrati and omasorum, ad lib. j. and coletur. In colutura add cathol. j.
Confect. hamech, iij. ol. violar. iiij. sacchari rub. j. Fiat Clyster.

This clyster having performed his operation, he presently made the wound to be
cauterized with a hot iron, and for the more speedy removing of the crust or
scabbe caused by the searing, he anointed it with a mixture made of fresh
butter, the yelke of an egg and swines grease, and sometime he mixed Vnguentum
basilicum with it. While these things were in hand, he gave preservatives
inward, for the subducting of the poisonous infection: and because he was a
plethorike young man, and of bad humors also, he did both let him blood and
purge him. For he feared not the recoyling or drawing inward of the venomous
matter left, because a great part of it had been consumed by washing in the
sea, and application of the cauterie, and for the remaining poison, he thought
it very requisite to do that now, which in the beginning might not be
permitted. His cure was, to draw forth as much as he could, by the wound,
keeping it open almost 60. days together, and diligently clensing it; to
strengthen the inward parts with appropriate Antidotes: and lastly to heal it
up.

For correcting and qualifying of his melancholic disposition and restrayning
of the poison, he caused this Apozeme or syrup following, to be made.

, Borag. bugloss. amborum cum radicib. suis, lapatij acuticum toto, ana M. j.
summata tum fumer. lupulor. and fraxini, ana M. ss. mellissoph. M. j. beton.
tantundem, sem. citri, acetos. and card. benedict. ana ij. polypodij queru.
recentis non corrosi, and purum contusi, j. pussulur. exacinaturum, N, vj. Fiat
omnium decoctio in aqua hordeacea recenter facta ad lib. ij. and colatur.

Colatura add succorum Inmar. lupulor. and pomorum redolentium ana iiij.
aceti, iij. Fiat syrupus cum saccharo clarificatus and aromatizatus cum puluere
theriaculi Guidonis, j.

This is to be given four mornings together, and to be iterated again some
other three or four mornings.

After the sick man had used this sirupe, eight days together, and now
appeared some notes of concoction in his urine, and the gross humors seeming
sufficiently attenuated, he purged him with this purgation following.

, fol. sen. Oriental. mundat. iij. epithym. j. ss. anis. and cinnamomi electi,
ana ij. trium flor. commumum, folior. meliss. and beton. ana P, j. Fiat
decoctio ad iiij. and coletur. In colatura dissol. rhabarb. electi; in sero
lactis caprini per noctem infusi cum tantillo cinnamoni, and mane fortiter
expressi, iiij. confect. hamech prima descriptionis, ij. ss. th^riacae elect.
puluer. theriaculis Guidonis, ana ij. syrup. rosarum ex infusione rosar. syrup.
de pomis, ana j. Fiat Potio.

By this purgation, he avoided many choleric, burnt and melancholic
excrements.

The next day following, he gave him treacle tempered with the powder of
betonie and sugar. For the bitten wound, he caused a cataplasme to be made
thus: Take of white onions in number three, make holes in the tops of them, and
fill them up with treacle, then cover the holes, and roast the onions in hot
embers till they be soft, after which, beat them in a mortar, and force them
through a hair sieve. This done, ad of both sorts of aristolochia beaten to
powder, each iij. of galbanum, bdellium, myrrh, each half an ounce; of the
powder of crabfishes, sieve drames. Mix them in the form of a cataplasme,
spread it and lay it on the wound.

After the crust was separated from the ulcer, he prepared a mundificatiue,
made of rosine mixed with the powder of crabfishes, and the roots of
aristolochia, and upon the ulcer he laid this emplastar. Take of galbanum,
sagapenum, and opopanax, each half a drame, of cuphorbium, iridis Florentiae,
aristoloc. rotund. and gentian roots, each a dram; powder of crabfishes, two
drams; of wax a sufficient quantity; of turpentine, two ounces. Mix them and
make a plaster.

This did draw a wonderful deal of filthy matter out of the ulcer, and kept
it from healing.

Inwardly he gave him this powder following, for the space of forty days
together, about two drams at once, to drink in buglosse water.

Take of the ashes of river crabfishes, ten ounces, of gentia^ roots, five
ounces, of olibanum, one ounce. Mix them together, and make a very fine powder.

When he had brought his cure to the point of healing, he gave the sick,
epithymum in whaie of goats milk, and sometime he purged him with
diacatholicon and the confection of hamech: and many times he washed the ulcer
with the urine of a young boy. For this a Auicen says, does forciblie draw
forth the venom. And lastly he healed it up, and recovered him perfectly from
the danger of this cruel and fearful evil,

But now to proceed as I began: It is very wholesome to drink the decoction of
oxylapathum and pimpinella, or mary-golds, tempered with a spooneful of aqua
vitae, that gentium and treacle have been infused in.

Some country people have made great account of a medicine made of rue,
wormwood, garlic, daysie leaves, mary-golds, balm, and a little black
hellebor, salt, and vinegar stamped and strained together, and the juice here
of given to drink every other morning fasting forthrice, which is wont to
purge them upward and downward in such manner, that they think, the venom of
the biting is thereby so thoroughly expelled out of the body, as they will never
be touched with hydrophobie, or water fear, yet in the beginning, while the
venom rests still in or near the bitten place, I think it not safe to use
it.

When the malignitie of the poison is dispersed into the entrails or inward
parts, some account the giving of antimonium, to be a thing of special
virtue, because it makes expulsion every way, as by vomit, siege, and sweat.
For in this case it is holden but lost labor, to purge with other then such as
be violent in operation.

In outward applications to the wound, a hot iron (as has been said before)
is much commended: yet if three or four days after the biting, be past
without the use of any other good means, it is commonly to late to use it, but
instead thereof may scarrifications be made, and some blistering medicines as
horse-leeches be applied.

Such as are afraid of a hot iron, may have a potentiall cauterie instead
thereof, made of Vnguentum rosatum and sumblimatum tempered together.

Such as are vexed with this infirmity, have many times a continual hot fever
withal, for whose ease Aetius commends the use of a medicine or antidote
made of nuts, as follows. R. sagapeni ij. op. ij. Thebaici, ij, Croci, ss.
Lycij Indici, ixj and ss. Carnis nucum iuglandium non valde veterum, 40, Misce.

The dose of it is about a dram at once in rain water hot, toward night, and
after the vigor of the fever, so that in the morning before be given an
antidote of crabfishes, and at night this of nuts. For it is of very great
efficacy to procure sleep where is great want thereof.

After the cure is finished, he advises such as be cured, to be purged once a
year with Hiera, for preservation, about the approaching of that time of the
year they were bitten in; and upon the instant day of their biting to take
treacle for three days together.

For further cure of the sick if need be, Paulus says that Dropacismi, and
Sinapismi, with great profit be made all the body over. But the most effectual
remedy of all other, he says, is the right use of veratrum often practiced
and taken. Which Salius seems to approve, where he says that the case is
very desperate and hopeless, where this doggish madness is not helped by
gining of white ellebor well prepared. It is good for the sick to drink whay,
Smithes water, sorrel or lettice water, which may easily be given them before
they begin to fear water.

But after they once begin to fear it, let them be kept from the sight both
of it, and all other liquid things. For nothing does put them into such
horror, and trembling, and vexation, and confusion, as the beholding of these,
and some other bright things. It were good also that they might not see such
meat as is provided for them. Yet if they refufe to eat or drink, they must
be forced thereto: although this be noted commonly in them that they swallow
with great difficulty.

As there may be devices to keep them from the sight of their meat that is
prepared for their eating, so may drink be spowted into their mouths, or
down their throats, with a syring, or given them in a suckling bottle, or such
like.

Some not yet come to the fear of water, but being at the point thereof, have
suddenly upon the sight of water, fallen very grieuouslie into the fear of it,
by the sudden motion and stirring of that virulent and poysonnous matter
contained in the body, which in nature is contrary to water.

Some very superstitiously take upon them to cure this disease, with words and
charms; which because it is ungodly and deuilish, I pass over as a thing much
more offensive to God, then healthful to man.

When the cure is brought either near, or to an end, by the use of such means
as have been declared, it would be very profitable and to good purpose, after
a clister given if the body be costiue, to cause the bitten body to sweat in
reasonable sort, for the utter expelling and vapouring out of the relickes and
remainder of the venomous matter, as well by inward as outward means. And
before the sore be quite healed up, a trial may be made whether any of the
venomous matter remain yet unremoved, by the application of such things as
have been before advised, for to know whether the biting dog were mad or not,
as the kernels of walnuts, or bread and such other laid to the sore and offered
to hungry dogs, but first the sore place should be so sweetened from the sent
and smell of such salues, and medicines as have been used thereto, as dogs by
reason of them, might not take any dislike of the bread that is offered them.
And also trial may be made by setting to the fundaments of cocks or hens, as
has been said.

And though the cure be as well performed, as the skill of the Physician or
Chyrurgian can devise, and no likelihood of any future harm seem to be feared:
yet for the better assurance and prevention of relapse, some advise as a point
of good providence, that the bitten body should be purged once every quarter of
a year, and once in fifteen days to eat a little of the best kind of
treacle.

I have not read in any man's writings that has entreated of this doggish
evil, how dogs may be ordered to keep them from madness, saving only in
Pliny, or the citers of Pliny, lib. 19. cap. 5. who shows that the old
Physicians before his time, used to cut a worm, as they call it, out of their
tongues, which indeed is no worm, but a sinowy matter, round in the fashion of
a worm. And some to that purpose cut of the end of whelps tails after they
be forty days old. And the same, Pliny says also, lib. 8. cap. 40. that
the elder and bigger dogs, should every year in the dog days, be given
hen-dunge mixed with the meat that they eat. For in those days they are most
apt to be caught with madness; but if they chance to be mad before the use of
these means, then to purge them with elleborus. But yet in my conceit, upon
the consideration of that which before I have noted, and gathered out of the
best and most judicial and practiced writers, before the purging of them,
there should be used outwardly (if they were bitten by any other dog) some of
those good remedies that are set down for men, and inwardly to give them
treacle and other good antidotes used against this infirmity. But the surest
way is to hang them up, or kill them outright, least being kept a live, they
mischeiue others. But for the preventing and keeping dogs from madness, whether
they be sound or bitten by a mad dog, no means can be used more excellent and
effectual for the sound then while the dog days last, and for the bitten at
any time to mix with their meat, or water that they drink, some of this
excellent powder following, that Doctor Julian Palmarius, has so much
commended.

All the advice, counsel, and manner of curing this fearful malady,
carefully set down by ancient and modern Physicians, has no further scope,
then to help such as are not fallen into hydrophobie or fear of water, which
is the extremity of this disease, and so hard to be helped, as none finding
the sick in that case, would adventure the curing of them, but leave them as
past all help and recovery.

Yet now of late years through the careful and commendable industry of some
notable men, there is found out an Antidote of so excellent and precious
virtue, as being rightly used, has by much experience been tried most sure and
infallible, not only for preventing of hydrophobie, but also for the curing of
such as have been attached therewith, so that the wound be not in any part of
the head above the mouth, nor washed with fresh water. For where either of these
is found, there remains either none, or very small hope of help.

This precious Antidote, or all-curing medicine, Julian Palmarius a worthy
Physician, has made known for the benefit of all sorts of people, affirming
upon his own sundry trials thereof, that it is so excellent in virtue, as it
will cure and help the bitten bodies, at what time soever they be bitten, yea
though they have never been purged, or used any of the means before set down,
or though they be vexed with the hydrophobie, the conditions only excepted that
are before noted. By which means, the sick are freed from many tortures that
in other manner of curings, they be forced to endure.

This remedy of so rare virtue, is made as follows.

Take of the leaves of rue, veruen, of the lesser sage, of plantaine, the
leaves of polypodie, common wormwood, mint, mugwort, balm, betonie, the
lesser centaurie, of each equal weight. These must every one of them be
gathered at such time of the year as they be of most force, which commonly is
in June, about the full of the Moon.

Let them be put severally into paper bags, and suffered to dry in such a
place, as neither Sun, nor rain may come near them, least they should grow
too dry, or wax mouldly. Thus dried, let them be kept for future uses, but so
as they be renewed every year.

When there is occasion to use them, take of each sort equal quantity, and
beat them to a very fine powder. Of this powder, give to such as be bitten,
half a dram every day fasting, either out of a spone, being mixed with the
doble weight of sugar, or with wine, or sidar, or broth, or tempered with
butter or honey in form of an Opiate, three hours before meat. Although a dram
and half or two drams at once, be sufficient, either for man, or any kind of
beast, though cruelly bitten, yet it will not be a miss to proceed to three or
four drams, especially if it be long since the party was bitten, or that he
be grown into hydrophobie. If he be hydrophobicke or mad, let him be bound
that he cannot slack or do hurt, and then temper this powder with wine or
other convenient liquor, and power it down his throat, whether he will or not,
putting something into his mouth to hold it open. This may best be done in the
intermission of his madness or fury. But to one that is newly bitten, there
needs no more to be done, then first to wipe and dry the wound, either with a
sponge, or some dry linen cloth, and then to bath it with wine or hydromell,
in which half a dram of this powder is dissolved.

This should be done twice or thrice every day, then lay on some ointment or
plaster, such as is wont to be laid on other wounds, and so suffer it to heal,
without any fear of hydrophobie.

While this practice is thus ordered, there will be no need, either to alter the
ordinary diet, or to keep the house, or to take any purging medicine, except
the bitten body be vexed with hydrophobie before he be taken in hand. For that
being removed, the humors of the body that be distempered, should be amended,
partly by purging, and partly by good and wholesome diet.

This noble remedy, was first received from a man of great nobility, called
Iacobus Syluanus, Lord of Pyrou, as a thing worthy to be dignified by the
authority and patronage of true nobility, and dinulged by Iulianus Palmarius
a noble minded Physician.

Admirable must needs be accounted the operation of this medicine, when it
being hot in te^perature is of force against hot malignant and continual
fevers, accompanied with most fearful symptoms, such as commonly follow the
the biting of mad dogs: and in allages and sexes, of what complexion soever,
and also in the helping of bruit beasts. Palmarius says he never knew it fail
in curing either the new bitten, or such as have not had above two or three
fits of hydrophobie. This therefore being of so wonderful efficacy against
this malady, all that I have set down before concerning the cure hereof, out
of ancient and late writers, might seem needless, were it not that this is
not like to be always in a readiness in all places, or peradventure not
prepared as it ought to be. These things considered, I thought it good to join
both sorts of cure together, that where the one is wanting, the other may be
used.

And after these so many much commended, and experienced medicines, set down
by learned writers for the cure of this disease I will communicate one more,
much commended unto me from a friend, who reports, that this medicine has
been often experienced, with most happy success, in the curing of wounds
caused by the biting of mad dogs. And is made as follows.

Capitum Allij ij. fol: Ruta M j. stanni puluerizati ij. Theriaca opt. Androm:
iij.

Boil all these together in muscudine, so much as will suffice in Balneo
Mariae, the vessel wherein they are being close stopped, or if you cannot get
wine, take so much Ale as will suffice to boil them in, and when they are well
boiled, strain them and let the grieved patient drink vij thereof at a time,
taking so much a time at three several times within 24 hours. The first
draught to be taken so soon as possible you can make this medicine ready
after the patient is bitten; then take the second draught, eight hours after
that; and the third eight hours after that, and so to continue the giving
thereof every eight hours, for the space of 7. or 8. days together. Or you
may use it longer if you see any cause to suspect danger, and toward the end,
you may change it from every 8. hours to every 12. hours.

And you must always apply unto the wound bitten with the dog, the feces,
or dregs, that were left of the drink, after the strayning thereof, and it
must be applied to the wound very warm.

And you must always here observe, that you are not to apply either this
medicine, or any other, unto the wound, until you have (by some of the means
before named) cleansed the wound, from that venomous slauer, and filth, left
there by the mad dogs biting by boxing-glasses with scarrifying, and by
washing the wound as before has been taught.

Now for conclusion, I suppose it will be expected, that after this my
demonstration and publishing of other men's opinions, aduises, counselles,
practizes, and experiments for the help of this infirmity, I should also
bring to light, such peculiar knowledge, observation and experience, as my
self have had at any time, in dealing with this kind of subject. To whose
expectation I answer, that although I have been a practiser in Physic,
above thirty years, and have dealt mith many sorts of infirmities, yet in all
this time I ingenuously and plainly protest and confess, that never hitherto
has any cures of this condition, come to my hand, neither have I known that
any Physician of mine acquaintance has been called to counsel for it. The
reason hereof (as I conceive) is, because the biting of a mad dog, in all
places where I have been, has so little been regarded and feared, as they
think it not of such moment that it may need the help of a Physician: But when
any such thing happens, they either apply some triuiall medicine that they have
a good opinion of, to the bitten place, or post them with what speed they can
to the sea, though it be three or four days before they can get thither, and
then they think them as soundly helped, as any Physician or Chirurgian can
do. And truly, till by the reading of many writers of great knowledge and
experience, I found it to be a matter of more regard then so slightly to be
passed over, I esteemed in a manner as lightly of it as they.

But now having offered a perspectiue glass, to all such as be willing to
accept of it, for the better looking into the consequences, and dependances of
these kinds of bytings, I doubt not but the wiser sort of such as shall have
the perusal of this small pamphlet, will as occasion may be ministered, more
seriously think of it, then peradventure they have hitherto done.

But yet because I am loath altogether to frustrate their expectation of
somewhat from me, that may help to direct such as be nouices in the practice
of physic, for ordring the cure hereof when occasion shall happen to be
offered, I will in few words show them, how I would proceed in hope of their
help, if any such came under mine hand.

First therefore if the biting be new and fresh, I would bind the bitten
member, about four or five fingers distance above the bitten place, if it were
in such a part, as I might well do it, or lay on some astrictiue plaster, such
as before has been set down, for the better restraint of the poisons passage,
especially in sanguine or choleric bodies, whose ways and passages are
large, and the heat of their complexions some motine to the speedier working of
it, the quantity and quality of the venom being considered withal.

But in bodies of gross humors and cold complexions, the regard of such
astriction may be the less, for that in such bodies the poison finds not
his passage or operation so easy. This done, I would note whether the wound
were great or small: if great, I would suffer it to bleed well: if small I
would enlarge it, and make it bleed sufficiently (having first washed away the
foame or flauer of the dogs mouth, with the urine of a boy, or some other
good lotion) either by circination as has been showed before, or
scarification, or leeches, and then set on a great cupping glass, with a good
flame, if the bitten part would receine it, or a cupping horn; after the
removing hereof, I would wash and foment it again, with some strong brine or
salt water tempered with the best sort of treacle, or with the lotion that
Ambrosius Paraus used to the Lady Grons daughter, and lastof all I would foment
it in such manner, as Julian Palmarius has advised, with a mixture of his
powder (if I had it in a readiness) and give of the same powder inward
according to his counsel forbearing to torture the bitten body with cauteries
as much as I could, and rest only upon the operation of this so much commended
Antidote, which I would continue for the space of 40. days at the least, still
fomenting and bathing the hurt place every day as I should find occasion, and
withal use means to keep the fore from healing up all that while, though
Palmarius affirm it needless so to do. But if this powder were not in
readiness, then after the binding, washing, and clensing with such lotions as
before are named, and cupping with scarification, I would sear it either with
an actual or a potential cautery, according to the doctrine before delivered
by the learned, procuring the fall or coming away of the scabbe or crust, with
what speed I could, and keeping open the sear a sufficient time, using
euacuations, by purging, bleeding, and sweating in their due times, and inward
corroboratiues and diet, etc. in such sort as has been specified. But except
I should see the greater occasion I would in stead of opening a vain in the
arm, use a practice that none of them have spoken of that I have read, namely
the opening of the hemorrhoidall veins in the fundament. For so by all
probability the venomous pollution would be drawn down thither from the
princip all parts, without detriment to any other.

If many days were past, before the bitten body came to my curing, I would
deal with him as Doctor Palmarius counsels, if I had his Antidote in a
readiness, or else as Franciscus Valleriola dealt with his patient, or like
differing from his practice.

Prognosticke notes
ALl that be bitten o^ a mad dog, if they be neglected or badly cured, will
fall into the passion of fearing water called hydrophobie, at one time or
other; and much the rather if they be repleat with evil humors. But all this
may easily be prevented, if at the first there be good order taken. For few
have miscarried thereby, that presently have used good means to withstand it.

Petrus Salius says that in his country, it has been long time observed for
truth, that if such as be bitten by a mad creature, chance to touch the plant
or tree called Cornus, or Sanguinaria, that is the Cornell or dogbery tree,
within the space of one year after his biting, he will certainly fall mad.
And some also affirm that if the bitten do sleep under the tree called
Sorbus, which we call a Service tree, he will do the like.

Though the biting be but small, and in the upper part of the skin, yet all
speed ought to be used for cure thereof. For otherwise it will be a very hard
matter to prevent the mischief depending thereon.

The poison contained in the slauer or spittle of a mad dog, is hot and dry,
malignant and contagious, causing a distemper like it self in all such as be
hurt thereby: which if it be suffered to lie on the skin of any part of the
body, and not quickly washed away with salt water, urine or such like, it will
infect the whole body, though it be not bitten.

The foam or slauer of a mad dogs mouth, touching ones lips or tongue, will
so quickly and easily pierce though those parts, that it will very speedily
induce madness, if it be not quickly prevented, which is verified by a history
out of Caelius Orlerianus, which makes report of a certain Semster or Sewster,
that while she was making a shirt, a dog that she no whit suspected to be
mad, snatched at the shirt, and rent it with his teeth, which rent place she
afterward held betwixt her teeth to pluck it out straight, that she might the
better sow it even, but by this houlding betwixt her teeth, she so lickt the
bitten rent of the cloth, that the third day after, she became stark mad, and
so died.

That this is like to be true, hear what Guiliel. I^b. Obser. and Cu^at C^rur.
Obser. 86.
Fabritius, a very excellent and expert Chirurgian of our time reports of the
like, in his chirurgicall obscruations and cures.

A certain Matron or ancient woman, hapt to be met in the way by a mad
dog, who catching hold of one of her coats, tare it in two or three places,
and so went his way without hurting any part of her body at all. This woman not
knowing or supposing the dog to be mad, at her coming home sowed up the
rents of her coat, and when she had done, bit of the thread with her teeth,
without perceiving any hurt at all thereby, till three months were past. After
which, she began by little and little to grow melancholic and troubled with
imaginations, horrible visions and fears, and lastly she fell into a great
loathing of water, wine, and liquid things, and moreover to bark like a dog,
loosing the knowledge of such as were usually in the house with her, and
offering to bite them, continuing in this state till she died.

The scratching also with the nails, as well as the slauer may induce madness,
as Caelius Orrelianus affirms which was found to be true, An. Dom. 602. by an
instance produced by the forenamed Fabritius in the same observation cited.

The story is this. A certain young man about 20. years of age, called Daniel
Perrin, in the harvest time of the year above named, was scratcht on the
thombe of the right hand, by a mad Cat, but yet so lightly as the very upper
rind of the skin, which the Greeks call Ep^dermis, was scarce hurt, which,
because the young man had noe suspicion of the Cats madness, he made none
account of, and the rather for that he felt no pain of it, but on the first
day of March following, he began by little and little to be very solemn,
fearful, and moved with strange imaginations, so that the next day he was
afraid to go abroad. The third day of the same Month, says Fabritius, I was
sent for, and found him hydrophobicke, so exceedingly abhorring water, wine, or
any liquid or bright thing, that he could not endure the sight of them. His
face, neck, and breast were inflamed, with the mixture of a blewe color,
sweating and fainting much, and sometime casting himself so violently this way
and that way on his bed, that three strong men could scarce hold him, offering
to bite such as stood near him, trembling and quaking at the sight of meat and
drink, and in this wretched estate ended his life that night: Thus far Guil.
Fabritius.

This Catte no doubt, had been bitten before by some mad dog.

Hereby furthermore is showed a most admirable force of this kind of poison,
that is able to pearce even the very nails, being of a solid, senseles and
horny substance, in such sort as to be able to work so strange effects.

D. Esaias Meischuerus in his observations has this story following. A
Stripling or youth belonging to a noble gentleman, by chance found a sword
cast under a bedstead, with which a mad dog had been thrust through many years
before. Which sword he begd of his master, who bad him take it. The youth
having gotten it, fell to scowring off the rust thereof, but being earnest in
this his business, he, chanced to catch a very slight hurt thereby upon one of
his hands, yet as small as the hurt was in show the sequel thereof proved it
great, in that very shortly after he became mad thereby, and so died.

Laurentius Surius reports that a certain Inhoulder in the Duchy of
Wertenberg, Comment. reru^ in orbegestar,
on a time entertained some of his Guests with swines flesh that had been
bitten by a mad dog, whereby all the eaters thereof became presently so mad,
that they bit and tare one an other with their teeth.

Many are of opinion, that if the principal parts, that is the brain, heart,
or liver, be affected, but especially if the sick doc once begin to fear
water, there is no hope, or very little, of recovery.

It is reported also a sgne of small hope, if the sick will lie down and
tomble on the ground, and do speak with a hoarse voice.

A biting or wound quickly closed up, is much worse then a great and large
wound.

No man neglecting means of help, ought to account himfelfe safe from peril,
that has been bitten of a mad dog, though he find no alteration in his body
within the space of a year. For Albertus says, that some have become mad not
till 12. years after. Galen also and Guinerius, and other more (as has partly
been noted before) have spoken of a greater number of years that have passed
betwixt the biting and the madness. And Alharabius of some called Alzaranius an
Arabian, affirms that he knew it fortruth, that the poison of a mad dogs
biting, has lien lurking in the body of the bitten, the space of forty years,
before it has showed it self. And such is the property of it, that the long
er it lies lurking in the body unperceived, the sooner it kills when it
breaks out into action, as Petrus Forestus by examples has notified.

The spittle or slauer of any beast, is thought to have something in it that is
contrary to man's nature, as also the scratchings with their nails etc. and
therefore is not to be neglected.

Auicen is of opinion that none bitten of a mad dog are past help, that are
able to know themselves in a looking glass.

It is not so dangerous to be bitten of a body that is mad by the biting of a
mad dog, as to be bitten of a mad dog.

Concerning prognostickes, thus writes Petrus Salius: There be only two things
worth the noting for prognosticke signs in this infirmity: Namely whether
they be only fore-showers of madness imminent or to come: or whether the madness
be alredie present. In the former case there is hope of health or recovery, if
the disease be oppugned with valiant and strong medicines, and not with such as
be gentle and light, because as yet the poison has not wholely invaded or
possessed the principal members: but if it have once gotten the mastry of
them, I am of opinion with the more famous sort of Physicians, that it is past
all help and remedy, and therefore but lost labor to use any means for
curing thereof. And if Dioscorides has testified that he cured Eudemus sick
of this disease, and that the Physician Themison was also delivered from it:
though this be true, yet is it to be numbered among admirable things, and such
as exceed the power of man. Again, if they were delivered from this disease, I
am of mind says he, that they were dealt withal in the beginning, and not in
the state or progress thereof.

But Paulus says, that these were not bitten of a mad dog, but that this
affection was transferred to them, by some man that had been bitten of a
dog, and that therefore Themison might be saved, because he had it by a light
contagion from a friend of his that had been dogge-bitten.

The difficulty therefore of this matter, being thus exemplified, may put the
wisely careful in mind, the better to regard it, and look to it in time.

For it has gone current from time to time that if once they be grown mad,
they are past recovery, and therefore the Poet Ovid who lived not long after
Asclepiades, a Physician of greatnote in his time could say: Soluere nodosam
nescit medicina podagram:
Nec formidatis vlla medetur aquis.
Which I have made speak english in this manner: The knottie gowte to cure, no
medcins counted sure:
Nor doggish waterfeare, that ever I could hear,


The biting of a dog that is not mad.
Cornelius Celsus says, that every biting of a beast, has some kind of
venomnes in it: therefore the biting of a dog that is not mad, should not be
neglected. For the pain that ensues thereupon, some think to be an argument
of malignitie from the biter, because the biting of any creature is more
painful and hard to cure, then any simple wound. Yet the pain of biting,
more then by a simple wound, may be by reason of the tearing of the skin and
flesh through the thicknes of the teeth, which rather does bruise, then pearce
the flesh, except they be pressed very hard. And such wounds as make round
holes, or such as be caused by stones, staves, stripes and such like, are also
more painful and hard to cure, then those that be made with swords, daggers,
knives, and such like. Wherefore whether a man, woman, child, horse, cow,
swine or other creature, be bitten with a dog that is not mad, or by a man,
or ape, or such like, let the biting be presently fomented or bathed with
vinegar and nitrum, called saltpeter mixed together. Or as Oribasius advises,
lay on a sponge soked in vinegar: or bruise a fenell root and lay it on with
honey.

Paulus Aegineta counsels that the bitten wound should first be sprinkled
with vinegar, and then beaten with the open or flat hand, after which, to power
vinegar upon it from a loft, the vinegar being first tempered with nitrum, and
then to lay on a new sponge soked either in vinegar alone, or tempered with
nitrum, and so let it lie the space of three days on the wound, moistening the
sponge with vinegar when it dries, for it heals perfectly, as he says. Or
lay on lana succida wet in vinegar, or an onion bruised with honey, or the tops
of origanum tempered with salt and onions in equal portions. But for bitings
that are come to suppuration or matter, temper the meal of eruum with honey and
lay it on: For it is special good for such bitings. If they be enflamed,
anoint them with spuma argenti or litharge beaten with water.

After the place has been formented, as before is said, and the sponge
removed, some account it very good to lay upon the wound a cateplasme made of
walnut kirnels, onions, honey and salt boiled together, and made up with wheat
meal, or farinaerui, beaten together. It is good to keep the wound open some
reasonable time before it be healed up.

Amatus Lusitanus being called to the cure of one bitten by an English Mastiue
dog that was not mad, kept the wound from healing, Curat med. Centur. 2.
Cura. 78.
a month together, to prevent all danger that might have happened.

Simples of great virtue against the biting of a mad dog.
AGrimonia, Eupatorium, Agrimonie is of force to purge by urine, and given
either in powder, or the juice of the green herb drunk of one bitten with a
mad dog, after three or four days from the beginning, is of great effect,
especially if the body have been dealt withal before with other convenient
means. It is very excellent also against the biting or stinging of serpents,
and other poisons.

Allium, Garlic, is of very great operation against all cold poisons, and the
biting of a mad dog.

Alysson, Madwort, or Galens Moonewort. Galen affirms it to be a marvelous
herb in curing such as are bitten of a mad dog, yea though they were entered
into madness. It is brought out of Spain, and Italy: but now some of our
Herboristes have it growing in their gardens.

Amygdala, Almons beaten with honey, are very good to lay to the biting of a mad
dog.

Angelica, is very excellent against the biting of a mad dog or any other
venomous beast.

Aphronitrum, Spumamaris, tempered with swines grease, avails much against
such bitings.

Arnoglossa, Plantago, Lambs tongue or plantain, is also very good.

Beta, Beet is commended for a good herb in this case.

Betonica, Betonie is also greatly commended for such bitings.

Brassica, Colewort, This herb says Rabbi Moises, has a peculiar property
against the biting of a mad dog.

Bulbi omnes impositi iuuant.

Cancer fluuiatilis, River crabfish, The ashes of these fishes (as Galen says)
are of wonderful virtue, by the property of their substance, against the
biting of a mad dog, either alone, or much more by mixing them with gentian
and frankencense or olibanum, in such sort as there may be offrankencense one
part, of gentian five, and of the ashes of crabfishes ten parts. This he
learned of his Master Aeschrion the Empiricke, who always had this powder in a
readiness, prepared as follows. Into a pot of red brass he put a number of
crabfishes alive, wherein he burnt them so long till they might be beaten to
very fine powder. This he did after the rising of the dogstarre, the sun
being in the sign of Leo, and the Moon being 18. days old. This powder he
gave the dog-bitten body, every day, forty days together, about a spoonefull
at once, sprinkled with water. But after three or four days from the
beginning, he gave every day two spoonefuls sprinkled as before.

An other of his Masters called Pelops, did no less esteem the powder of
these fishes, then the former.

Oribasius, Paulus and Aetius, prepare them much after the same manner. The use
of them is very much regarded both of old and late writers.

Caepe, Onion. The juice of onions tempered with honey, rue and salt, is very
profitable against the biting of mad dogs.

Centaurium minus. The lesser centurie is an herb of very great excellency for
the same.

Cham^^itis, Herbe-Iuie, or ground pine stamped green with honey, is of virtue
against poison, or the biting of any venomous beast.

Gentiana, Gentian or Felwort, a dram of the powder of the root of gentian or
felwort, mixed with a little pepper and herb grace, and given inward, is
profitable for such as are bitten or stung with any manner of beast, or for any
that has taken poison.

Hyaenaepellis, the skin or hide of the beast Hyaena, is of so admirable
efficacy, says Aetius, that if it be lapt about one that begins to be mad
of the biting of a mad dog, he will quickly be restored again to his wits.
Or the powder of it burnt and given in drink, will assuage the affection of
hydrophobie.

Imperatoria, masterwort, the root with the leaves stamped and laid upon the
bytings of mad dogs, or rather venomous beasts, will cure them.

Lapatium, Docke or herbe-patience is greatly commended by Aetius, to be laid
plasterwise on the wound or biting, and the decoction thereof drunk, saying, he
knew an old man that used none other remedy.

Lichnis Plumaria, Fethertop or wild campion, the weight of two drams of the
seed hereof beaten to powder and drunk, is good for such as are bitten of any
venomous beast.

Lycopsis Anglica, Echium, Alcibiadion, vipers buglosse or wall buglosse: this
herb chewed and the juice swalowed down, is a most singular remedy against
poison and the biting of any venomous beast, or the root chewed and laid on the
sore, works the same effect.

Melissa, Melissophyllon, Balm drunk in wine, or applied outwardly, is of
great virtue against the biting of mad dogs, or other venomous beasts.

Nepeta, Nep dry, is a very good herb for this purpose: It draws all the
circumstant moisture from the deepest parts of the body, as Oribasius writes.

Origanum wild marierome drunk in wine, is good against any kind of poison.

Oxalis Acetosa, Sorrel bruised and laid on, or the decoction thereof drunk,
is of great force in this case as Aetius reports. Some use it as a secret,
both in meats and medicines prepared therewith and applied to the wound.

Pimpinella, Burnet, This is a herb of excellent virtue against the biting of
a mad dog. Of this herb a hunts-man belonging to the french King Henry the
second, made report unto Doctor John Fernelius (while he had him in cure of a
grievous disease) that he knew by often experience, so great excellency in it
for preventing of hydrophobie or fear of water, that whosoever being bitten of
a mad dog, did use to eat thereof certain mornings fasting, either in a
salade or otherwise ordered did never sustain any hurt by such biting, which he
first made proof of in the Kings hounds, with notable good success.

Porrum, Leeke, the juice of Leekes drunk with honey, is good against the
biting of venomous beasts, and so are the leaves stamped and laid on the wound.

Potumogeton, pond-weed tempered with salt and laid on the sore, will not
suffer any to fall into hydrophobie, says Aetius.

Prasium, Marrubium, Horehound is one of the three herbs of account that Galen
mentions.

Ruta siluestris, or agrestis, the seeds of this herb are very excellent to
drink against all bytings.

Scordeum, water-germander, or garlick-germander, is an herb of very great
account, not only against all bytings of venomous beasts, but also against the
plague and other poisons. This herb and Centaurium minus, and Prasium, have
been retained says Galen, as great secrets for these infirmities, among the
ancient Physicians: but yet he preferred Terra Lemnia before them all.

Scorzonera, Viper grass is also reputed of great virtue against poisonous
bytings.

Serpillum, wild time is good against the bytings of any venomous beast either
taken in drink, or outwardly applied.

Triticum, wheat chewed betwixt the teeth, and laid on the bitten wound, is
very curatiue. So is the meal thereof tempered with vinegar, or the branne of
it.

Balmes either natural or artificial, are very excellent to dress the
bittenwound withal.

Some remedies named in this treatis, I have set down in Latin, as I found
them in the Authors thereof, partly because any Apothecatie upon the sight
thereof, can prepare them in better sort then other that are not used to such
practices: and partly for that many remedies heretofore (and too commonly
indeed) diuulged and laid open to the unskillful managing of women and
al-daring Empirickes, (though of themselves very excellent, where they be
ordered per manum artificis, by the ministration and application of a skillful
artist that knows the true times and opportunities of their use) have fallen
out to do great hurt to such as they have been practiced upon, to the great
discredit and undeserved blemishing of the most noble science of Physic,
especially in matters of purging and phebotomie, and such particulars as
specially belong to the secret mysteries of Physic. For now are start up so
many Thessalian Physicians in every corner, whom many not improperly do term
Dogle^ches, that this never too much commended Science, containing in it the
hidden secrets of all the whole Elementall world, is grown now so triuiall and
basely common, as every smattering Surgion, every Apothecarie, yea almost every
woman, and every botching Ass that has read a little in English books of
medicine, take upon them to be as good Physicians, as those that in the
universities have spent many years, and much money in the suite and study
thereof, and been dignified with the highest degrees of school, belonging to
that profession, that the Universities can bestow upon them.

(...).

