SAINT Peter's complaynt.

With other Poems.

AT LONDON. Printed by I. R. for G. C. 1595.

The Printer to the Gentlemen Readers.
Having beheld (kind Gentlemen) the numberless Judges of not to be reckoned
labors, with what kind admiration you have entertained the Divine Complaint of
holy Peter; and having in my hands certain especial Poems and divine
Meditations, full as worthy belonging to the same, I thought it a charitable
deed to give them life in your memories, which else should die in an obscure
sacrifice, gently embrace them, gentle censurers of gentle endeavors: so shall
you not be fantastike in diversity of opinions, nor contradict your resolves by
denying your former judgments, but still be your selves discreetely virtuous,
nor could I other wish, but that the courteous reader of these labors, not
having already bought Peter's Complaint, would not for so small a mite of money
loose so rich a treasure of heavenly wisdom as these two Treatises should
minister unto him, the one so needfully depending upon the other. One thing
amongst the rest I am to admonish thee of, that having in this Treatise read
Mary's visitation, the next that should follow is Christ's nativity, but being
before printed in the end of Peter's Complaint, we have here of purpose omitted;
that thou should not be abridged of that and theother like comforts which
that other treatise profereth thee.

Yours (kind Gentlemen) in all his abilities. I. B.

The Author to the Reader.
Dear eye that do peruse my Muses style.
With easy censure deem of my delight:
Give sobrest countnance leave sometime to smyle,
And grauest wits to take a breathing flight:
Of mirth to make a trade may be a crime,
But tired spirits for mirth must have a time.
The lofty Eagle soars not still above,
High flightes will force her from the wing to stoop,
And studious thoughts at times men must remove,
Least by excess before their time they droupe.
In courser studies it is a sweet repose,
With Poets pleasing vain to temper prose.
Profane conceits and fayning fits I fly,
Such lawless stuff does lawless speeches fit:
With David verse to virtue I apply,
Whose measure best with measured words does fit:
It is the sweetest note that man can sing,
When grace in virtues key tunes natures string.
The Author to the Reader.
Dear eye that daynest to let fall a look,
On these sad memories of Peter's plaints:
Muse not to see some mud in cleerest brook,
They once were brittle mould that now are Saints.
Their weakness is no warrant to offend,
Learn by their faults, what in thine own to mend.
If equities euen-hand the balance held,
Where Peter's sins and ours were made the weightes:
Ounce, for his dram: Pound, for his Ounce we yield:
His ship would groan to feel some sinners freightes.
So ripe is vice, so green is virtues bud:
The world does wax in ill, but waine in good.
This makes my mourning Muse resolve in tears,
This theames my heavy pen to plain in prose,
Christ's Thorn is sharp, no head his Garland wears:
Still finest wits are stilling Venus Rose.
In paynim toys the sweetest veins are spent:
To Christian works, few have their tallents lent.
License my single pen to seek a pheere,
You heavenly sparks of wit, show native light:
Cloud not with mistie loves your Orient clear,
Sweet flights you shoot; learn once to level right.
Favor my wish, well-wishing works no ill:
I move the Suite, the Grant restes in your will.
SAINT PETER'S Complaynt.
LAunch forth my Soul into a maine of tears,
Full fraught with grief the traffic of thy mind:
Torn sails will serve, thoughts rent with guilty fears:
Give care the stern: use sighs in lieu of wind:
Remorse, thy Pilot: thy misdeede, thy Card?
Torment thy Haven: Shipwreck, thy best reward.
Shun not the shelfe of most deserved shame:
Stick in the sands of agonizing dread:
Content thee to be storms and billows game:
Diuorc'd from grace thy soul to penance wed:
Fly not from foreign evils, fly from thy heart:
Worse then the worst of evils is that thou art.
Give vent unto the vapors of thy breast,
That thicken in the brimmes of cloudie eyes:
Where sin was hatched, let tears now wash the nest:
Where life was lost, recover life with cries.
Thy trespass foul: let not thy tears be few:
Baptize thy spotted soul in weeping dew.
Fly mournful plaintes, the Echoes of my ruth;
Whose screeches in my freighted conscience ring:
Sob out my sorrows, fruits of mine untruth:
Report the smart of sins infernal sting.
Tell hearts that languish in the soriest plight,
There is on earth a far more sorry wight.
A sorry wight, the object of disgrace,
The monument of fear, the map of shame,
The mirror of mishap, the stain of place,
The scorn of time, the infamy of fame:
An excrement of earth, to heaven hateful,
Injurious to man, to God ungrateful.
Ambitious heads dream you offortunes pride:
Fill volumes with your forged Goddess praise.
You fancies drudges, plunged in follies tide:
Deuote your fabling wits to lovers lays:
Be you o sharpest griefs, that ever wrung,
Text to my thoughts, Theme to my playning tung.
Sad subject of my sin has stoard my mind.
With everlasting matter of complaint:
My threnes an endless Alphabet do find,
Beyond the panges which Jeremy does paint.
That eyes with errors may just measure keep,
Most tears I wish that have most cause to weep.
All weeping eyes resign your tears to me:
A sea will scantly rince my ordur'de soul:
Huge horrors in high tides must drowned be,
Of every tear my crime exacteth tole.
These stains are deep: few drops, take out no such:
Even salve with sore: and most, is not too much.
I feared with life, to die; by death to live:
I left my guide, now left, and leaving God.
To breath in bliss, I feared my breath to give:
I feared for heavenly reign, an earthly rod.
These fears I feared, fears feeling no mishaps:
O fond, o faint, o false, o faulty laps.
How can I live, that thus my life denied?
What can I hope, that lost my hope in fear?
What trust to one, that truth it self defi'de?
What good in him, that did his God forswear?
O sin, of sins, of evils, the very worst:
O matchless wretch: o catiffe most accursed.
Vain in my vaunts I vowed if friends had failed
Alone Christ's hardest fortunes to abide:
Giant in talk, like dwarf, in trial quaild:
Excelling none, but in untruth and pride.
Such distance is between high words and deeds:
In proof the greatest vaunter seldom speedes.
Ah rashness hasty rise to murdering leap,
Lavish in vowing, blind, in seeing what:
Soon sowing shames, that long remorse must reap:
Nurcing with tears, that ouer-sight begat;
Scout of repentance, harbinger of blame,
Treason to wisdom, mother of ill name.
The borne-blind beggar, for received sight,
Fast in his faith and love, to Christ remained,
He stouped to no fear, he feared no might:
No change his choice: no threats his truth distained.
One wonder wrought him in his duty sure:
I, after thousands did my Lord abjure.
Could servile fear of rendering natures due,
Which growth in years was shortly like to claim,
So thrall my love, that I should thus eschew
A vowed death, and miss so fair an aim?
Die, die, disloyal wretch, thy life detest:
For saving thine, thou have forsworn the best.
Ah life, sweet drop, drowned in a sea of sowers,
A flying good, posting to doubtful end,
Still loosing months and years to gain new hours:
Feign, time to have, and spare, yet forced to spend;
Thy growth, decrease, a moment, all thou have:
That gone, ere known: the rest: to come, or past.
Ah life, the maze of countlesse straying ways,
Open to erring steps, and strow'd with baits,
To wind weak senses into endless strayes,
A loofe from virtues rough unbeaten straights;
A flower, a play, a blast, a shade, a dream,
A living death, a never turning stream.
And could I rate so high a life so base?
Did fear with love cast so uneven account,
That for this goal I should run Judas race,
And Caiphas rage in cruelty surmount?
Yet they esteemed thirty pence his price,
I, worse then both, for naught denied him thrice. Ma

The mother sea from ouerflowing deepes,
Sends forth her issue by divided veins:
Yet back her offspring to their mother creepes,
To pay their purest streams with added gains;
But I that drunk the drops of heavenly flud,
Bemyr'd the gyuer with returning mud.
Is this the harvest of his sowing toil?
Did Christ manure thy heart to breed him briars?
Or does it need this vnaccustomd soil,
With hellish dunge to fertile heavens desires?
No, no, the Marle that periuries does yield,
May spoil a good, not fat a barraine field.
Was this for best deserts the duest meede?
Are highest worthes well wag'de with spiteful hire?
Are stoutest vows repealed in greatest need?
Should friendship at the first affront retire?
Blush crauen sott, lurk in eternal night:
Crouch in the darkest caves from loathed light.
Ah wretch, why was I named son of a dove,
Whose speeches voyded spite, and breathed gall?
No kin I am unto the bird of love:
My stony name much better suits my fall,
My oaths were stones; my cruel tongue the sling:
My God, the mark: at which my spite did fling.
Were all the Jewish tiranies too few,
To glut thy hungry looks with his disgrace:
That thou more hateful tirannies must show:
And spit thy poison in thy Makers face?
Did thou to spare his foes put up thy sword:
To brandish now thy tongue against thy Lord?
Ah tongue, that did his praise and Godhead sound,
How were thou stained with such detesting words
That every word was to his heart a wound,
And launst him deeper then a thousand swords?
What rage of man, yea what infernal spirit,
Could have disgorg'd more loathsome dregs of spite?
Why did the yielding sea like marble way
Support a wretch more wavering then the waves? Mat

Whom doubt did plunge, why did the water stay,
Unkind, in kindness; murdering, while it saues?
O that this tongue had then been fishes food,
And I devoured before this cursing mood.
Their surges, depthes, and seas vnfirme by kind,
Rough gusts, and distance both from ship and shore,
Were titles to excuse my staggering mind,
Stout feet might falter on that liquid floare.
But here, no seas, no blastes, no billows were,
A puff of woman's wind bred all my fear.
O coward troops far better armed then hearted,
Whom angry words, whom blows could not prouok, Ioh.

Whom though I taught how sore my weapon smarted,
Yet none repaide me with a wounding stroke.
O no: that stroke could but one moitie kill,
I was reserved both halfes at once to spill.
Ah, whether was forgotten love exilde?
Where did the truth of pledged promise sleep?
What in my thoughts begat this ougly child,
That could through rented soul thus fircely creep?
O viper, fear their death by whom thou live,
All good thy ruynes wrecke, all euels thou give.
Threats threw me not, torments I none assayde:
My fray, with shades: conceits did make me yield,
Wounding my thoughts with fears: selfely dismayed,
I neither fought nor lost, I gave the field;
Infamous foil: a Maidens easy breath
Did blow me down, and blast my soul to death.
Titles I make untruths, am I a rock?
That with so soft a gale was ouer-throwne?
Am I fit Pastor for the faithful flock,
To guide their souls, that murdered thus mine own?
A rock of ruin, not a rest to stay,
A Pastor, not to feed, but to betray.
Fidelity was flowne, when fear was hatched,
Incompatible brood in virtues nest:
Courage can less with cowardice be matched,
Prowess nor love lodged in divided breast;
O Adams child, cast by a silly Eve,
Heir to thy Fathers foyles, and borne to grieve.
In Thabors joys I eger was to dwell,
An earnest friend while pleasures light did shine,
But when ecclipsed glory prostrate fell,
These zealous heates to sleep I did resign;
And now, my mouth has thrice his name defiled,
That cried so loud three dwellings there to build.
When Christ attending the distressefull hour,
With his surcharged breast did bless the ground,
Prostrate in pangs, rayning a bleeding shower,
Me, like my self, a drowsy friend he found;
Thrice in his care, sleep closde my careless eye,
Presage, how him my tongue should thrice deny.
Parting from Christ my fainting force declined,
With lingering foot I followed him a loofe,
Base fear out of my heart his love vnshrind, Ma(...) Lu(...)

Huge in high words, but impotent in proof;
My vaunts did seem hatched under Sampsons locks,
Yet woman's words did give me murdring knocks.
So far luke warm desires in crasie love,
Far off in need with feeble foot they train:
In tides they swim, low ebbes they scorn to prove,
They seek their friends delights, but shun their pain.
Hire of a hireling mind is earned shame:
Take now thy due: bear thy begotten blame.
Ah, cool remisnes, virtues quartane fever,
Pyning of love, consumption of grace:
Old in the cradle, languor dying ever,
Souls wilful famine, sins soft stealing pace,
The undermining evil of zealous thought,
Seeming to bring no harms till all be brought.
O portresse of the door of my disgrace;
Whose tongue, unlocked the truth of vowed mind;
Whose words, from cowardes heart did courage chase,
And let in death-full fears my soul to blind,
O, had thou been the portresse to my tomb:
When thou were portresse to that cursed room.
Yet love, was loath to part; fear, loath to die:
Stay, danger life, did counterplead their causes:
I favoring stay, and life, bad danger fly:
But danger did except against these clauses.
Yet stay, and live, I would, and danger shun:
And lost my self, while I my verdict won.
I stayde, yet did my staying farthest part:
I lived; but so, that saving life, I lost it:
Danger I shunned, but to my sorer smart:
I gained naught, but deeper damage crossed it,
What danger, distance, death is worse then this,
That runs from God and spoils his soul of bliss?
O John my guide into this earthly hell, 16

Too well acquainted in so ill a court,
Where railing mouths with blasphemies did swell,
With taynted breath infecting all resort.
Why did thou lead me to this hell of evils:
To show my self a fiend among the devils?
Evil president, the tide that wafts to vice,
Dumme Orator, that woes with silent deeds,
VVriting in works lessons of ill advise,
The doing tale that eye in practice reeds:
Taster of joys: to unacquainted hunger:
With leaven of the old seasoning the younger,
It seems no fault to do that all have done:
The number of offenders hides the sin:
Coatch drawn, with many horse does easily run.
Soon follows one where multitudes begin.
O, had I in that court much stronger bin;
Or not so strong as first to enter in.
Sharp was the weather in that stormy place, Ioh

Best suting hearts benumbed with hellish frost,
Whose crusted malice could admit no grace,
Where coals were kindled to the warmers cost.
Where fear, my thoughts canded with ysie cold:
Heat, did my tongue to periuries unfold.
O hateful fire (ah that I ever saw it)
Too hard my heart was frozen for thy force,
Far hotter flames it did require to thawe it,
Thy hell resembling heat did freeze it worse.
O that I rather had congealed to yse:
Then bought thy warm'th at such a damning price.
O wakefull bird, proclaimer of the day,
Whose piercing note does daunt the Lions rage: 6.

Thy crowing did my self to me bewray, 4.

My frights, and brutish heates it did aswage.
But o, in this alone unhappy cock:
That thou to count my foyles were made the clock.
O bird, the just rebuker of my crime,
The faithful waker of my sleeping fears:
Be now the daily clock to strike the time,
When stinted eyes shall pay their task of tears.
Vpbraide mine ears with thine accusing crow:
To make me rue that first it made me know.
O mild revenger of aspiring pride,
Thou can dismount high thoughts to low effects:
Thou made a cock me for my fault to chide,
My lofty boastes this lowly bird corrects.
Well might a cock correct me with a crow:
Whom hennish cackling first did ouer-throw.
VVeake weapons did Golias fumes abate, 17.

Whose storming rage did thunder threats in vain:
His body huge harnest with massy plate,
Yet David's stone brought death into his brain.
With staff and sling as to a dog he came:
And with contempt did boasting fury tame.
Yet David had with Bear and Lion fought,
His skillful might excusd Golias foil:
The death is easd that worthy hand has wrought,
Some honor lives in honorable spoil.
But I on whom all infamies must light:
Was hisd to death with words of women's spite.
Small gnats enforst th'Egiptian king to stoop,
Yet they in swarms and armed with piercing stings: Exodus(...)

Smart, noise, annoyance, made his courage droupe,
No small incombrance such small vermin brings:
I quaild at words that neither bit nor stoung,
And those delivered from a woman's tongue.
Ah fear, abortiue impe of drouping mind:
Self ouer-throw; false friend; root of remorce:
Sighted, in seeing evils; in shunning blind;
Foyld without field; by fancy not by force;
Ague of valor; frenzy of the wise;
True honors stain; loves frost; the mint of lies.
Can virtue, wisdom, strength by women spild
In David's, Salomons and Sampsons falls, 2. R(...) 3. R(...) Iud(...)

With semblance of excuse my error guild,
Or lend a marble gloss to muddy walls?
O no their fault had show of some pretense,
No veyle can hide the shame of my offense.
The blaze of beauties beams allured their looks,
Their looks, by seeing often, conceived love:
Love, by affecting, swallowed pleasures hooks:
Thus beauty, love, and pleasure them did move.
These Sirens sugared tunes rockt them a sleep:
Enough, to damn, yet not to damn so deep.
But gracious features dazeled not mine eyes,
Two homely droyles were authors of my death:
Not love, but fear, my senses did surprise:
Not fear of force, but fear of woman's breath.
And those unarmed, ill graced, despisd, unknown:
So base a blast my truth has ouer-throwne.
O women, woe to men: traps for their falls,
Still actors in all tragical mischances:
Earthes necessary evils, captiuing thralls,
Now murdring with your tongs, now with your glances,
Parents of life, and love: spoylers of both,
The thieves of hearts: false do you love or loath.
In time, o Lord, thine eyes with mine did meet,
In them I read the ruins of my fall:
Their chearing rays that made misfortune sweet,
Into my guilty thoughts pourd floods of gall,
Their heavenly looks that blessed where they beheld,
Darts of disdain, and angry checks did yield.
O sacred eyes, the springs of living light,
The earthly heavens, where Angels joy to dwell:
How could you deigne to view my deathfull plight,
Or let your heavenly beams look on my hell?
But those unspotted eyes encountered mine,
As spotless Sun does on the dounghill shine.
Sweet volumes stoard with learning fit for Saints,
Where blisfull quires imparadize their minds,
Wherein eternal study never faints,
Still finding all, yet seeking all it finds,
How endless is your laborinth of bliss,
Where to be lost the sweetest finding is?
Ah wretch how often have I sweet lessons read,
In those dear eyes the registers of truth?
How often have I my hungry wishes fed,
And in their happy joys redressed my ruth?
Ah that they now are Heralds of disdain:
That erst were ever pittiers of my pain.
You flames divine that sparkle out your heats,
And kindle pleasing fires in mortal hearts:
You nectar'd Aumbryes of soul feeding meats,
You graceful quiuers of loves dearest darts:
You did vouchsafe to warm, to wound, to feast:
My cold, my stony, my now famishd breast.
The matchles eyes, matched only each by other,
Were pleased on my ill matched eyes to glaunce:
The eye of liquid pearl, the purest mother,
Broch'd tears in mine to weep for my mischance;
The cabinets of grace unlocked their treasure,
And did to my misdeed their mercies measure.
These blazing Comets, lightning flames of love,
Made me their warming influence to know;
My frozen heart their sacred force did prove,
Which at their looks did yield like melting snow,
They did not joys in former plenty carue,
Yet sweet are crumbs where pined thoughts do starve.
O living mirrours, seeing whom you show,
which equal shadows worths with shadowed things:
Yea make things nobler then in native hew,
By being shaped in those life-gyuing springs;
Much more my image in those eyes was graced,
Then in my self, whom sin and shame defaced.
All-seeing eyes, more worth then all you see,
Of which one is the others only price:
I worthless am, direct your beams on me,
With quickening virtue cure my killing vice.
By seeing things, you make things worth the sight,
You seeing, salve, and being seen delight.
O Pooles of Hesebon, the bathes of grace, Ca(...)

Where happy spirits diue in sweet desires:
Where Saints rejoice to glass their glorious face,
Whose banks make Echo to the Angels quires;
An Echo sweeter in the sole rebound,
Then Angels music in the fullest sound.
O eyes, whose glaunces are a silent speech,
In ciphred words high mysteries disclosing:
Which with a look all Sciences can teach,
Whose textes to faithful hearts need little glosing:
Witness unworthy I, who in a look,
Learned more by rote, then all the scribes by book.
Tough malice still possessed their hardened minds,
I, though too hard, learned softnes in thine eye,
Which iron knots of stubborn will vnbinds,
Offering them love, that love with love will buy,
This did I learn, yet they could not discern it,
But woe, that I had now such need to learn it.
O Suns, all but your selves in light excelling,
Whose presence, day, whose absence causes night,
Whose neighbor course, brings Summer cold expelling,
Whose distant periods freeze away delight.
Ah, that I lost your bright and fostring beams,
To plunge my soul in these congealed streams.
O gracious spheres where love the Center is,
A native place for our selfe-loaden souls:
The compass, love, a cope that none can mis:
The motion, love that round about us rowles:
O Spheres of love, whose Center, cope and motion,
Is love of us, love that inuites devotion.
O little worlds, the sums of all the best,
Where glory, heaven, God, son: all virtues, stars;
Where fire, a love that next to heaven does rest,
Air, light of life, that no distemper marres;
The water, grace, whose seas, whose springes, whose showers.
Cloth natures earth with everlasting flowers.
What mixtures these sweet elements do yield,
Let happy worldlings of those worlds expound,
But simples are by compounds far excelled,
Both suit a place, where all best things abound.
And if a banished wretch guess not amiss:
All but one compound frame of perfect bliss.
I, outcast from these worlds exiled rome,
Poor Saint, from heaven, from fire cold Salamander:
Lost fish, from those sweet waters kindly home,
From land of life, strayed pilgrim still I wander.
I know the cause: these worlds had never hell,
In which my faults have best deserved to dwell.
O Bethelem cesterns, David's most desire, 2. Reg.

From which my sins like fierce Philistims keep,
To fetch your drops what champions should I hire,
That I therein my withered heart may steep.
I would not shed them like that holy king,
His were but tipes, these are the figured thing.
O turtle twins all bathed in virgins milk,
Upon the margin of full flowing banks: Can. 5. 12.

Whose graceful plume surmounts the finest silk,
Whose sight enamoreth heavens most happy ranks,
Could I forswear this heavenly pair of doves,
That cag'd in care for me were groaning loves.
Twice Moses wand did strike the stubborn rock,
Ere stony veins would yield their crystal blood: Exodus 1 verse. 6*

Thy eyes, one look served as an only knock,
To make my heart gush out a weeping flood.
Wherein my sins as fishes spawne their frye,
To show their inward shames, and then to dye.
But o, how long demurre I on his eyes,
Whose look did pearce my heart with healing wound:
Launcing impostumd sore of periurd lies,
Which these two issues of mine eyes has found:
Where run it must, till death the issues stop,
And penal life has purgd the final drop.
Like solest Swan that swimmes in silent deep,
And never sings but obsequies of death,
Sigh out thy plaints, and sole in secret weep,
In suing pardon, spend thy periurd breath.
Attire thy soul in sorrows mourning weed:
And at thine eyes let guilty conscience bleed.
Still in the limbecke of thy doleful breast,
These bitter fruits that from thy sins do grow,
For fuel, self accusing thoughts be best,
Use fear, as fire the coals let penance blow:
And seek none other quintescence but tears,
That eyes may shed what entered at thine ears.
Come sorrowing tears the of spring of my grief,
Scant not your parent of a needful aid;
In you I rest, the hope of wished relief,
By you my sinful debts must be defraide.
Your power preuailes, your sacrifice is grateful,
By love obtaining life to men most hateful.
Come good effects of ill deserving cause;
Ill gotten impes, yet virtuously brought forth:
Selfe-blaming probates, of infringed laws,
Yet blamed faults redeeming with your worth;
The signs of shame in you each eye may read,
Yet while you guilty prove, you pity plead.
O beams of mercy beat on sorrows cloud,
Pour suppling showers upon my parched ground:
Bring forth the fruit to your due service vowde,
Let good desires with like deserts be crowned.
Water young bloming virtues tender flower,
Sin did all grace of riper groth deuower.
Weep Balm and mirrhe you sweet Arabian trees,
With purest gummes perfume and pearl your ryne:
Shed on your honey drops you busy bees,
I barraine plaint must weep unpleasant bryne,
Hornets I hyue, salt drops their labor plyes,
Sucked out of sin, and shed by showring eyes.
If David night by night did bath his bed,
Esteeming longest days to short too moan: Psalm. 6

Inconsolable tears if Anna shed,
Who in her son her solace had forgone. Tob,

Then I to days, and weeks, to months and years,
Do owe the hourly rent of stintlesse tears.
If love, if loss, if fault, if spotted fame,
If danger, death, if wrath or wrecke of weal,
Entitle eyes true heirs to earned blame,
That due remorse in such events conceal,
Then want of tears might well enroll my name,
As chiefest Saint in Calender of shame.
Love, where I loved, was due, and best deserved,
No love could aim at more loue-worthy mark,
No love more loved then mine of him I served,
Large use he gave, a flame for every spark.
This love I lost, this loss a life must rue,
Yea life is short to pay the ruth is due.
I lost all that I had, and had the most,
The most that will can wish, or wit devise:
I least performd, that did most vainly boast,
I staind my fame in most infamous wise.
What danger then, death, wrath, or wreck can move,
More pregnant cause of tears then this I prove?
If Adam sought a veyle to scarf his sin,
Taught by his fall to fear a scourging hand, (...)3, 7,

If men shall wish that hills should wrap them in,
When crimes in final doom come to be scand:
What mount, what cave, what center can conceal
My monstrous fact, which even the birds reveal?
Come shame the livery of offending mind:
The ougly shroud, that ouershadoweth blame:
The mulct, at which foul faults are justly find,
The dampe of sin, the common sluice of fame.
By which impostum'd tongues, their humors purge,
Light shame on me, I best deserved the scourge.
Caines murdering hand imbrude in brothers blood,
More mercy then my impious tongue may crave: Gene(...)

He killed a rival with pretense of good,
In hope Gods doubled love alone to have.
But fear so spoild my vanquished thoughts of love:
That periurde oaths my spightfull hate did prove.
Poor Agar from her phere enforced to fly,
VVandring in Barsabeian wilds alone:
Doubting her child through helples drought would dye,
Laid it aloof and set her down to moan.
The heavens with prayers: her lap with tears she filled,
A mothers love in loss is hardly stild.
But Agar now bequeath thy tears to me, Gene,(...)

Fears, not effects, did set aflote thine eyes:
But wretch I feel more then was feared of thee,
Ah, not my son, my soul it is that dies.
It dies for drought yet had a spring in sight,
Worthy to dye, that would not live and might.
Fair Absolons foul faults compard with mine, 2, Re(...)

Are brightest sands, to mud of Sodom lakes.
High aims, young spirits, birth of royal line,
Made him play false where kingdoms were the stakes,
He gazd on golden hopes, whose luster winnes
Sometime the grauest wits to grievous sins.
But I whose crime cuts off the least excuse,
A kingdom lost, but hoped no mite of gain,
My highest mark, was but the worthless use,
Of some few lingering hours of longer pain;
Ungrateful child, his parent he pursude,
I, Giants war with God himself renude.
Joy infant Saints, whom in the tender flower (...)2.

A happy storm did free from fear of sin,
Long is their life that die in blisfull hour,
Joyful such ends as endless joys begin.
Too long they live, that live till they be naught,
Life saved by sin, base purchase dearly bought.
This lot was mine, your fate was not so fearce,
Whom spotless death in cradle rockt a sleep,
Sweet Roses mixed with Lillies strow'd your hearce,
Death virgin white in martirs red did steep.
Your downy heads both pearls and rubies crowned,
My hoary locks did femall fears confound.
You bleating Ewes that wail this vvoluish spoil,
Of sucking Lambs new bought with bitter throws,
To balm your babes your eyes distill their oil,
Each heart to tomb her child wide rupture shows;
Rue not their death whom death did but revive:
Yield ruth to me that lived to die alive.
With easy loss sharp wreacks did he eschew,
That Sindonles aside did naked slyp,
Once naked grace no outward garment knew,
Rich are his robes whom sin did never stryp,
I that in vaunts displaid prides fairest flags,
Disrobed of grace, am wrapped in Adams rags.
When traitor to the Son, in Mothers eyes,
I shall present my humble suit for grace,
What blush can paint the shame that will arise,
Or write my inward feeling in my face?
Might she the sorrow with the sinner see,
Though I dispisde: my grief might pittyed be.
But ah, how can her ears my speech endure,
Or sent my breath still reeking hellish steeme?
Can Mother like what did the Son abjure,
Or heart deflowered a virgins love redeem?
The Mother nothing loves that Son does loath,
Ah loathsome wretch detested of them both.
O sister Nymphs the sweet renowned pair,
That bless Bethania bounds with your aboade:
Shall I infect that sanctified air,
Or stain those steps where Jesus breathed and trod?
No: let your prayers perfume that sweetened place:
Turn me with Tigers to the wildest chase.
Could I revived Lazarus behold, 11.

The third of that sweet Trinity of Saints?
Would not astonished dread my senses hold?
Ah yes, my heart even with his naming faints;
I seem to see a messenger from hell,
That my prepared torments comes to tell.
O John, o James, we made a triple cord 17.

Of three most loving and best loved friends: (...)8.

My rotten twist was broken with a word,
Fit now to fuel fire among the fiends;
It is not ever true, though often spoken,
That triple twisted cord is hardly broken.
The dispossessed devils that out I threw,
In Jesus name, now impiously forsworn,
Triumph to see me caged in their mew,
Trampling my ruins with contempt and scorn;
My periuries were music to their dance,
And now they heap disdaines on my mischaunce.
Our rock (say they) is riuen, o welcome hour,
Our Eagles wings are clypt that wrought so hie:
Our thundering Cloud made noise but cast no shower,
He prostrate lies that would have scaled the sky;
In woman's tongue our runner found a rub,
Our Cedar now is shrunk into a shrub.
These scornful words vpbraid my inward thought,
Proofs of their damned prompters neighbor voice:
Such ugly guests still wait upon the naught,
Fiends swarm to souls that swerve from virtues choice,
For breach of plighted truth, this true I try:
Ah, that my deed thus gave my word the lie.
Once, and but once, too dear a once to twice it,
A heaven, in earth, Saints, nere my self I saw;
Sweet was the sight, but sweeter loves did spice it,
But sightes and loves did my misdeed withdraw.
From heaven and Saints to hell and devils estranged,
Those sights to frights, those loves, to hates are changed.
Christ, as my God, was tempted in my thought,
As man, he lent mine eyes their dearest light;
But sin, his temple has to ruin brought:
And now, he lightneth terror from his sight,
Now of my lay vnconsecrate desires,
Profaned wretch I taste the earned hires.
Ah sin, the nothing that does all things file;
Outcast from heaven, earths curse, the cause of hell:
Parent of death, author of our exile,
The wrecke of souls, the wares that fiends do sell.
That men to monsters; Angels turns to devils:
VVrong, of all rights; self ruin: root of evils.
A thing most done, yet more then God can do,
Daily new done; yet ever done amiss:
Friended of all, yet unto all a foe,
Seeming a heaven, yet banishing from bliss.
Served with toil, yet paying naught but pains
Man's deepest loss, though false, esteemed gain.
Shot, without noise: wound without present smart:
First seeming light; proving in fine a lode*
Entering with ease, not easily won to part,
Far in effects from that the shows abode:
Endorc'd with hope, subscribed with despair;
Ugly in death, though life did feign it fair.
O forfeiture of heaven: eternal debt,
A moments joy; ending in endless fires:
Our natures scumme; the worlds entangling Net:
Night of our thoughts: death of all good desires.
Worse then all this: worse then all tongues can say,
Which man could owe, but only God defray.
This fawning viper, dumme till he had wounded,
With many mouths does now vpbraid my harms:
My sight was vaild till I my self confounded,
Then did I see the dissinchanted charms.
Then could I cut the anotomy of sin,
And search with Linxes eyes what lay within.
Bewitching evil, that hides death in deceits,
Still borrowing lying shapes to mask thy face,
Now know I the deciphring of thy sleights,
A cunning, dearly bought with loss of grace;
Thy sugared poison now has wrought so well,
That thou have made me to my self a hell.
My eye, reads mournful lessons to my heart,
My heart, does to my thought the griefs expound,
My thought, the same does to my tongue impart,
My tongue, the message in the ears does sound;
My ears, back to my heart their sorrows send,
Thus circkling griefs run round without an end.
My guilty eye still seems to see my sin,
All things Charecters are to spell my fall,
What eye does read without, heart rues within,
What heart does rue, to pensive thought is gall;
Which when the thought would by the tongue digest
The ear conuayes it back into the breast.
Thus gripes in all my parts do never fail,
Whose only league is now in bartring pains,
What I in gross, they traffic by retayle,
Making each others miseries their gains;
All bound for ever, prentizes to care,
While I in shop of shame trade sorrows ware.
Pleased with displeasing lot I seek no change,
I wealthiest am when richest in remorce;
To fetch my ware no seas nor lands I range,
For customers to buy I nothing force.
My homebred goods at home are bought and sold,
And still in me the interest I hold.
My comfort now is comfortless to live,
In Orphan state devoted to mishap:
Rent from the root, that sweetest fruit did give,
I scorned to graffe in stock of meaner sap.
No juice can joy me but of Iesse flower,
Whose heavenly root has true reviving power.
At sorrows door I knocked, they craved my name;
I answered one, unworthy to be known;
What one, say they? one worthiest of blame.
But who? a wretch, not Gods, nor yet his own.
A man? O no, a beast; much worse, what creature:
A rock: how called? the rock of scandale, Peter,
From whence? from Caiphas house, ah dwell you there.
Sins farm I rented, there, but now would leave it*
What rent? my soul; what gain? unrest, and fear,
Dear purchase. Ah too dear, will you receive it?
What shall we give? fit tears, and times, to plain me*
Come in, say they; thus griefs did entertain me.
With them I rest true prisoner to their Iayle,
Chained in the iron linkes of basest thrall,
Till grace vouchsafing captive soul to bail,
In wonted See degraded loves enstall.
Days, pass in plaints: the nights without repose,
I wake, to weep, I sleep in waking woes.
Sleep, deaths allye, oblivion of tears,
Silence of passions, balm of angry sore,
Suspense of loves, security of fears,
VVrathes lenitiue, hearts ease, storms calmest shore,
Senses and souls repriuall from all cumbers,
Benumming sense of ill, with quiet slumbers.
Not such my sleep, but whisperer of dreams,
Creating strange chymeraes, fayning frights:
Of day discourses giving fancy theames,
To make dumme shows with worlds of antic sights,
Casting true griefs in fancies forging mold,
Brokenly telling tales rightly foretold.
This sleep most fitly suteth sorrows bed,
Sorrow, the smart of evil, Sins eldest child*
Best, when unkind in killing who it bred,
A rack for guilty thoughts, a bit, for wild.
The scourge, that whips, the salve that cures offense:
Sorrow, my bed, and home, while life has sense.
Here solitary Muses nurse my griefs,
In silent lonenesse burying worldly noise,
Attentive to rebukes, deaf to reliefes,
Pensive to foster cares careless of joys:
Ruing life's loss under deaths dreary roofes,
Solemnizing my funeral behoofes.
A self contempt, the shroud: my soul, the corse:
The beer, an humble hope: the hearse cloth, fear:
The mourners, thoughts, in blacks of deep remorse:
The hearse, grace, pity, love, and mercy bear.
My tears, my dole: the priest, a zealous will:
Penance, the tomb: and doleful sighs, the knill.
Christ, health of feuer'd soul, heaven of the mind,
Force of the feeble, nurse of Infant loves,
Guide to the wandering foot, light of the blind,
Whom weeping winnes, repentant sorrow moves.
Father in care, mother in tender heart:
Revive and save me slain with finnefull dart.
If king Manasses sunk in depth of sin,
With plaints and tears recovered grace and crown:
A worthless worm some mild regard may win,
And lowly creep, where flying threw it down.
A poor desire I have to mend my ill;
I should, I would, I dare not say, I will.
I dare not say; I will, but wish I may,
My pride is checked, high words the speaker spilt:
My good, o Lord, thy gift; thy strength my stay:
Give what thou bidst, and then bid what thou will.
Work with me what thou of me do request:
Then will I dare the most, and vow the best.
Prone look, crossed arms, bent knee, and contrite heart,
Deep sighs, thick sobs, dew'd eyes and prostrate prayers,
Most humbly beg release of earned smart,
And saving shroud in mercies sweet repaires.
If justice should my wrongs with rigor wage:
Fears, would dispaires: ruth, breed a hopeless rage.
Lazar at pitties gate I vlcered lie,
Craving the reffues crummes of childrens plate:
My sores, I lay in view to mercies eye,
My rags, bear witness of my poor estate:
The worms of conscience that within me swarm:
Prove that my plaints are less then is my harm,
With mildness, Jesus, measure my offense:
Let true remorse thy due revenge abate:
Let tears appease when trespass does incense:
Let pity temper thy deserved hate.
Let grace forgive, let love forget my fall:
With fear I crave, with hope I humbly call.
Redeem my lapse with ransom of thy love,
Trauerse th'inditement, rigors doom suspend:
Let frailty favor, sorrows succor move,
Be thou thy self, though changling I offend.
Tender my suit, cleanse this defiled den,
Cancel my debts, sweet Jesus, say Amen.
The end of Saint Peter's complaint.
MARY MAGDALENS BLVSH.
THE signs of shame that stain my blushing face*
Rise from the feeling of my rauing fits,
Whose joy, annoy: whose guerdon, is disgrace:
Whose solace, flies: whose sorrow, never flits:
Bad seed I sowed: worse fruit is now my gain:
Soon dying mirth begat long living pain.
Now pleasure ebbes: revenge begins to flow:
One day does wreake the wrath that many wrought:
Remorse does tcach my guilty thoughts to know,
How cheap I sold, that Christ so dearly bought.
Faults long unfelt does conscience now bewray,
Which cares must cure, and tears must wash away.
All ghostly dynts that grace at me did dart,
Like stubborn rock I forced to recoyle;
To other flights an aim I made my heart,
whose wounds, then wel-come, now have wrought my foil.
VVoe worth the bow, woe worth the archers might,
That drove such arrows to the mark so right.
To pull them out, to leave them in, is death:
One, to this world: one, to the world to come:
VVounds may I wear, and draw a doubtful breath:
But then my wounds will work a dreadful dome.
And for a world, whose pleasures pass away:
I lose a world, whose joys are past decay.
O sense, o soul, o had, o hoped bliss,
You woo, you weane, you draw, you drive me back.
Your cross encountering, like their combat is,
That never end but with some deadly wrack.
When sense does win, the soul does loose the field,
And present haps, make future hopes to yield.
O heaven, lament: sense robs thee of Saints:
Lament o souls, sense spoyleth you of grace.
Yet sense does scarce deserve these hard complaints,
Love is the thief, sense but the entering place.
Yet grant I must, sense is not free from sin,
For thief he is that thief admits in.
Marie Magdalens complaynt at Christ's death.
Since my life from life is parted:
Death come take thy portion.
Who suruiues, when life is murdered,
Lives by mere extortion.
All that live, and not in God:
Couch their life in deaths abod.
Seely stars must needs leave shining,
When the sun is shaddowed.
Borrowed streams refrain their running,
When head springs are hindered.
One that lives by others breath,
Dies also by his death.
O true life, since thou have left me,
Mortal life is tedious.
Death it is to live without thee,
Death of all most odious.
Turn again or take me to thee,
Let me dye or live thou in me.
Where the truth once was, and is not,
Shadows are but vanity:
Showing want, that help they cannot:
Signs, not salues of misery.
Painted meat no hunger feeds,
Dying life each death exceedes.
With my love, my life was nestled
In the sum of happiness;
From my love, my life is wrested
To a world of heaviness.
O, let love my life remove,
Since I live not where I love.
O my soul, what did unloose thee
From thy sweet captivity?
God, not I, did still possess thee:
His, not mine, thy liberty.
O, two happy thrall thou wart,
When thy prison, was his heart.
Spightfull spear, that break'st this prison,
Seat of all felicity,
VVorking this, with double treason,
Loves and lives delivery:
Though my life thou drau'st away,
Maugre thee my love shall stay.
Times go by turns.
THE lopped tree in time may grow again,
Most naked plants renew both fruit and flower:
The soriest wight may find release of pain,
The dryest soil suck in some moystning shower.
Times go by turns, and chances change by course:
From foul to fair: from better hap, to worse.
The sea of fortune does not ever flow,
She draws her favors to the lowest ebb:
Her tides has equal times to come and go,
Her Loome does weaue the fine and coursest web.
No joy so great, but runs to an end:
No hap so hard, but may in fine amend.
Not always fall of leaf, nor ever spring,
No endless night, yet not eternal day:
The saddest birds a season find to sing,
The roughest storm a calm may soon alay.
Thus with succeeding turns God tempereth all:
That man may hope to rise, yet fear to fall.
A chance may win that by mischaunce was lost,
The net that holds no great, takes little fish;
In some things all, in all things none are crossed,
Few, all they need: but none, have all they wish,
Vnmedled joys here to no man befall,
Who least, has some, who most, has never all.
Look home.
Retired thoughts enjoy their own delights,
As beauty does in self beholding eye:
Man's mind a mirror is of heavenly sights,
A brief wherein all meruailes summed lie.
Of fairest forms, and sweetest shapes the store,
Most graceful all, yet thought may grace them more.
The mind a creature is, yet can create,
To natures patterns adding higher skill:
Of finest works wit better could the state,
If force of wit had equal power of will.
Devise of man in working has no end,
What thought can think an other thought can mend.
Man's soul of endless beauties image is,
Drawn by the work of endless skill and might;
This skillful might gave many sparks of bliss,
And to discern this bliss a native light,
To frame Gods image as his worthes requird,
His might, his skill, his word, and will conspird.
All that he had his image should present,
All that it should present he could afford:
To that he could afford his will was bent,
His will was followed with performing word.
Let this suffize, by this conceive the rest,
He should, he could, he would, he did the best.
Fortunes falsehood.
IN worldly meriments lurketh much misery,
Sly fortunes subtilties in baits of happiness
Shroud hooks, that swallowed, without recovery
Murder the innocent with mortal heaviness.
She sootheth appetites with pleasing vanities,
Till they be conquered with cloaked tyranny,
Than, changing countenance, with open enmities,
She triumphs over them, scorning their slavery.
With fawning flattery deaths door she opens,
Alluring passengers to bloody destenie:
In offers bountiful, in proof she beggereth;
Men's ruins registring her false felicity.
Her hopes are fastened in bliss that vanishes,
Her smart inherited with sure possession,
Constant in cruelty, she never alters,
But from one violence, to more oppression.
To those that follow her, favors are measured
As easy premises to hard conclusions;
With bitter corrosiues her joys are seasoned,
Her highest benefits are but illusions.
Her ways, a laborinth of wandering passages:
Fools common pilgrimage, to cursed deieties:
Whose fond devotion and idle menages
Are wagde with weariness in fruitless drudgeries.
Blind in her favorites foolish election,
Chance is her arbiter in giving dignities:
Her choice of visions, shows most discretion,
Since wealth the virtuous might wrest from piety.
To humble suppliants tyrant most obstinate:
She suitors answers with contrarieties:
Proud with petition, untaught to mitigate
Rigor with clemency in hardest cruelties.
Like Tygre fugitive from the ambitious,
Like weeping Crodocile to scornful enemies
Suing for amity where she is odious,
But to her followers forswearing courtesies.
No wind so changeable, no sea so wavering,
As giddie Fortune in reeling varieties;
Now mad, now merciful, now fierce, now favoring:
In all things mutable, but mutabilities.
Scorn not the least.
WHere wards are weak, and foes encountering strong:
Where mightier do assault, then do defend:
The feebler part puts up enforced wrong,
And silent sees, that speech could not amend.
Yet higher powers must think, though they repine,
When sun is set: the little stars will shine.
While Pike does range, the silly Tench does fly,
And crouch in privy creekes, with smaller fish:
Yet Pikes are caught when little fish go bie:
These, fleet a flote; while those, do fill the dish.
There is a time even for the worms to creep:
And suck the dew while all their foes do sleep.
The Marlyne cannot ever sore on high,
Nor greedy Greyhound still pursue the chase:
The tender Lark will find a time to fly,
And fearful Hare to run a quiet race.
He that high growth on Ceders did bestow:
Gave also lowly Mush-rumpts leave to grow.
In Amans pomp poor Mardocheus wept;
Yet God did turn his fate upon his foe.
The Lazar pinde, while Dives feast was kept,
Yet he, to heaven; to hell did Dives go.
We trample grass, and prize the flowers of May:
Yet grass is green, when flowers do fade away.
The Nativity of Christ.
Behold the father, is his daughters son:
The bird that built the nest, is hatched therein:
The old of years, an hour has not out-runne:
Eternal life, to live does now begin.
The word is dumme: the mirth of heaven does weep:
Might feeble is: and force does faintly creep.
O dying souls, behold your living spring:
O dazeled eyes, behold your son of grace:
Dull ears, attend what word this word does bring:
Up heavy hearts; with joy your joy embrace.
From death, from dark, from deafness, from dispaires:
This life, this light, this word, this joy repaires.
Gift better then him self, God does not know:
Gift better then his God, no man can see;
This gift does here the giver given bestow;
Gift to this gift let each receiver be.
God is my gift, himself he freely gave me;
Gods gift am I, and none but God shall have me.
Man altered was by sin from man to beast;
Beasts food is hay, hay is all mortal flesh;
Now God is flesh, and lies in Manger pressed;
As hay, the brutest sinner to refresh.
O happy field wherein this fodder grew,
Whose taste, does us from beasts to men renew.
Christ's childhood.
TIll twelve years age, how Christ his childhood spent,
All earthly pens unworthy were to write,
Such acts, to mortal eyes he did present:
Whose worth, not men, but Angels must recite.
No natures blots, no childish faults defilde,
Where grace was guide, and God did play the child.
In springing locks, lay couched hoarie wit,
In semblance young, a grave and ancient port,
In lowly looks, high Majesty did sit:
In tender tongue, sound sense of sagest sort,
Nature imparted all that she could teach,
And God supplied, where nature could not reach.
His mirth, of modest mean a mirror was,
His sadness, tempered with a mild aspect:
His eye, to try each action was a glass,
Whose looks, did good approve, and bad correct.
His natures gifts, his grace, his word and deed,
Well showed that all did from a God proceed.
A child my choice.
LEt folly praise that fancy loves, I praise and love that child,
Whose heart, no thought: whose tongue, no word: whose hand no deed defild.
I praise him most, I love him best, all praise and love is his:
While him I love, in him I live, and cannot live amiss.
Loves sweetest mark, lawdes highest theme, man's most desired light,
To love him, life: to leave him, death: to live in him, delight.
He mine, by gift: I his, by debt: thus each, to others due:
First friend he was: best friend he is: all times will try him true.
Though young, yet wise: though small, yet strong: though man, yet God he is:
As wise, he knows: as strong, he can: as God, he loves to bliss,
His knowledge rules: his strength, defends: his love, does cherish all:
His birth, our joy: his life, our light: his death, our end of thrall.
Alas, he weeps, he sighs, he pants, yet do his Angels sing:
Out of his tears, his sighs and throbs, does buda joyful spring.
Almighty babe, whose tender arms can force all foes to fly:
Correct my faults, protect my life, direct me when I die.
Content and rich.
IDwell in graces court,
Enriched with virtues rights:
Faith, guides my wit: love, leads my will:
Hope; all my mind delights.
In lowly vales I mount
To pleasures highest pich:
My seely shroud true honor brings,
My poor estate is rich.
My conscience, is my crown:
Contented thoughts, my rest*
My heart is happy in it self:
My bliss is in my breast.
Enough, I reckon wealth:
A mean, the surest lot,
That lies too high, for base contempt;
Too low, for enuies shot.
My wishes are but few,
All easy to fulfill:
I make the limits of my power,
The bonds unto my will.
I have no hopes but one,
Which is of heavenly reign,
Effects attaind, or not desired,
All lower hopes resraine.
I feel no care of coin,
VVeldoing is my wealth:
My mind to me an empire is
While grace affords health.
I clyp high-clyming thoughts,
The wings of swelling pride,
Their fall is worst that from the hight,
Of greatest honor slide.
Since sails of largest size
The storm does soonest tear,
I bear so low and small a sail
As freeth me from fear.
I wrestle not with rage
While furies flame does burn,
It is in vain to stop the stream
Until the tide does turn.
But when the flame is out,
and ebbing wrath does end,
I turn a late enraged foe
Into a quiet friend.
And taught with often proof,
A tempered calm I find;
To be most solace, to it self;
Best cure, for angry mind.
Spare diet, is my fare;
My clothes, more fit, then fine;
I know I feed and cloth a foe:
That pamp'red, would repine.
I envy not their hap,
Whom favor does advance:
I take no pleasure in their pain,
That have less happy chance.
To rise by others fall,
I deem a loosing gain:
All states with others ruins built,
To ruin run a-maine.
No change of fortunes calmes,
Can cast my comforts down:
When fortune smiles, I smile to think,
How quickly she will frown.
And when in froward mood
She proves an angry foe:
Small gain I found to let her come,
Less loss to let her go.
Loss in delays.
SHun delays, they breed remorse,
Take thy time while time does serve thee,
Creeping Snayles have weakest force,
Fly their fault least thou repent thee,
Good is best when soonest wrought,
Lingering labors come to naught.
Hoise up sail, while gale does last;
Tide and wind stay no man's pleasure:
Seek not time, when time is past,
Sober speed is wisdoms leisure:
After wits are dearly bought,
Let thy fore-wit guide thy thought.
Time wears all his locks before,
Take thou hold upon his forehead,
When he flies he turns no more,
And behind his scalpe is naked,
Works aiournd have many stays,
Long demurres breed new delays.
Seek thy salve while sore is green,
Festred wounds ask deeper launcing;
After cures are seldom seen,
Often sought scarce ever chauncing,
Time and place give best advise,
Out of season out of prise.
Crush the Serpent in the head,
Break ill eggs ere they be hatched,
Kill bad Chickins in the tread,
Fligge, they hardly can be catched.
In the rising, stifle ill,
Least it grow against thy will.
Drops do pierce the stubborn flint,
Not by force but often falling,
Custom kills with feeble dint,
More by use then strength prevailing.
Single sands have little weight,
Many make a drowning freight.
Tender twigs are bent with ease,
Aged trees do break with bending,
Young desires make little prease,
Growth does make them past amending.
Happy man that soon does knock,
Babble babes against the rock.
Loves servile Lot.
Love, mistress is of many minds,
Yet few know whom they serve,
They reckon least how little love
Their service does deserve.
The will she robs from the wit,
The sense from reasons lore,
She is delightful in the rine,
Corrupted in the core;
She shroudeth vice in virtues veil,
Pretending good in ill,
She offers joy, affoordeth grief,
A kiss where she does kill.
A honny shower raines from her lyps,
Sweet lights shine in her face,
She has the blush of virgin mind,
The mind of Vipers race.
She makes thee seek, yet fear to find,
To find, but not enjoy;
In many frowns some gliding smiles,
She yields to more anoy.
She wooes thee to come near her fire,
Yet does she draw it from thee,
Far off she makes thy heart to fry,
And yet to freeze within thee.
She lets fall some luring baits
For fools to gather up:
Too sweet, too sour to every taste
She tempereth her cup.
Soft souls she binds in tender twist,
Small Flies in spinners web,
She sets a floote some luring streams,
But makes them soon to ebb.
Her watrie eyes have burning force:
Her floods and flames conspire.
Tears kindle sparks, sobbes fuel are:
And sighs do blow her fire.
May never was the Month (...)oue,
For May is full of flowers,
But rather April wet by kind,
For love is full of showers.
Like tyrant cruel wounds she gives,
Like Surgeon salve she lends,
But salve and sore have equal force,
For death is both their ends.
With soothing words, inthralled souls:
She chains in servile bands,
Her eye in silence has a speech,
Which eye best understands.
Her little sweet has many fowres,
Short hap immortal harms,
Her loving looks, are murdring darts,
Her songs bewitching charms.
Like winter rose, and summer Ise
Her joys are still untimely,
Before her hope, behind remorse,
Fair first, in fine unseemly.
Moodes passions, fancies jealous fits,
Attend upon her train;
She yields rest without repose,
A heaven in hellish pain.
Her house is sloth, her door deceit,
And slipperie hope her stairs,
Vnbashfull boldness bids her guests,
And every vice repaires.
Her diet is of such delight,
As please till they be past,
But then the poison kills the heart,
That did entise the taste.
Her sleep in sin, does end in wrath,
Remorse rings her awake,
Death calls her up, shame drives her out,
Dispaires her vp-shot make.
Plowe not the Seas, sow not the sands,
Leave off your idle pain,
Seek other mistres for your minds,
Loves service is in vain.
Life is but loss.
BY force I live in will I wish to dye,
In plaint I pass the length of lingering days,
Free would my soul from mortal body fly,
And tread the tracke, of deaths desired ways;
Life is but loss, where death is deemed gain,
And loathed pleasures breed displeasing pain.
Who would not dye to kill all murdering greeues,
Or who would live in never dying fears?
Who would not wish his treasure safe from thieves,
And quit his heart from pangues, his eyes from tears?
Death parts but two, ever fighting foes,
Whose civil strife, does work our endless woes.
Life is a wandering course to doubtful rest,
As often a cursed rise to damning leap;
As happy race to win a heavenly crest,
None being sure, what final fruits to reap.
And who can like, in such a life to dwell,
Whose ways are strait to heaven, but wide to hell.
Come cruel death why lingrest thou so long,
What does withhold thy dint from fatal stroke?
Now pressed I am alas thou do me wrong,
To let me live more anger to provoke:
Thy right is had, when thou have stopped my breath,
Why should thou stay, to work my double death?
If Saules attempt in falling on his blade,
As lawful were, as ethe to put in ure:
If Sampsons leave, a common law were made,
Of Abels lot if all that would were sure.
Then cruel death thou should the tyrant play,
With none but such as wished for delay.
Where life is loved, thou ready art to kill,
And to abridge with sudden pangues their joy,
Where life is loathed thou will not work their will,
But do adiourne their death to their annoy,
To some thou art a fierce unbidden guest,
But those that crave thy help thou helpest least.
Auant o viper, I thy spite defy,
There is a God that ouer-rules thy force,
Who can thy weapons to his will apply,
And shorten or prolong our brittle course:
I on his mercy, not thy might rely,
To him I live, for him I hope to dye.
I dye alive.
O Life what lets thee from a quick decease?
O death what draws thee from a present pray?
My feast is done my soul would beat ease,
My grace is said, o death come take away.
I live, but such a life as ever dies,
I die but such a death, as never ends,
My death to end my dying life denies,
And life my living death no whit amends.
Thus still I dye, yet still I do revive,
My living death by dying life is fed:
Grace more then nature keeps my heart alive,
Whose idle hopes and vain desires are dead.
Not where I breath, but where I love I live,
Not where I love, but where I am I dye:
The life I wish, must future glory give,
The deaths I feel, in present dangers lie.
What joy to line.
I wage no war, yet peace I none enjoy,
I hope, I fear, I fry in freezing cold,
I mount in mirth still prostrate in annoy,
I all the world embrace, yet nothing hold.
All wealth is want where chiefest wishes fail,
Yea life is loathed, where love may not prevail.
For that I love, I long, but that I lack,
That others love I loath, and that I have:
All worldly fraights to me are deadly wrack,
Men, present hap, I future hopes do crave.
They loving where they live, long life require,
To live where best I love, death I desire.
Here love is lent for loan of filthy gain,
Most friends befriend themselves with friendships show
Here, plenty perril, want does breed disdain,
Cares common are, joys faulty, short and few.
Here honor enuide, meanenes is dispis'd,
Sin deemed solace, virtue little pris'd.
Here beauty is a bait that swallowed choakes,
A treasure sought still to the owners harms:
A light that eyes to murdring sighs prouokes,
A grace that souls enchant with mortal charms.
A luring aim to Cupids fiery flights,
A balefull bliss that damnes where it delights.
O who would live, so many deaths to try?
Where will does wish that wisdom does reprove,
Where nature craves that grace must needs deny,
Where sense does like, that reason cannot love,
Where best in show, in final proof is worst,
Where pleasures vpshot is to die accursed.
Life's death loves life.
WHo lives in love, loves least to live,
And long delays does rue:
If him he love by whom he lives,
To whom all love is due.
Who for our love did choose to live,
And was content to die:
Who loved our love more then his life,
And love with life did buy.
Let us in life, yea with our life,
Requite his living love,
For best we live when least we live,
If love our life remove.
Where love is hot, life hateful is,
Their grounds do not agree:
Love where it loves, life where it lives,
Desires most to be.
And since love is not where it lives,
Nor lives where it loves:
Love hates life, that holds it back,
And death it best approues.
For seldom is he won in life,
Whom love does most desire:
If won by love yet not inioyde,
Till mortal life expire.
Life out of earth, has not abode,
In earth love has no place,
Love settled has her joys in heaven,
In earth life all her grace.
Mourn therefore no true lovers death:
Life only him annoyes,
And when he takes leave of life,
Then love begins his joys.
At home in Heaven.
Fair soul, how long shall veyles thy graces shroud?
How long shall this exile withold thy right,
When will thy sun disperse this mortal cloud,
And give thy glories scope to blaze their light?
O that a Star more fit for Angels eyes,
Should pyne in earth, not shine above the skies.
Thy ghostly beauty offered force to God,
It cheyn'd him in the linkes of tender love.
It won his will with man to make abode:
It stayed his Sword, and did his wrath remove.
It made the rigor of his justice yield,
And Crowned mercy Empress of the feeld.
This lulled our heavenly Sampson fast a sleep,
And laid him in our feeble natures lap.
This made him under mortal load to creep
And in our flesh his godhead to enwrap.
This made him soiourne with us in exile:
And not disdain our tytles in his style.
This brought him from the ranks of heavenly quires,
Into this vale of tears, and cursed soil:
From flowers of grace, into a world of briars:
From life to death, from bliss to balefull toil.
This made him wander in our Pilgrim weed,
And taste our torments, to relieve our need.
O soul do not thy noble thoughts abase?
To lose thy loves in any mortal wight:
Content thine eye at home with native grace,
Since God him self is ravished with thy sight.
If on thy beauty God enamored be:
Base is thy love of any less then he.
Give not assent to muddy minded skill,
That deemes the feature of a pleasing face,
To be the sweetest bait to lure the will:
Not valewing right the worth of ghostly grace*
Let Gods and Angels censure win belief,
That of all beauties judge our souls the chief.
Queen Hester was of rare and pearlesse hew,
And Iudeth once for beauty bare the vaunt,
But he that could our souls endowments view,
Would soon to souls the Crown of beauty grant,
O soul out of thy self seek God alone:
Grace more then thine, but Gods, the world has none.
Lewd Love is Loss.
MIsdeeming eye that stoupest to the lure
Of mortal worthes not worth so worthy love*
All beauties base, all graces are impure:
That do thy erring thoughts from God remove.
Sparks to the fire, the beams yield to the sun,
All grace to God from whom all graces run.
If picture move, more should the pattern please,
No shadow can, with shaddowed things compare,
And fairest shapes whereon our loves do seize:
But seely signs of Gods high beauties are.
Go steruing sense, feed thou on earthly mast,
True love in Heaven, seek thou thy sweet repast.
Gleane not in barren soil these offall ears,
Since reap thou may whole haruests of delight.
Base joys with griefs, bad hopes do end in fears:
Lewd love with loss, evil peace with deadly fight:
Gods love alone does end with endless ease,
Whose joys in hope, whose hope concludes in peace.
Let not the luring train of fancies trap,
Or gracious features proofs of natures skill,
Lull reasons force a sleep in errors lap,
Or draw thy wit to bent of wanton will;
The fairest flowers, have not the sweetest smell,
A seeming heaven, proves often a damning hell.
Selfe-pleasing souls that play with beauties bayte,
In shyning shroud may swallow fatal hook,
Where eager sight, or semblant fair does wait,
A lock it proves that first was but a look;
The fish with ease into the Net does glide,
But to get out the way is not so wide.
So long the fly does dally with the flame,
Until his singed wings do force his fall,
So long the eye does follow fancies game,
Till love has left the heart in heavy thrall;
Soon may the mind be cast in Cupids Iayle,
But hard it is imprisoned thoughts to bail.
O loath that love, whose final aim is lust,
Moth of the mind, eclypse of reasons light,
The grave of grace, the mole of natures rust,
The wrack of wit, the wrong of every right;
In sum, an evil whose harms no tongue can tell,
In which to live is death, to dye is hell.
Loves Garden grief.
Vain loves auaunt infamous is your pleasure,
Your joy deceit,
Your jewels jests, and worthless trash your treasure,
Fools common bait.
Your palace is a prison that allureth
To sweet mishap, and rest that pain procures.
Your garden grief, hedged in with thorns of envy,
And stakes of strife:
Your Allies error graueled with jealousy,
And cares of life.
Your banks are seats enwrapt with shades of sadness,
Your Arbours breed rough fittes of raging madness.
Your beds are sown with seeds of all iniquity,
And poys'ning weeds:
Whose stalks evil thoughts, whose leaves words full of vanity,
Whose fruit misdeedes.
Whose sap is sin, whose force and operation,
To banish grace, and work the souls damnation.
Your trees are dismal plants of pyning corrosiues,
Whose root is ruth.
Whose bark is bale, whose timber stubborn fantasies:
Whose pyth untruth.
On which in liew of birds whose voice delights:
Of guilty conscience screching note affrighteth.
Your coolest summer gales are scalding sighings,
Your showers are tears,
Your sweetest smell the stench of sinful living,
Your favors fears
Your gardener satan, all you reap is misery:
Your gain remorse and loss of all felicity.
From Fortunes reach.
LEt fickle fortune run her blindest raze:
I settled have an unremoved mind:
I scorn to be the game of fancies chase,
Or vane to show the change of every wind,
Light giddy humors stinted to no rest,
Still change their choice, yet never chose the best.
My choice was guided by fore-sightfull heed,
It was auerred with approving will,
It shall be followed with performing deed:
And sealed with vow, till death the chooser kill,
Yea death though final date of vain desires,
Ends not my choice, which with no time expires.
To beauties fading bliss I am no thrall:
I bury not my thoughts in metal Mines,
I aim not at such fame, as fears fall,
I seek and find a light that ever shynes:
Whose glorious beams display such heavenly sights,
As yield my soul a sum of all delights.
My light to love, my love to life does guide
To life that lives by love, and loves light:
By love to one, to whom all loves are tide
By dewest debt, and never equal right.
Eyes light, hearts love, souls truest life he is,
Consorting in three joys, one perfect bliss.
FINIS.

