THE Shepheardes Calender Containing twelve Aeglogues proportionable to the
twelve months.

Entitled TO THE NOBLE AND VERTVous Gentleman most worthy of all titles both of
learning and cheualrie M. Philip Sidney.

AT LONDON. Printed by Hugh Singleton, dwelling in Creed Lane near unto
Ludgate at the sign of the gylden Tun, and are there to be sold. 1579.

TO HIS BOOK.
Go little book: thy self present
As child whose parent is vnkent:
To him that is the president
Of noblesse and of cheualree,
And if that Envy bark at thee,
As sure it will, for succoure flee
Under the shadow of his wing,
And asked, who thee forth did bring,
A shepherds swain say did thee sing,
All as his straying flock he fed:
And when his honor has thee read,
Crave pardon for my hardyhedde.
But if that any ask thy name,
Say thou were base begot with blame:
For thy thereof thou take shame.
And when thou art past ieopardee,
Come tell me, what was said of me:
And J will send more after thee.
Jmmerito.

To the most excellent and learned both Orator and Poet, Master Gabriell
Haruey, his very special and singular good friend E. K. commends the good
lyking of this his labor, and the patronage of the new Poet.
VNCOVTHE VNKISTE, Said the old famous Poet Chaucer: whom for his
excellency and vvonderfull skill in making, his scholar Lidgate, a worthy
scholar of so excellent a master, calls the Loadstarre of our Language: and
whom our Colin clout in his Aeglogue calls Tityrus the God of shepherds,
comparing him to the worthiness of the Roman Tityrus Virgile. Which proverb
mine own good friend Ma. Haruey, as in that good old Poet it served well
Pandares purpose, for the bolstering of his baudy brocage, so very well takes
place in this our new Poet, who for that he is uncouth (as said Chaucer) is
vnkist, and unknown to most me^, is regarded but of fevv. But I dout not, so
soon as his name shall come into the knowledge of men, and his worthiness be
sounded in the tromp of fame, but that he shall be not only kiste, but also
beloved of all, embraced of the most, and vvondred at of the best. No less I
think, deserves his vvittinesse in devising, his pithinesse in uttering, his
complaints of love so lovely, his discourses of pleasure so pleasantly, his
pastoral rudeness, his moral vvisenesse, his dew observing of Decorum
every where, in personages, in seasons, in matter, in speech, and generally
in all seemly simplycitie of handeling his matter, and framing his words: the
which of many things which in him be strange, I know will seem the
straungest, the words them selves being so ancient, the knitting of them so
short and intricate, and the whole Periode and compass of speech so
delightsome for the roundnesse, and so grave for the strangeness. And first
of the words to speak, I grant they be something hard, and of most men
unused. yet both English, and also used of most excellent Authors and most
famous Poets. In whom whenas this our Poet has been much traueiled and
thoroughly redd, how could it be, (as that worthy Orator said) but that
vvalking in the son although for other cause he vvalked, yet needs he might
be sunburnt; and having the sound of those ancient Poets still ringing in his
ears, he might needs in singing hit out some of their tunes. But whether he
uses them by such casualtye and custom, or of set purpose and choice, as
thinking them fittest for such rusticall rudeness of shepherds, either for
that their rough sound would make his rymes more ragged and rustical, or else
because such old and obsolete words are most used of country folk, sure I
think, and think I think not amiss, that they bring great grace, and, as one
would say, authority to the verse. For albe amongst many other faults it
specially be objected of Valla against Liuie, and of other against Saluste,
that with over much study they affect antiquity, as coveting thereby
credence and honor of elder years, yet I am of opinion, and eke the best
learned are of the like, that those ancient solemn words are a great
ornament both in the one and in the other; the one laboring to set forth in
his work an eternal image of antiquity, and the other carefully discoursing
matters of gravity and importance. For if my memory fail not, Tullie in that
book, wherein he endeavors to set forth the pattern of a perfect Orator,
says that ofttimes an ancient word makes the style seem grave, and as it
were reverend: no otherwise then we honor and reverence gray hears for a
certain religious regard, which we have of old age. yet nether every where must
old words be stuffed in, nor the commen Dialecte and manner of speaking so
corrupted thereby, that as ^^ old buildings it seem disorderly and ruinous. But
all as in most exquisite pictures they use to blaze and portraict not only the
dainty lineaments of beautye, but also round about it to shadow the rude
thickets and craggy clifts, that by the baseness of such parts, more
excellency may accrue to the principal; for oftimes we find ourselves, I
know not how, singularly delighted with the show of such natural rudeness,
and take great pleasure in that disorderly order. Even so do those rough and
harsh terms enlumine and make more clearly to appear the brightness of brave
and glorious words. So ofentimes a dischorde in Music makes a comely
concordaunce: so great delight took the worthy Poet Alceus to behold a
blemish in the joint of a well shaped body. But if any will rashly blame such
his purpose in choice of old and vnvvonted words, him may I more justly blame
and condemn, or of vvitlesse headiness in judging, or of heedelesse
hardiness in condemning. for not marking the compass of his bent, he vvil
judge of the length of his cast. for in my opinion it is one special praise, of
many which are dew to this Poet, that he has labored to restore, as to
their rightsull heritage such good and natural English words, as have been long
time out of use and almost clear disherited. Which is the only cause, that
our Mother tongue, which truly of it self is both full enough for prose and
stately enough for verse, has long time ben cou^red most bare and barrein of
both. which default when as some endeavored to salve and recure, they patched
up the holes with pieces and rags of other languages, borrowing here of the
french, there of the Italian, every where of the Latin, not vveighing how il,
those tongues accord with themselves, but much worse with ours: (...) they
have made our English tongue, a gallimaufray or hodgepodge of al other speches.
Other some no so well seem in the English tongue as perhaps in other lan guages,
if the^ happen to here an old word albeit very natural and significant, cry
out straight way, that we speak no English, but gibbrish, or rather such, as in
old time Eua^ders mother spoke. whose fitst shame is, that they are not
ashamed, in their own mother tongue strangers to be counted and alienes. The
second shame no less then the first, that what so they understand not, they
straight way deem to be senseless, and not at al to be understood. Much like
to the Mole in Aesopes fable, that being blind her self, would inno wise be
persuaded, that any beast could see. The last more shameful then both, that of
their own country and natural speech, which together with their Nources
milk they sucked, they have so base regard and bastard judgment, that they
will not only themselves not labor to garnish and beautify it, but also
repine, that of other it should be embel lished. Like to the dog in the
maunger, that him self can eat no hay, and yet barketh at the hungry bullock,
that so feign would feed: whose currish kind though cannot be kept from
barking, yet I conne them thank that they refrain from biting.

Now for the knitting of sentences, which they call the joints and members
thereof, and for all the compass of the speech, it is round without roughness,
and learned without hardness, such indeed as may be perceived of the least,
understood of the most, but judged only of the learned. For what in most
English writers uses to be loose, and as it were vngyrt, in this Author is
well grounded, finely framed, and strongly trussed up together. In regard
whereof, I scorn and spue out the rakehellye route of our ragged rymers (for so
themselves use to hunt the letter) which without learning boste, without
judgment iangle, without reason rage and some, as if some instinct of
Poetical spirit had newly ravished them (...) the meannesse of commen
capacity. And being in the midst of all their bravery, suddenly either for
want of matter, or of ryme, or having forgotten their former conceit, they
seem to be so pained and traueiled in their remembrance, as it were a woman in
childbirth or as that same Pythia, when the trance came upon her.

Os rabidum fera corda domans etc.
Nethelesse let them a Gods name (...) on their own folly, so they seek not
to darken the beams of others glory. As for Colin, under whose person the
Author self is shadowed, how ^^rre he is from such vaunted titles and
glorious shows, both him self shows, where he says.

Of Muses Hobbin. I conne no skill. And Enough is me to paint out my unrest,
etc.

And also appears by the baseness of the name, wherein, it seems, he chose
rather to unfold great matter of argument covertly, then professing it, not
suffice thereto accordingly. which moved him rather in Aeglogues, then other
wise to write, doubting perhaps his ability, which he little needed, or
mynding to surnish our tongue with this kind, wherein it faulteth, or
follovving the example of the best and most ancient Poets, which devised this
kind of writing, being both so base for the matter, and homely for the manner
at the first to try their habilities? and as young birds, that be newly
crept out of the nest, by little first to prove their tender vvyngs, before
they make a greater flight. So flevv Theocritus, as you may perceive he was
all ready full fledged. So flew Virgile, as not yet well feeling his wings
So flevv Mantuane, as being not full somd. So Petrarque. So Boccace; So Marot,
Sanazarus, and also diverse other excellent both Italian and French Poets,
whose foting this Author every where follovved; yet so as few, but they be
well sented can trace him out. So finally flies this our new Poet, as a bird,
whose principals be scarce grown out, but yet as that in time shall be hable
to keep wing with the best

Now as touching the general dryft and purpose of his Aeglogues, I mind not
to say much, him self laboring to conceal it. Only this appears, that his
unstayed yougth had long vvandred in the common Labyrinth of Love, in which
time to mitigate and allay the heat of his passion, or else to vvarne (as he
says) the young shepherds (...) his equals and companions of his unfortunate
folly, he compiled these xij. Aeglogues, which for that they be proportioned
to the state of the xij. months, he terms the SHEPHERDS CALENDAR, applying
an old name to a new work. Hereunto have I added a certain Gloss or
scholion for thexposition of old words and harder phrases: which manner of
glosing and commenting, well I vvote, vvil seem strange and rare in our
tongue: yet for so much as I knew many excellent and proper devises both in
words and matter would pass in the speedy course of reading, either as
unknown, or as not marked, and that in this kind, as in other we might be
equal to the learned of other nations, I thought good to take the pains upon
me, the rather for that by means of some familiar acquaintance I was made
privy to his counsel and secret meaning in them, as also in sundry other
works of his. which albert I know he nothing so much hates, as to
promulgate, yet thus much have I adventured upon his friendship, him self being
for long time furre estraunged, hoping that this will the rather occasion him,
to put forth diverse other excellent works of his, which sleep in silence, as
his Dreamcs, his Legendes, his Court of Cupide, and sundry others; whose
commendations to set out, were very vain; the things though worthy of many
yet being known to few. These my present pains if to any they be pleasurable
or profitable, be you judge, mine own good Master Haruey, to whom I have
both in respect of your worthiness generally, and otherwise upon some
particular and special cousiderations voued this my labor, and the maydenhead
of this our commen friends Poetry, himself having already in the beginning
dedicated it to the Noble and worthy Gentleman, the right worshipful Ma. Phi.
Sidney, a special favorer and maintainer of all kind of learning.) Whose
cause I pray you Sir, if Envy shall stur up any wrongful accusasion, defend
with your mighty Rhetoric and other your rare gifts of learning, as you can,
and shield with your good vvil, as you ought, against the malice and outrage of
so many enemies, as I know will be set on fire with the sparks of his kindled
glory. And thus reco^mending the Author unto you, as unto his most special good
friend, and my self unto you both, as one making singular account of two so
very good and so choice friends, I bid you both most heartily farvvel, and commit
you and your most commendable studies to the tuicion of the greatest.

Your own assuredly to be commanded E. K.

Post scr.
Now I trust M. Haruey, that upon sight of your special friends and fellow
Poets doings, or else for envy of so many unworthy Quidams, which catch at the
garlond, which to you alone is dew, you will be persuaded to pluck out of
the hateful darkness. those so many excellent English poemes of yours, which
lie hid, and bring the^ forth to eternal light. Trust me you do both them
great wrong, in depriving them of the desired son, and also your self, in
smoothering your deserved praises, and all mer generally, in withholding from
them so divine pleasures, which they might conceive o your gallant English
verses, as they have already done of your Latin Poemes, which it my opinion
both for invention and Elocution are very delicate, and superexcellent. An thus
again, I take my leave of my good Master Haruey. from my lodging at London
this 10. of April. 1579.

The general argument of the whole book.
LIttle I hope, needs me at large to discourse the first Original of
Aeglogues, having already touched the same. But for the word Aeglogues I
know is unknown to most, and also mistaken of some the best learned (as they
think) I will say somevvhat thereof, being not at all impertine^t to my
present purpose.

They were first of the Greeks the inuentours of them called Aeglogaj as it
were (...) or (...). that is Goteheards tales. For although in Virgile and
others the speakers be most shepherds, and Goteheards, yet Theocritus in whom
is more ground of authority, then in Virgile, this specially from that
deriuing, as from the first head and vvelspring the whole Inuericion of his
Aeglogues, makes Goteheards the persons and authors of his tales. This being,
who sees not the grossness of such as by color of learning would make us
believe that they are more rightly termed Eclogai, as they would say,
extraordinary discourses of unnecessary matter, which difinition albe in
substance and meaning it agree with the nature of the thing, yet nowhit
answers with the (...) and interpretation of the word. For they be not termed
Eclogues, but Aeglogues. which sentence this author very well observing,
upon good judgment, though indeed fevv Goteheards have to do herein,
nethelesse doubts not to call the^ by the used and best known name. Other
curious discourses hereof I reserve to greater occasion. These xij. Aeclogues
every where answering to the seasons of the twelve months may be well
divided into three forms or ranckes. For either they be Plaintiue, as the
first, the sixth, the eleventh, and the twelfth, or recreatiue, such as al those
be, which conceive matter of love, or commendation of special personages, or
Moral: which for the most part be mixed with some Satirical bitterness,
namely the second of reverence dew to old age, the fifth of colored deceit,
the seventh and ninth of dissolute shepherds and pastors, the tenth of
contempt of Poetry and pleasant wits. And to this division may every thing
herein be reasonably applied: A few only except, whose special purpose and
meaning I am not privy to. And thus much generally of these xij. Aeclogues.
Now will we speak particularly of all, and first of the first. which he
calls by the first months name January. wherein to some he may seem
fovvly to have faulted, in that he erroniously begins with that month,
which begins not the year. For it is welknown and stoutely mainteyned
with strong reasons of the learned, that the year begins in March. for
then the son renevveth his finished course, and the seasonable spring
refreshes the earth, and the pleasaunce thereof being buried in the sadness
of the dead winter now worn away, reliueth. This opinion maynteine the old
Astrologers and Philosophers, namely the reverend Andalo, and Macrobius in his
holidays of Saturn, which accoumpt also was generally observed both of
Grecians and ROmans. But saving the leave of such learned heads, we mayntaine
a custom of coumpting the seasons from the month January, upon a more
special cause, then the heathen Philosophe^ ever could conceive, that is, for
the incarnation of our mighty Savior and eternal redeemer the L. Christ, who
as then renewing the state of the decayed world, and returning the compass
of expired years to their former date and first commencement, (...) to us his
(...) a memorial of his birth in the end of the last year and beginning of
the next. which reckoning, beside that eternal monument of our salvation,
leans also upon good proof of special judgment. For albeit that in
elder-times, when as yet the coumpt of the year was not perfected, as
afterward it was by Julius Caesar, they began to tell the months from
Marches beginning, and according to the same God (as is said in Scripture)
commanded the people of the Jews to count the month Abil, that which we
call March, for the first month, in remembrance that in that month he
brought them out of the land of Aegipt: yet according to tradition of latter
times it has been otherwise observed, both in government of of the church,
and rule of Mightiest Realms. For from Julius Caesar who first observed the
leap year which he called Bissextilem Annum, and brought in to a more
certain course the odd vvandring days which of the Greeks were called
(...). of the Romans intercalares (for in such matter of learning I am forced
to use the terms of the learned) the months have been nombred xij. which in
the first ordinance of Romulus were but ten, counting but CCCiiij. days in
every year, and beginning with March. But Numa Pompilius, who was the father
of all the Romain ceremonies and religion, seeing that reckoning to agree
neither with the course of the son, nor of the Moon, thereunto added two
months, January and February: wherein it seems, that wise king minded upon
good reason to begin the year at January, of him therefore so called tanquam
Ianua anni the gate and entrance of the year, or of the name of the god Ianus,
to which god for that the old Paynims attributed the birth and beginning of all
creatures new coming into the world, it seems that he therefore to him
assigned the beginning and first enrraunce of the year. which account for the
most part has hitherto continued. Notvvithstanding that the Aegiptians begin
their year at September, for that according to the opinion of the best
Rabbis, and very purpose of the scripture self, God made the world in that
Month, that is called of them Tisri And therefore he commanded them, to keep
the feast of Pauilions in the end of the year, in the xv. day of the seventh
month, which before that time was the first.

But our Author respecting nether the subtlety of the one part, nor the
antiquity o the other, thinks it fittest according to the simplicity of
commen understanding, to be gin with January, wening it perhaps no decoru,
that Sepheard should be seen in ma ter of so deep insight, or canuase a case
of so doubtful judgment. So therefore begin(...) he and so continues he
throughout.

Januarye.


Aegloga prima.
ARGUMENT.
IN this first Aeglogue Colin cloute a shepheardes boy complains him of his
unfortunate love, being but newly (as seems) enamoured of a country less
called Rosalinde: with which strong affection being very sore traueled, he
compares his careful case to the sad season of the year, to the frostie
ground, to the frosen trees, and to his own winterbeaten flock. And lastly,
fynding himself robbed of all former pleasaunce and delights, he breaks his
Pipe in pieces, and casts him self to the ground.

COLIN Cloute. A Shepeheards boy (no better do him call)
when Winters wastful spite was almost spent,
All in a sunneshine day, as did befall,
Led forth his flock, that had been long ypent.
So faint they woxe, and feeble in the fold,
That now uneaths their feet could them uphold.
All as the Sheep, such was the shepeheards look,
For pale and wanne he was, (alas the while,)
May seem he loud, or else some care he took:
Well couth he tune his pipe, and frame his style.
Tho to a hill his faynting flock he led,
And thus him playnd, the while his sheep there fed.
Ye Gods of love, that pity lovers pain,
(If any gods the pain of lovers pity:)
Look from above, where you in joys remain,
And bow your ears unto my doleful dittie.
And Pan thou shepherds God, that once did love,
Pity the pains, that thou thy self did prove.
Thou barrein ground, whom winters wrath has wasted,
Art made a myrrhour, to behold my plight:
Whilome thy fresh spring flowrd, and after hasted
Thy summer proud with Daffadillies dight.
And now is come thy wynters stormy state,
Thy mantle mard, wherein thou mas-kedst late.
Such rage as winters, reigns in my heart,
My life blood friesing with unkindly cold:
Such stormy stoures do breed my balefull smart,
As if my year were wast, and woxen old.
And yet alas, but now my spring begone,
And yet alas, yt is already done.
You naked trees, whose shady leaves are lost,
Wherein the byrds were wont to build their bower:
And now are clothd with moss and hoary frost,
Instede of bloosmes, wherewith your buds did flower:
I see your tears, that from your boughs do rain,
Whose drops in drery ysicles remain.
All so my lustful leaf is dry and sere,
My timely buds with wayling all are wasted:
The blossom, which my branch of youth did bear,
With breathed sighs is blown away, and blasted,
And from mine eyes the drizling tears descend,
As on your boughs the ysicles depend.
Thou feeble flock, whose fleece is rough and rent,
Whose knees are weak through fast and evil fare:
May witness well by thy ill government,
Thy masters mind is overcome with care.
Thou weak, I wanne: thou lean, I quite forlorn:
With mourning pyne I, you with pyning mourn.
A thousand sithes I curse that careful hour.
Wherein I longd the neighbor town to see:
And eke ten thousand sithes I bless the stoure,
Wherein I saw so fair a sight, as she.
Yet all for naught: such sight has bred my bane.
Ah God, that love should breed both joy and pain.
It is not Hobbinol, wherefore I plain,
Albee my love he seek with daily suit:
His clownish gifts and curtsies I disdain,
His kiddes, his cracknelles, and his early fruit.
Ah foolish Hobbinol, thy gyfts been vain:
Colin them gives to Rosalind again.
I love thilke less, (alas why do I love?)
And am forlorn, (alas why am I lorne?)
She deignes not my good will, but does reprove,
And of my rural music holds scorn.
Shepherds devise she hates as the snake,
And laughes the songs, that Colin Clout does make.
Wherefore my pype, albee rude Pan thou please,
Yet for thou please not, where most I would:
And thou unlucky Muse, that wontst to ease
My musing mind, yet can not, when thou should:
Both pype and Muse, shall sore the while abye.
So broke his oaten pype, and down dydlye.
By that, the welked Phoebus began avail,
His weary waine, and now the frosty Night
Her mantle black through heaven began ouerhaile.
Which seen, the pensife boy half in despite
Arose, and homeward drove his sonned sheep,
Whose hanging heads did seem his careful case to weep.

Colins Emblem.
Anchora speme.

GLOSS.
COLIN Cloute) is a name not greatly used, and yet have I seen a Poesy of M.
Skeltons under that title. But indeed the word Colin is French, and used of
the French Poet Marot (if he be worthy of the name of a Poet) in a certain
Aeglogue. Under which name this Poet secretly shadoweth himself, as sometime
did Virgil under the name of Tityrus, thinking it much fitter, then such Latin
names, for the great vnlikelyhoode of the language.

uneaths) scarcely.

couthe) comes of the verb Conne, that is, to know or to have skill. As
well interprets the same the worthy Sir Tho. Smitth in his book of
government: where of I have a perfect copy in writing, lent me by his kinseman,
and my very singular good friend, M. Gabriel Haruey: as also of some other his
most grave and excellent vvrytings.

Sithe) time. Neighbor town) the next town: expressing the Latin Vicina.

Stoure) a fit. Sere) withered.

His clovvnish gyfts) imitateth Virgils verse,

Rusticus es Corydon, nec munera curat Alexis.

Hobbinol) is a fained country name, whereby, it being so commune and usual,
seems to be hidden the person of some his very special and most familiar
friend, whom he entirely and extraordinarily beloved, as peradventure shall be
more largely declared hereafter. In this place seems to be some savor of
disorderly love, which the learned call paederastice: but it is gathered
beside his meaning. For who that has red Plato his dialogue called
Alcybiades, Xenophon and Maximus Tyrius of Socrates opinions, may easily
perceive, that such love is much to be allowed and liked of, specially so
meant, as Socrates used it: who says, that in deed he loved Alcybiades
extremely, yet not Alcybiades person, but his soul, which is Alcybiades own
self. And so is paederastice much to be praeferred before gynerastice, that is
the love which enflameth men with lust tovvard woman kind. But yet let no
man think, that herein I stand with Lucian or his deuelish disciple Vnico
Aretino, in defense of execrable and horrible sins of forbidden and unlawful
fleshlinesse. Whose abominable error is fully confuted of Perionius, and
others.

I love) a pretty Epanorthosis in these two verses, and vvithall a Paronomasia
or playing with the word, where he says (I love thilke less (alas etc.

Rosalinde) is also a feigned name, which being well ordered, vvil bewray the
very name of his love and mistress, whom by that name he colors. So as
Ouide shadoweth his love under the name of Corynna, which of some is supposed
to be Iulia, themperor Augustus his daughter, and wise to Agryppa. So does
Aruntius Stella every where call his Lady Asteris and Ianthis, albe it is well
known that her right name was Violantilla: as witnesses Statius in his
Epithalamiu^. And so the famous Paragone of Italy, Madonna Coelia in her
letters enuclopeth her self under the name of Zima: and Petrona vuder the name
of Bellochia. And this generally has been a common custom of counterfeicting
the names of secret Personages.

Auail) bring down.

Emblem. Ouerhaile) draw over.

His Emblem or Poesye is here under added in Italian, Anchora speme: the
meaning vvherof is, that notvvithstande his extreme passion and lucklesse love,
yet leaning on hope, he is some what recomforted.

February.


Aegloga Secunda.
ARGUMENT.
THis Aeglogue is rather moral and general, then bent to any secret or
particular purpose. It specially conteyueth a discourse of old age, in the
person of Thenot an old Shepherd, who for his crookedness and vnlustinesse,
is scorned of Cuddie an unhappy Heardmans boy. The matter very well accords
with the season of the month, the year now drouping, and as it were, drawing
to his last age. For as in this time of year, so the^ in our bodies there is a
dry and withering cold, which congealeth the crudsed blood, and frieseth the
wetherbeate^ flesh, with storms of Fortune, and hoare frosts of Care. To which
purpose the old man tells a tale of the Oak and the Bryer, so lively and so
feelingly, as if the thing were set forth in some Picture before our eyes, more
plainly could not appear.

CVDDIE. THENOT.
AH for pity, will rank Winters rage,
These bitter blasts never ginne tasswage?
The kene cold blows through my beaten hyde,
All as I were through the body gryde.
My ragged rontes all shiver and shake,
As done high Towers in an earthquake:
They wont in the wind wagge their wrigle tails,
Perke as Peacock: but now it anales.

THENOT. Lewdly complainest thou laesie ladde,
Of Winters wrack, for making thee sad.
Must not the world wend in his commun course
From good to badd, and from badde to worse,
From worse unto that is worst of all,
And then return to his former fall?
Who will not suffer the stormy time,
Where will he live till the lusty prime?
Self have I worn out thrice threttie years,
Some in much joy, many in many tears:
Yet never complained of cold nor heat,
Of Summers flame, nor of Winters threat:
Ne ever was to Fortune foeman,
But gently took, that ungently came.
And ever my flock was my chief care,
Winter or Summer they might well fare.

CVDDIE. No marvel Thenot, if thou can bear
Cherefully the Winters wrathful cheer:
For Age and Winter accord full nie,
This chill, that cold, this crooked, that wrye.
And as the lowering Wether looks down,
So semest thou like good friday to frown:
But my flowring youth is foe to frost,
My ship unwont in storms to be tossed.

THENOT. The sovereign of seas he blames in baine,
That once seabeate, will to sea again.
So loytring live you little heardgroomes,
Keeping your beasts in the budded broomes:
And when the shining sun langheth once,
You deemen, the Spring is come attonce.
Tho gynne you, fond flies, the cold to scorn,
And crowing in pypes made of green corn,
You thinken to be Lords of the year.
But eft, when ye count you freed from fear,
Comes the breme winter with chamfred brows,
Full of wrinckles and frostie furrows:
Drerily shooting his stormy darte,
Which cruddles the blood, and pricks the heart.
Then is your careless courage accoied,
Your careful herds with cold been annoied.
Then pay you the price of your surquedrie,
With weeping, and wayling, and misery.

CVDDIE. Ah foolish old man, I scorn thy skill,
That would me, my springing youngth to spil.
I deem, thy brain emperished be
Through rusty elde, that has rotted thee:
Or sicker thy head very tottie is,
So on thy corbe shoulder it leanes amiss.
Now thy self have lost both lopp and topp,
Als my budding branch thou would cropp:
But were thy years green, as now been mine,
To other delights they would incline.
Tho would thou learn to caroll of Love,
And hery with hymns thy lasses glove.
Tho would thou pype of Phyllis praise:
But Phyllis is mine for many days:
I won her with a gyrdle of gelt,
Embost with buegle about the belt.
Such an one shepeheards would make full feign:
Such an one would make thee young again.

THENOT. Thou art a fon, of thy love to boste,
All that is lent to love, will be lost.

CVDDIE. See, how brag yond Bullock bears,
So smirke, so smoothe, his pricked ears?
His horns been as broad, as Rainebowe bent,
His dewelap as lythe, as less of Kent.
See how he venteth into the wynd.
Weenest of love is not his mind?
Seems thy flock thy counsel can,
So lustlesse been they, so weak so wan,
Clothed with cold, and hoary with frost.
Thy flocks father his courage has lost:
Thy Ewes, that wont to have blown bags,
Like wail full widows hangen their crags:
The rather Lambs been starued with cold,
All for their Master is Iustlesse and old.

THENOT. Cuddie, I wot thou kenst little good,
So vainly taduaunce thy headless hood.
For Youngth is a bubble blown up with breath,
Whose wit is weakness, whose wage is death,
Whose way is wilderness, whose ynne Penance,
And stoopegallaunt Age the host of Greeuaunce.
But shall I tell thee a tale of truth,
Which I cond of Tityrus in my youth,
Keeping his sheep on the hills of Kent?

CVDDIE. To naught more Thenot, my mind is bent,
Then to hear nouells of his devise:
They been so well thewed, and so wise,
What ever that good old man bespake.

THENOT. Many meet tales of youth did he make,
And some of love, and some of cheualrie:
But none fitter then this to apply.
Now listen a while, and hearken the end.
There grew an aged Tree on the green,
A goodly Oak sometime had it been,
With arms full strong and largely displayed,
But of their leaves they were disarayde:
The body big, and mightily pight,
Thoroughly rooted, and of wondrous hight:
Whilome had been the King of the field,
And mochell mast to the husband did yielde,
And with his nuts larded many swine.
But now the gray moss marred his rine,
His bared boughs were beaten with storms,
His top was bald, and wasted with worms,
His honor decayed, his branches sere.
Hard by his side grew a bragging brere,
Which proudly thrust into Thelement,
And seemed to threat the Firmament.
Yt was embellisht with blossoms fair,
And thereto aye wonned to repair
The shepherds daughters, to gather flowers,
To peinct their girlonds with his colowres.
And in his small bushes used to shrowde
The sweet Nightingale singing so loud:
Which made this foolish Brere wexe so bold,
That on a time he cast him to scold,
And snebbe the good Oak, for he was old.
Why standst there (quoth he) thou brutish block?
Nor for fruict, nor for shadow serves thy stock:
See, how fresh my flowers been spredde,
Dyed in Lilly white, and Cremsin read,
With Leaves engrained in lusty green,
Colors meet to clothe a maiden Queen.
Thy wast bigness but combers the grownd,
And dirks the beauty of my blossoms rownd.
The mouldie moss, which thee accloteth,
My Sinamon smell too much annoieth.
Wherefore soon I read thee, hence remove,
Least thou the price of my displeasure prove.
So spoke this bold brere with great disdain:
Little him answered the Dake again,
But yielded, with shame and grief adawed,
That of a weed he was ouerawed.
Yt chanced after upon a day,
The Hus-bandman self to come that way,
Of custom for to seruewe his grownd,
And his trees of state in compass rownd.
Him when the spiteful brere had espied,
Caul less complained, and lowdly cried
Unto his Lord, stirring up stern strife:
O my liege Lord, the God of my life,
Pleases you ponder your Suppliants plaint,
Caused of wrong, and cruel constraint,
Which I your poor Vassal daily endure:
And but your goodness the same recure,
Am like for desperate doole to dye,
Through felonous force of mine enemy.
Greatly aghast with this piteous plea,
Him rested the goodman on the lea,
And badde the Brere in his plaint proceed.
With painted words tho began this proud weed,
(As most vsen Ambitious folk:)
His colowred crime with craft to cloak.
Ah my sovereign, Lord of creatures all,
Thou placer of plants both humble and tall,
Was not I planted of thine own hand,
To be the primtose of all thy land,
With flowring blossemes, to furnish the prime,
And scarlot berries in Summer time?
How falls it then, that this faded Dake,
Whose body is sere, whose branches broke,
Whose naked Arms stretch unto the fire,
Unto such tyranny does aspire:
Hindering with his shade my lovely light,
And robbing me of the sweet sons sight;
So beat his old boughs my tender side,
That often the blood springs from wounds wide:
Untimely my flowers forced to fall,
That been the honor of your Coronall.
And often he lets his cancker worms light
Upon my branches, to work me more spite:
And often his hoarie locks down does cast,
Where with my fresh flowretts been defast,
For this, and many more such outrage,
Craving your goodlihead to aswage
The ranckorous rigor of his might,
Naught ask I, but only to hold my right:
Submitting me to your good sufferance,
And praying to be guarded from greeuance.
To this the Dake cast him to reply
Well as he couth: but his enemy
Had kindled such coals of displeasure,
That the good man noulde stay his leisure,
But home him hasted with furious heat,
Eucreasing his wrath with many a threate.
His harmefull Hatchet he hent in hand,
(Alas, that it so ready should stand)
And to the field alone he speedeth.
(Ay little help to harm there needs)
Anger nould let him speak to the tree,
Enaunter his rage might cooled be:
But to the root bent his sturdy stroke,
And made many wounds in the wast Dake.
The Axes edge did often turn again,
As half unwilling to cut the grain:
Seemed, the sencetesse iron did fear,
Or to wrong holy eld did forbear.
For it had been an ancient tree,
Sacred with many a mysteree,
And often crossed with the priests crewe,
And often hallowed with holy water dew.
But sike fancies weren foolerie,
And broughten this Oak to this miserye.
For naught might they quitten him from decay:
For fiercely the good man at him did lay.
The block often groned under the blow,
And sighed to see his near overthrow.
In fine the steel had pierced his pitth,
Tho down to the earth he fell forthwith:
His wondrous weight made the ground to quake,
Thearth shronke under him, and seemed to shake.
There lies the Oak, pitied of none.
Now stands the Brere like a Lord alone,
Puffed up with pride and vain pleasannce:
But all this glee had no continuance.
For eftsoon Winter began to approach,
The blustering Boreas did encroche,
And beat upon the solitary Brere:
For now no succoure was seen him nere.
Now began he repent his prvde to late:
For naked left and disconsolate,
The biting frost nipt his stalk dead,
The watrie wette weighed down his head,
And heaped snow burdned him so sore,
That now upright he can stand no more:
And being down, is trodde in the dirt
Of cattle, and brouzed, and sorely hurt.
Such was thend of this Ambitious brere,
For scorning Eld

CVDDIE. Now I pray thee shepherd, tell it not forth:
Here is a long tale, and little worth.
So long have I listened to thy speech,
That graffed to the ground is my breche:
My hartblood is welnigh frorne I feel,
And my galage grown fast to my heel:
But little ease of thy lewd tale I tasted.
Hye thee home shepherd, the day is nigh wasted.

Thenots Emblem.
Iddio perch e vecchio,
Fa suoi al suo essempio.
Cuddies Emblem.
Niuno vecchio,
Spaventa Iddio.
GLOSS.
Kene) sharp.

Gride) perced: an old word much used of Lidgate, but not found (that I know
of) in Chaucer.

Ronts) young bullockes.

VVracke) ruin or Violence, whence comes shipwreck: and not vvreake, that
is vengeance or wrath.

Foeman) a foe.

Thenot) the name of a shepherd in Marot his Aeglogues.

The sovereign of Seas) is Neptune the God of the seas. The saying is borovved
of Mimus Publianus, which used this proverb in a verse.

Improbe Neptunum accusat, qui iterum naufragium facit. Heardgromes.) Chaucers
verse almost whole.

Fond Flies) He compares careless sluggardes or ill husbandmen to flies, that
so soon as the sun thineth, or yt wexeth any thing vvarme, begin to fly
abroad vvben sodeinly they be overtaken with cold:

But eft when) A very excellent and lively description of VVinter, so as may
be indifferently taken, either for old Age, or for VVinter season.

Breme) chill, bitter. Chamfred) chapt, or vvrinckled.

Accored) plucked down and daunted. Surque dry) pride.

Elde) old age. Sicker) sure. Tottie) wavering.

Corbe) crooked. Herie) worship.

Herie) the name of some maid unknown, whom Cuddie, whose person is secret,
loved. The name is usual in Theocritus, Virgile, and Mantuane.

Belte) a girdle or wast band. A son) a fool. lythe) soft and gentile.

Venteth) snuffeth in the vvind. Thy flocks Father) the Ram. Crags) necks
Rather Lambs) that be evved early in the beginning of the year.

Youth is) A very moral and pitthy Allegory of youth, and the lusts thereof,
compared to a vvearie vvayfaring man.

Tityrus) I suppose he mean Chaucer, whose praise for pleasant tales cannot
dye, so long as the memory of his name shall live, and the name of Poetry shall
endure.

Well thevved) that is, Been moratae, full of moral wisenesse.

There grew) This tale of the Oak and the Brere, he tells as learned of
Chaucer, but it is clean in another kind, and rather like to Aesopes fables.
It is very excellent for pleasant descriptions, being altogether a certain
Icon or Hypotyposis of disdainful younkers.

Embellisht) beautified and adorned. To won) to haunt or frequent. Sneb)
check.

Why standst) The speech is scorneful and very presumptuous. Engrained) dyed
in grain.

Accloieth) encombreth. Adavved) daunted and confounded.

Trees of state) taller trees fit for timber vvood. Stern strife) said
Chaucer. s fell and sturdy. O my liege) A manner of supplication, wherein is
kindly colored the affection and speech of Ambitious men.

Coronall) Garlande. Flourets) young blossoms.

The Primrose) The chief and worthiest

Naked arms) metaphorically meant of the bare boughs, spoiled of leaves. This
colourably he speaks, as adiudging him to the fire.

The blood) spoken of a block, as it were of a living creature, figuratively,
and (as they say) (...).

Hoarie locks) metaphorically for withered leaves.

Hent) caught. Nould) for would not. Ay) evermore. VVounds) gashes.

Enaunter) least that.

The priests crevve) holy water pott, wherewith the popish priest vfed to
sprinckle and hallovve the trees from mischaunce. Such blindness was in those
times, which the Poet supposes, to have been the final decay of this
ancient Oak.

The block often groned) A liuelye figure, which gives sense and feeling to
insensible creatures, as Virgile alfo says: Saxa gemunt grauido etc.

Boreas) The Northern vvynd, that brings the most stormy vveather.

Glee) chere and iollitie.

For scorning Eld) And minding (as should seem) to have made ryme to the
former verse, he is conningly cut of by Cuddye, as disdayning to here any
more.

Galage) a startuppe or clovvnish shoe.

Emblem. This emblem is spoken of Thenot, as a moral of his former tale:
namelye, that God, which is himself most aged, being before al ages, and
without beginning, makes those, whom he loves like to himself, in heaping
years unto their days, and blessing them with long life. For the blessing
of age is not given to all, but unto those, whom God will so bless: and
albeit that many evil me^ reach unto such fullness of years, and some also
vvexe old in myserie and thraldom, yet therefore is not age ever the less
blessing. For even to such evil men such number of years is added, that they
may in their last days repent, and come to their first home. So the old man
checketh the rashheaded boy, for despysing his gray and frostye hears.

Whom Cuddye does counterbuff with a biting and bitter proverb, spoken
indeed at the first in contempt of old age generally. for it was an old
opinion, and yet is continued in some men's conceit, that me^ of years have no
fear of god at al, or not so much as younger folk. For that being rypened
with long experience, and having passed many bitter brunts and blastes of
vengeance, they dread no storms of Fortune, nor wrath of Gods, not danger
of men, as being either by long and ripe wisdom armed against all
mischaunces and adversity, or with much trouble hardened against all
troublesome tides: like unto the Ape, of which is said in Aesops fables, that
oftentimes meeting the Lion, he was at first sore aghast and dismayed at the
grimnes and austeritie of his countenance, but at last being acquainted with
his looks, he was fo furre from fearing him, that he would familiarly gybe
and jest with him: Such long experi ence breeds in some men security.
Although it please Erasimus a great clerk and good old father, more fatherly
and fauourablye to construe it in his Adages for his own behoof, That by the
proverb Nemo Senex metuit Iouem, is not meant, that old men have no fear of
God at al, but that they be furre from superstition and Idolatrous regard of
false Gods, as is Jupiter. But his great learning notwithstanding, it is to
plain, to be gainsayd, that old men are much more inclined to such fond
fooleries, then younger heads.

March.


Aegloga Tertia.
ARGUMENT.
IN this Aeglogue two shepherds boys taking occasion of the season, begin
to make purpose of love and other plesaunce, which to spring time is most
agreeable. The special meaning hereof is, to give certain marks and tokens,
to know Cupide the Poets God of Love. But more particularlye I think, in the
person of Thomalin is meant some secret friend, who scorned Love and his
knights so long, till at length him self was entangled, and unawares wounded
with the dart of some beautiful regard, which is Cupides arrowe.

VVillye Thomalin.
THomalin, why sytten we so,
As weren ouerwent with woe,
Upon so fair a morrow?
The joyous time now nighest fast,
That shall alegge this bitter blast,
And slake the winters sorrow.

Thomalin. Sicker Willye, thou warnest well:
For Winters wrath begins to quell,
And pleasant spring appears.
The grass now ginnes to be refresht,
The Swallow peepes out of her nest,
And clowdie Welkin clears.

VVillye. See not thilke same Hawthorne studde,
How bragly it begins to budde,
And utter his tender head?
Flora now calls forth each flower,
And bids make ready Maias bower,
That new is vpryst from bed.
Tho shall we sporten in delight,
And learn with Lettice to wexe light,
That scornefully looks askaunce,
Tho will we little Love awake,
That now sleeps in Let he lake,
And pray him leaden our dance.

Thomalin. Willye, I wene thou be assott:
For lusty Love still sleeps not,
But is abroad at his game.

VVillye. How kenst thou, that he is awoke?
Or have thy self his slomber broke?
Or made preuie to the same?

Thomalin. No, but happily I him spyde,
Where in a bush he did him hide,
With wings of purple and blewe.
And were not, that my sheep would stray,
The preuie marks I would bewray,
Whereby by chance I him knew.

VVillye. Thomalin, have no care for thy,
My self will have a double eye,
Ylike to my flock and thine:
For als at home I have a sire,
A stepdame eke as whott as fire,
That dewly adays counts mine.

Thomalin. Nay, but thy seeing will not serve,
My sheep for that may chance to swerue,
And fall into some mischief.
For since is but the third morrow,
That I chaunst to fall a sleep with sorrow,
And waked again with grief:
The while thilke same unhappy Ewe,
Whose clouted leg her hurt does show,
Fell headlong into a dell,
And there unjointed both her bones:
Might her neck been ioynted attones,
She should have need no more spell.
Thelf was so wanton and so wood,
(But now I trow can better good)
She might ne gang on the green,

VVillye. Let be, as may be, that is past:
That is to come, let be forecast.
Now tell us, what thou have seen.

Thomalin. It was upon a holiday,
When shepheardes grooms han leave to play,
I cast to go a shooting.
Long wandering up and down the land,
With bow and bolts in either hand,
For birds in bushes tooting:
At length within an Yuie todde
(There shrouded was the little God)
I heard a busy bustling.
I bent my bolt against the bush,
Listening if any thing did rushe,
But then heard no more rustling.
Tho peeping close into the thick,
Might see the moving of some quick,
Whose shape appeared not:
But were it faerie, feend, or snake,
My courage earnd it to awake,
And manfully thereat shot.
With that sprung forth a naked swayne,
With spotted wings like Peacocks train,
And laughing lope to a tree.
His gylden quiver at his back,
And silver bow, which was but slack,
Which lightly he bent at me.
That seeing I, leuelde again,
And shot at him with might and maine,
As thick, as it had hayled.
So long I shot, that al was spent:
Tho pumie stones I hastly hent,
And threw: but naught availed:
He was so wimble, and so wight,
From bough to bough he lepped light,
And often the pumies latched.
Therewith affrayd I ran away:
But he, thast erst seemd but to play,
A shaft in earnest snatched,
And hit me running in the heel:
For then I little smart did feel:
But soon it sore increased.
And now it ranckleth more and more,
And inwardly it festreth sore,
Ne wot I, how to cease it.

VVillye. Thomalin, I pity thy plight.
Perdie with love thou did fight:
I know him by a token.
For once I heard my father say,
How he him caught upon a day,
(Whereof he will be wroken)
Entangled in a fowling net,
Which he for carrion Crows had set,
That in our Peeretree haunted.
Tho said, he was a winged lad,
But bow and shaftes as then none had:
Else had he sore be daunted.
But see the Welkin thicks apace,
And stouping Phoebus steepes his face:
Yts time to have us homeward.

Willyes Emblem.
To be wise and eke to love,
Is granted scarce to God above.
Thomalins Emblem.
Of Honey and of Gaul in love there is store:
The Honye is much, but the Gaul is more.
GLOSS.
THIS Aeglogue seems somevvhat to resemble that same of Theocritus, wherein
the boy likewise telling the old man, that he had shot at a vvinged boy in a
tree, was by him warned, to beware of mischief to come.

Over went) ouergone

To quell) to abate.

Alegge) to lessen or asvvage.

VVelkin) the sky.

The swallow) which bird uses to be counted the messenger, and as it were,
the forerunner of spring.

Flora) the Goddess of flovvres, but indede (as says Tacitus) a famous
harlot, which with the abuse of her body having gotten great riches, made the
people of Rome her heir: who in remembrance of so great beneficence,
appointed a yearly feste for the memorial of her, calling her, not as she
was, nor as some do think, Andronica, but Flora: making her the Goddess of
all flowers, and doing yearly to her solemn facrifice.

Maias bovvre) that is the pleasant field, or rather the May bushes. Maia is
a Gods and the mother of Mercury, in honor of whom the month of May is
of her name so called, as says Macrobius.

Lettice) the name of some country less.

Ascaunce) askevve or asquint. For thy) therefore.

Lethe) is a lake in hell, which the Poets call the lake of forgetfulness. For
Lethe signifies forgetfulness. Wherein the souls being dipped, did forget the
cares of their former life. So that by love sleeping in Lethe lake, he means
he was almost forgotten and out of knowledge, by reason of winters hardness,
when al pleasures as it were, sleep and wear out of mind.

Assotte) to dote.

His slomber) To break Loves slomber, is to exercise the delights of Love and
wanton pleasures.

Wings of purple) so is he feyned of the Poets.

For als) he imitateth Virgils verse.

Est mihi namque domi pater, est iniusta nouerca etc.

A dell) a hole in the ground.

Spell) is a kind of verse or charm, that in elder times they used often to
say over every thing, that they would have preserved, as the Nightspel for
thieves, and the vvoodspell. And herehence I think is named the gospel, as it
were Gods spell or word. And so says Chaucer, Listeneth Lordings to my spell.

Gange) go.

An Yuie todde) a thick bushe.

Swain) a boy: For so is he described of the Poets, to be a boy. s always
fresh and lusty: blindfolded, because he makes no difference of Personages:
with diverse colored wings,. s full of flying fancies: with bow and arrow,
that is with glaunce of beautye, which prycketh as a forked arrowe. He is
said also to have shafts, some leaden, some golden: that is, both pleasure for
the gracious and loved, and sorrow for the lover that is disdayned or forsaken.
But who list more at large to behold Cupids colors and furniture, let him
read either Propertius, or Mofchus his Idyllion of wandering love, being now
most excellently translated into Latin by the singular learned man Angelus
Politianus: which work I have seen amongst other of this Poets doings, very
well translated also into English Rymes.

VVimble and vvighte) Quick and deliver.

In the heel) is very Poetically spoken, and not without special judgment.
For I remember, that in Homer it is said of Thetis, that she took her young
babe Achilles being nevvely borne, and holding him by the heel, dipped him in
the River of Styx. The virtue whereof is, to defend and keep the bodies
vvashed therein from any mortal vvound. So Achilles being washed al over, save
only his hele, by which his mother held, was in the rest in vulnerable:
therefore by Paris was feyned to be shot with a poyfoned arrowe in the
heel, vvhiles he was busy about the marying of Polyxena in the temple of
Apollo. which mystical fable Eustathius unfolding, says: that by wounding in
the hele, is meant lustful love. For from the heel (as say the best
Physicians) to the preuie parts there pass certain veins and slender
synnevves, as also the like come from the head, and are carried like little
pypes behynd the ears: so that (as says Hipocrates) if those veins there be
cut a sonder, the party straighte becomes cold and unfruitful. which
reason our Poet well weighing, makes this shepherds boy of purpose to be
vvounded by Love in the heel.

Latched) caught. VVroken) revenged.

For once) In this tale is set out the simplicitye of shepherds opinion of
Love.

Stouping Phoebus) Is a Periphrasis of the sun setting.

Emblem. Hereby is meant, that all the delights of Love, wherein vvanton youth
vvallovveth, be but follye mixed with bitterness, and sorrow savvced with
repentance. For besides that the very affection of Love it self tormenteth
the mind, and vexes the body many vvayes, with vnrestfulnesse all night, and
vvearines all day, seeking for that we can not have, and fynding that we would
not have: eue^ the self things which best before us lyked, in course of time
and chaung of ryper years, which also there vvithall changes our wonted
lyking and former fantasies, will then seem loathsome and breed us
annoyaunce, when yougthes flovvre is withered, and we find our bodies and
wits answer not to such vain iollitie and lustful pleasaunce.

April.


Aegloga Quarta.
ARGUMENT.
THis Aeglogue is purposely intended to the honor and praise of our most
gracious sovereign, Queen Elizabeth. The speakers herein be Hobbinoll and
Thenott, two shepheardes: the which Hobbinoll being before mentioned, greatly
to have loved Colin, is here set forth more largely, complaining him of that
boys great misaduenture in Love, whereby his mind was alienate and with drawn
not only from him, who most loved him, but also from all former delights and
studies, as well in pleasant pyping, as conning ryming and singing, and other
his laudable exercises. Whereby he takes occasion, for proof of his more
excellency and skill in poetry, to record a song, which the said Colin
sometime made in honor of her Majesty, whom abruptely be terms Elysa.

Thenot. Hobbinoll.
TEll me good Hobbinoll, what garres thee greet?
What? has some Wolf thy tender Lambs ytorne?
Or is thy Bagpype broke, that soundes so sweet?
Or art thou of thy loved less forlorn?

Or been thine eyes attempred to the year,
Quenching the gasping furrows thirst with rain?
Like April shoure, so stremes the trickling tears
Adowne thy cheek, to quench thy thriftye pain.
Hobbinoll. Nor this, nor that, so much does make me mourn,
But for the ladde, whom long I lovd so dear,
Now loves a less, that all his love does scorn:
He plongd in pain, his tressed lacks does tear.
Shepherds delights he does them all forswear,
His pleasant Pipe, which made us meriment,
He wylfully has broke, and does forbear
His wonted songs, wherein he all outwent.

Thenot. What is he for a Ladde, you so lament?
Is love such pinching pain to them, that prove?
And has he skill to make so excellent,
Yet has so little skill to bridle love?

Hobbinoll. Colin thou kenst, the Southern shepheardes boy:
Him Love has wounded with a deadly darte.
Whilome on him was all my care and joy,
Forcing with gyfts to win his wanton heart.
But now from me his madding mind is starte,
And woes the Widows daughter of the glenne:
So now fair Rosalind has bredde his smart,
So now his friend is changed for a frenne.

Thenot. But if his ditties been so trimly dight,
I pray thee Hobbinoll, record some one:
The whiles our flocks do graze about in sight,
And we close shrouded in this shade alone.

Hobbinol. Contented I: then will I singe his lay
Of fair Elisa, Queen of shepheardes all:
Which once he made, as by a spring he lay,
And tuned it unto the Waters fall.
YE dayntye Nymphs, that in this blessed Brook
do bathe your breast,
For sake your watery bowres, and hither look,
at my request:
And eke you Virgins, that on Parnasse dwell,
Whence flows Helicon the learned well,
Help me to blaze
Her worthy praise,
Which in her sex does all excel.
Of fair Elisa be your silver song,
that blessed wight:
The flower of Virgins, may she flourish long,
In princely plight.
For she is Syrinx daughter without spotte,
Which Pan the shepherds God of her begot:
So sprung her grace
Of heavenly race,
No mortal blemishe may her blotte.
See, where she sits upon the grassie green,
(O seemly sight)
Yclad in Scarlot like a maiden Queen,
And Ermines white.
Upon her head a Cremosin coronet,
With Damask roses and Daffadillies set:
Bayleaues between,
And Primroses green
Embellish the sweet Violet.
Tell me, have ye seen her angelick face,
Like Phoebe fair?
Her heavenly haueour, her princely grace
can you well compare?
The Red rose meddled with the White yfere,
In either cheek depeincten lively chere.
Her modest eye,
Her Majesty,
Where have you seen the like, but there?
I saw Phoebus thrust out his golden hedde,
upon her to gaze:
But when he saw, how broad her beams did spredde,
it did him amaze.
He blushed to see another Sun below,
Ne durst again his fyrye face out show:
Let him, if he dare,
His brightness compare
With hers, to have the overthrow.
Show thy self Cyntbia with thy silver rays,
and be not abasht:
When she the beams of her beauty displayes,
O how art thou dashed?
But I will not match her with Latonaes seed,
Such folly great sorrow to Niobe did breed.
Now she is a stone,
And makes daily moan,
Warning all other to take heed.
Pan may be proud, that ever he begot
such a Bellibone,
And Syrinx rejoice, that ever was her lot
to bear such an one.
Soon as my younglings cryen for the dam,
To her will I offer a milkwhite Lamb:
She is my goddess plain,
And I her shepherds swayne,
Albee for swonck and for swatt I am.
I see Calliope speed her to the place,
where my Goddess shines:
And after her the other Muses trace,
with their Violines.
Been they not Bay branches, which they do bear,
All for Elisa in her hand to wear?
So sweetly they play,
And sing all the way,
That it a heaven is to hear.
Lo how finely the graces can it foot
to the Instrument:
They dauncen deffly, and singen soote,
in their meriment.
Wants not not a fourth grace, to make the dance even?
Let that rowme to my Lady be yeuen:
She shall be a grace,
To fill the fourth place,
And reign with the rest in heaven.
And whither rennes this beuie of Ladies bright,
raunged in a row?
They been all Ladies of the lake behight,
that unto her go.
Chloris, that is the chiefest Nymph of al,
Of Olive branches bears a Coronall:
Olives been for peace,
When wars do surcease:
Such for a Princess been principal.
Ye shepherds daughters, that dwell on the green,
hye you there apace:
Let none come there, but that Virgins been,
to adorn her grace.
And when you come, whereas she is in place,
See, that your rudeness do not you disgrace:
Bind your fillets fast,
And gird in your waste,
For more f^nesse, with a tawdrie lace.
Bring hither the Pincke and purple Cullambine,
With Gelliflowres:
Bring Coronations, and Sops in wine,
worn of Paramoures.
Strowe me the ground with Daffadowndillies,
And Cowslips, and Ringcups, and loved Lilies:
The pretty Pawnce,
And the Cheuisaunce.
Shall match with the fair flower Delice,
Now rise up Elisa, decked as thou art,
in royal array:
And now ye dainty Damsells may depart
echeone her way,
I fear, I have troubled your troops to long:
Let dame Eliza thank you for her song.
And if you come hither,
When Damsines I gether,
I will part them all you among.

Thenot And was thilk same song of Colins own making?
Ah foolish boy, that is with love yblent:
Great pity is, he be in such taking,
For naught caren, that been so lewdly bent.

Hobbinol. Sicker I hold him, for a greater fon,
That loves the thing, he cannot purchase.
But let us homeward: for night draws on,
And twincling stars the daylight hence chase.

Thenots Emblem.
O quam te memorem virgo?
Hobbinols Emblem.
O dea certe.
GLOSS.
Gars thee greete] causes thee weep and complain. Forlorne] left and
forsaken. Attempred to the yeare] agreeable to the season of the year, that is
April, which month is most bent to shoures and seasonable rain: to quench,
that is, to delay the drought, caused through dryness of March vvyndes.

The Ladde] Colin Clout] The Lasse] Rosalinda. Tressed locks) wrethed and curled

Is he for a ladde] A strange manner of speaking. s what manner of Ladde is he?

To make] to rhyme and versifye. For in this word making, our old English
Poets were wont to comprehend all the skill of Poetrye, according to the
Greek word (...), to make, whence comes the name of Poets.

Colin thou kenst] know. Seems hereby that Colin perteyneth to some
Southern noble man, and perhaps in Surrye or Kent, the rather because he so
often names the Kentish dovvnes, and before, As lythe as less of Kent.

The VVidovves] He calls Rosalind the Widows daughter of the glenne, that
is, of a country Hamlet or borough, which I think is rather said to color
and concele the person, then simply spoken. For it is well known, even in
spighte of Colin and Hobbinoll, that she is a Gentle woman of no mean house,
nor en dewed with any vulgar and common gifts both of nature and manners:
but such indeed, as need nether Colin be ashamed to have her made known by
his verses, nor Hobbinol be grieved, that so she should be commended to
immortality for her rare and singular Virtues: Specially deserving it no
less, then either Myrto the most excellent Poet Theocritus his dearling, or
Lauretta the divine Petrarches Goddess, or Himera the worthy Poet
Stesichorus his Idol: Upon whom he is said so much to have doted, that in
regard of her excellency, he scorned and wrote against the beauty of Helena.
For which his praesumptuous and vnheedie hardiness, he is said by vengeance
of the Gods, thereat being offended, to have lost both his eyes.

Frenne] a stranger. The word I think was first poetically put, and
afterward used in commen custom of speech for forenne.

Dight] adorned. Laye] a song. as Roundelayes and Virelayes

In all this song is not to be respected, what the worthiness of her
Majesty deserves, nor what to the highness of a Prince is agreeable, but
what is most comely for the meanness of a shepherds vvitte, or to conceive,
or to utter.

And therefore he calls her Elysa, as through rudeness tripping in her name:
and a shepherds daughter, it being very unfit, that a shepherds boy brought
up in the shepefold, should know, or ever seem to have heard of a Queens
roialty.

Ye daintie] is, as it were an Exordium ad preparandos animos.

Virgins] the nine Muses, daughters of Apollo and Memory, whose abode the
Poets feign to be on Parnassus, a hill in Greece, for that in that country
specially flourished the honor of all excellent studies.

Helicon] is both the name of a fountain at the foot of Parnassus, and also
of a mounteine in Baeotia, out of which flows the famous Spring Castalius,
dedicate also to the Muses: of which spring it is said, that when Pegasus the
winged horse of Perseus (whereby is meant fame and flying renown) struck the
grovvnde with his hoof, suddenly thereout sprange a well of most clear and
pleasant water, which fro thence forth was consecrate to the Muses and
Ladies of learning.

Your silver song] seems to imitate the like in Hesiodus (...).

Syrinx] is the name of a Nymphe of Arcadie, whom when Pan being in love
pursued, she flying from him, of the Gods was turned into a reed. So that Pan
catching at the Reeds instead of the Damsel, and puffing hard (for he was
almost out of wind) with his breath made the Reeds to pype: which he seeing,
took of them, and in remembrance of his lost love, made him a pype thereof.
But here by Pan and Syrinx is not to be thought, that the shephearde simplye
meante those Poetical Gods: but rather supposing (as seems) her graces
progeny to be divine and immortal (so as the Paynims were wont to judge of
all Kings and Princes, according to Homeres saying.

(...),
(...).)
could devise no parents in his judgment so worthy for her, as Pan the
shepeheards God, and his best beloved Syrinx. So that by Pan is here meant the
most famous and victorious King, her highness Father, late of worthy memory
K. Henry the eight. And by that name, oftymes (as hereafter appears) be noted
kings and mighty Potentates: And in some place Christ himself, who is the ve
rye Pan and god of Shepheardes.

Cremosin coronet] he deuiseth her crown to be of the finest and most delicate
flowers, instede of perles and precious stones, wherevvith Princes Diademes use
to be adorned and embost.

Embellish] beautifye and set out.

Phebe] the Moon, whom the Poets feign to be sister unto Phoebus, that is the
Sun.

Medled] mingled.

Ysere] together. By the mingling of the Red rose and the White, is meant
the uniting of the two principal houses of Lancaster and of York: by whose
long discord and deadly debate, this realm many years was sore traueiled, and
almost clean decayed. Til the famous Henry the seventh, of the linc of
Lancaster, taking to wife the most virtuous Princess Elisabeth, daughter to
the fourth Edward of the house of York, begat the most royal Henry the eight
aforesaid, in whom was the first union of the White Rose and the Red.

Calliope] one of the nine Muses: to whom they assign the honor of all
Poetical Invention, and the first glory of the Heroical verse. other say,
that she is the Goddess of Rhetoric: but by Virgile it is manifest, that
they mystake the thing. For there in his Epigrams, that art seems to be
attributed to Polymnia, saying: Signat cuncta manu, loquiturque Polymnia gestu.

which seems specially to be meant of Action and elocution, both special par
tes of Rhetoric: beside that her name, which (as some construe it) imports
great remembrance, contains another part. but I hold rather with them,
which call her Polymnia or Polyhymnia of her good singing.

Bay branches] be the sign of honor and victory, and therefore of mighty
Conquerors worn in their triumphs, and eke of famous Poets, as says Petrarch
in his Sonets.

Arbor vittoriosa triomphale,
Honor d' Imperadori and di Poeti, etc.
The Graces] be three sisters, the daughters of Jupiter, (whose names are
Aglaia, Thalia, Euphrosyne, and Homer only adds a fourth. s Pasithea)
otherwise called Chari tes, that is thanks vvho^ the Poets feyned to be the
Goddesses of al bounty and comelines, which therefore (as says Theodontius)
they make three, to wete, that men first ought to be gracious and bountiful to
other freely, then to receive benefits at other men's hands courteously, and
thirdly to requite them thankfully: which are three sundry Actions in
liberalitye. And Boccace says, that they be painted naked, (as they were
indeed on the tomb of C. Julius Caesar) the one having her back toward us,
and her face fromwarde, as proceeding from us: the other two toward us, noting
double thank to be due to us for the benefit, we have done.

Deaffly] Finelye and nimbly. Soote] Sweet. Meriment] Mirth.

Beuie] A beauie of Ladies, is spoken figuratively for a company or troop. the
term is taken of Larkes. For they say a Beuie of Larkes, even as a Couey of
Partridge, or an eye of Pheasaunts.

Ladies of the lake] be Nymphs. For it was an old opinion amongste the
Ancient Heathen, that of every spring and fountain was a goddess the
Sovereign. Which opinion stuck in the minds of men not many years
sithence, by means of certain fine fablers and loud liars, such as were the
Authors of King Arthure the great and such like, who tell many an unlawful
leasing of the Ladies of the Lake, that is, the Nymphs. For the word Nymphe in
Greek signifies Well water, or otherwise a Spouse or Bcyde.

Bedight] called or named.

Cloris] the name of a Nymph, and signifies greenesse, of whom is said, that
Zephyrus the Western wind being in love with her, and coveting her to wife,
gave her for a dowry, the chiefedome and soueraigntye of al flowers and green
herbs, growing on earth.

Olives bene] The Olive was wont to be the ensign of Peace and quietness,
either for that it cannot be planted and pruned, and so carefully looked to, as
it ought, but in time of peace: or else for that the Olive tree, they say, will
not grovve near the Fur tree, which is dedicate to Mars the God of
battle, and used most for spears and other instruments of war. VVhereupon
is finely feigned, that when Neptune and Minerua strove for the naming of the
city of Athens, Neptune striking the ground with his (...), caused a horse to
come forth, that imports war, but at Mineruaes stroke sprung out an Olive,
to note that it should be a nurse of learning, and such peaceable studies.

Bind your] Spoken rudely, and according to shepheardes simplicitye.

Bring] all these be names of flovvers. Sops in wine a flovvre in color much
like to a Coronation, but differing in smell and quantitye. Flower delice, that
which they use to misterme, Flovvre de luce, being in Latin called Flos
delitiarum.

A Bellibone] or a Bonibell homely spoken for a fair maid or Bonilasse.

Forsvvonck and forswat^]. ouerlaboured and sunneburnt.

I savv Phaebus] the sun. A sensible Narration, and present view of the thing
mentioned, which they call (...).

Cynthia] the Moon so called of Cynthus a hill, where she was honored.

Latonaes seede] Was Apollo and Dinna. Whom whenas Niobe the wife of
Amphion scorned, in respect of the noble fruict of her womb; namely her seven
sons, and so many daughters, Latona being therewith displeased, commanded
her son Phoebus to slay all the sons, and Diana all the daughters: where at
the unfortunate Niobe being sore dismayed, and lamenting out of measure, was
feigned of the Poets, to be turned into a stone upon the sepulcher of her
children. for which cause the shepherd says, he will not compare her to
them, for fear of like my mysfortune. (...)

Now rise] is the conclusion. For having so decked her with praises and
comparisons, he returns all the thanck of his labor to the excellency of
her Majesty.

When Damsins] A base revvard of a clovvnish giver.

Yblent] Y, is a poetical addition. blent blinded.

Emblem. This Poesye is taken out of Virgile, and there of him used in the
person of Aeneas to his mother Venus, appearing to him in likeness. of one of
Dianaes damosells: being there most divinely set forth. To which similitude of
divinity Hobbinoll comparing the excelency of Elisa, and being through the
worthynes of Colins song, as it were, overcome with the hugeness of his
imagination, brusteth out in great admiration, (O quam te memore^ virgo?) being
otherwife unable, then by soddein silence, to express the worthiness of his
conceit. Whom Thenot answers with another part of the like verse, as
confirming by his grant and approuaunce, that Elisa is novvhit inferior to
the Majesty of her, of whom that Poet boldly pronounced, O dea certe.

May.


Aegloga Quinta
ARGUMENT
Jn this first Aeglogue, under the persons of two shepherds, Piers and
Palinodie, be represented two forms of pastoures or Ministers, or the
protestant and the Catholic: whose chief talk stands in reasoning,
whether the life of the one must be like the other, with whom having showed,
that it is dangerous to maintain any fellowship, or give too much credit to
their colorable and feyned goodwill, he tells him a tale of the fox, that
by such a counterpoynt of craftines deceived and devoured the credulous kidde.

Palinode. Piers,
IS not thilke the merry month of May,
When love lads mas ken in fresh array?
How falls it then, we no merrier been,
Ylike as others, girt in gaudy green?
Our bloncket liueryes been all to sad,
For thilke same season, when all is ycladd
With pleasaunce: the grownd with grass, the Wods
With green leaves, the bushes with bloosming Buds.
Yougthes folk now flocken in every where,
To gather may bus-kets and smelling brere:
And home they hasten the posts to dight,
And all the Kirk pillours ear day light,
With Hawthorne buds, and sweet Eglantine,
And girlonds of roses and Sopps in wine.
Such merimake holy Saints does queme,
But we here sytten as drowned in a dreme.

PIERS. For Younkers Palinode such follies fit,
But we tway been men of elder wit.

PALINODE. Sicker this morrow, ne longer ago,
I saw a shole of shepeheardes outgoe,
With singing, and shouting, and jolly chere:
Before them yode a lusty Tabrere,
That to the many a Horn pype played,
Whereto they dauncen each one with his maid.
To see those folks make such iouysaunce,
Made my heart after the pype to dance.
Tho to the green Wood they speeden hem all,
To fetchen home May with their musical:
And home they bringen in a royal throne,
Crowned as king: and his Queen atone
Was Lady Flora, on whom did attend
A fair flock of Facries, and a fresh bend
Of lovely Nymphs. (O that I were there,
To helpen the Ladies their Maybush bear)
Ah Piers, been not thy teeth on edge, to think,
How great sport they gaynen with little swinck.

PIERS. Perdie so far am I from envy,
That their fondness inly I pity.
Those faytours little regarden their charge,
While they letting their sheep run at large,
Passen their time, that should be sparely spent,
In lustihede and wanton meryment.
Thilke same been shepeheards for the Devils stedde,
That playen, while their flocks be vnfedde.
Well is it seen, their sheep been not their own,
That letten them run at randon alone.
But they been hired for little pay
Of other, that caren as little as they,
What fallen the stock, so they han the fleece,
And get all the gain, paying but a piece.
I muse, what account both these will make,
The one for the hire, which he does take,
And the other for leaving his Lords tas-ke,
When gread Pan account of shepeherdes shall as-ke.

PALINODE. Sicker now I see thou speak of spite,
All for thou lackest somedele their delight.
I (as I am) had rather be envied,
All were it of my foe, then fonly pitied:
And yet if need were, pitied would be,
Rather, then other should scorn at me:
For pitied is mishappe, that nas remedy,
But scorned been deeds of fond foolerie.
What shoulden shepherds other things tend,
Then since their God his good does them send,
Reapen the fruit thereof, that is pleasure,
The while they here liuen, at ease and leisure?
For when they been dead, their good is ygoe,
They sleepen in rest, well as other more.
Tho with them wends, what they spent in cost,
But what they left behind them, is lost.
Good is no good, but if it be spend:
God giuethgood for none other end.

PIERS. Ah Palinodie, thou art a worlds child:
Who touches Pitch might needs be defilde.
But shepherds (as Algrind used to say,)
Might not live ylike, as men of the lay:
With them it sits to care for their heir,
Enaunter their heritage do impair:
They must provide for means of maintenance,
And to continue their wont countenance.
But shepherd must walk another way,
Sike wordly souenance he must foresay.
The son of his loins why should should he regard
To leave enriched with that he has spard?
Should not thilke God, that gave him that good,
Eke cherish his child, if in his ways he stood?
For if he misliue in leudnes and lust,
Little boots all the wealth and the trust,
That his father left by iuheritaunce:
All will be soon wasted with misgouernaunce.
But through this, and other their miscreaunce,
They maken many a wrong cheuisaunce,
Heaping by waves of wealth and woe,
The floddes whereof shall them ouerflow.
Sike men's folly I cannot compare
Better, then to the Apes folish care,
That is so enamoured of her young one,
(And yet God wot, such cause has she none.)
That with her hard h^ld, and straight embracing,
She stops the breath of her youngling.
So often times, when as good is meant,
Evil ensues of wrong intent.
The time was once, and may again return,
(For ought may happen, that has been beforne)
When shepeheards had none inheritance,
Ne of land, nor fee in sufferaunce:
But what might arise of the bare sheep,
(Were it more or less) which they did keep.
Well ywis was it with shepherds thoe:
Naught having, naught feared they to forgo.
For Pan himself was their inheritance,
And little them served for their mayntenaunce.
The shephears God so well them guided,
That of naught they were unprovided,
Butter enough, honye, milk, and whay,
And their flocks fleeces, them to array.
But tract of time, and long prosperity:
That nource of vice, this of insolency,
Lulled the shepherds in such security,
That not content with loyal obeysaunce,
Some began to gape for greedy governance,
And match them self with mighty potentates,
Lovers of Lordship and troublers of states:
Tho began shepherds swains to look a loft,
And leave to live hard, and learn to ligge soft:
Tho under color of shepeheards, somewhile
There crept in Wolves, full of fraud and guile,
That often devoured their own sheep,
And often the shepherds, that did hem keep.
This was the first sourse of shephear ds sorrow,
That now nill be quitt with bail, nor borrowe.

PALINODE. Three things to bear, been very burdenous,
But the fourth to forbear, is outrageous.
Women that of Loves longing once lust,
Hardly forbearen, but have it they must:
So when choler is inflamed with rage,
Wanting revenge, is hard to assuage:
And who can counsel a thristie soul,
With patience to forbear the offered bowl?
But of all burdens, that a man can bear,
Most is, a fools talk to bear and to hear.
I wene the Geaunt has not such a weight,
That bears on his shoulders the heavens height.
Thou find fault, where nys to be found,
And buildest strong warke upon a weak ground:
Thou raylest on right withouten reason,
And blamest hem much, for small encheason.
How shoulden shepheardes live, if not so?
What? should they pynen in pain and woe?
Nay said I thereto, by my dear borrowe,
If I may rest, I nill live in sorrow.
Sorrow ne need be hastened on:
For he will come without calling anon.
While times enduren of tranquillity,
Vsen we freely our felicity.
For when approchen the stormy stowres,
We might with our shoulders bear of the sharp showers.
And sooth to said, naught seems sike strife,
That shepheardes so witen each others life,
And layen her faults the world beforne,
The while their foes done each of hem scorn.
Let none mislike of that may not be mended:
So conteck soon by concord might be ended.

PIERS. Shepherd, I list none accordaunce make
With shepherd, that does the right way forsake.
And of the twain, if choice were to me,
Had lever my foe, then my friend he be.
For what concord han light and dark sam?
Or what peace has the Lion with the Lamb?
Such faitors, when their false hearts been hid de.
Will do, as did the Fox by the Kidde.

PALINODE. Now Piers, of fellowship, tell us that saying:
For the Ladde can keep both our flocks from straying.

PIERS. THilke same Kidde (as I can well devise)
Was too very foolish and unwise.
For on a time in Summer season,
The Gate her dame, that had good reason.
Yode forth abroad unto the green wood,
To brouze, or play, or what she thought good.
But for she had a motherly care
Of her young son; and wit to beware,
She set her youngling before he: knee,
That was both fresh and lovely to see,
And full of favor, as kidde might be:
His Vellet head began to shoot out,
And his wreathed horns began newly sprout:
The blossoms of lust to bud did begin,
And spring forth ranckly under his chinne.
My son (quoth she) (and with that began weep:
For careful thoughts in her heart did creep)
God bless thee poor Orphane, as he might me,
And send thee joy of thy iollitee
Thy father (that word she spoke with pain:
For a sigh had nigh rent her heart in twain)
Thy father, had he lived this day,
To see the branch of his body displaie,
How would he have ioyed at this sweet sight?
But ah false Fortune such joy did him spite,
And cut of his days with untimely woe,
Betraying him into the trains of his foe.
Now I a waylfull widdowe behight,
Of my old age have this one delight,
To see thee succeed in thy fathers stead,
And flourish in flowers of lusty head.
For even so thy father his head vpheld,
And so his hauty horns did he weld.
Tho marking him with melting eyes,
A thrilling throbbe from her heart did arise,
And interrupted all her other speech,
With some old sorrow, that made a new breach:
Seemed she saw in the younglings face
The old line aments of his fathers grace.
At last her solein silence she broke,
And began his new budded beard to stroke
Kiddie (quoth she) thou kenst the great care,
I have of thy health and thy welfare,
Which many wyld beasts liggen in wait,
For to entrap in thy tender state:
But most the Fox, master of collusion:
For he has voued thy last confusion.
For thy my Kiddie be ruld by me,
And never give trust to his trecheree.
And if he chance come, when I am abroad,
Sperre the yate fast for fear of fraud:
Ne for all his worst, nor for his best,
Open the door at his request.
So schooled the Gate her wanton son,
That answered his mother, all should be done.
Tho went the pensife Damme out of door,
And chaunst to stomble at the threshold flore:
Her stombling step some what her amazed,
(For such, as signs of ill luck been dispraised)
Yet forth she yode thereat half aghast:
And Kiddie the door sperred after her fast.
It was not long, after she was gone,
But the false Fox came to the door anon:
Not as a Fox, for then he had be kend,
But all as a poor peddler he did wend,
Bearing a trusse of tryfles at his back,
As bells, and babes, and glasses in his pack.
A Biggen he had got about his brain,
For in his headpeace he felt a sore pain.
His hinder heel was wrapped in a clout,
For with great cold he had got the gout.
There at the door he cast me down his pack,
And laid him down, and groned, Alack, Alack.
Ah dear Lord, and sweet Saint Charitee,
That some good body would once pity me.
Well heard Kiddie all this sore constraint,
And lengd to know the cause of his complaint:
Tho creeping close behind the Wickets clinck,
Preuelie he peeped out through a chinck:
Yet not so preuilie, but the Fox him spyed:
For deceifull meaning is double eyed.
Ah good young master (then began he cry)
Jesus bless that sweet face, I espy,
And keep your corpse from the careful stounds,
That in my carrion carcas abounds.
The Kidd pitying his heaviness,
Asked the cause of his great distress,
And also who, and whence that he were,
Tho he, that had well ycond his lere,
Thus meddled his talk with many a tear,
(...), (...), alas, and little lack of dead,
But ^ be relieved by your beastlyhead.
I am a poor Sheep, albe my color done:
For with long traveile I am brent in the son.
And if that my Grandsire me said, be true,
Sicker I am very sybbe to you:
So be your goodlihead do not disdain
The base kindred of so simple swain.
Of mercy and favor then I you pray,
With your aid to forstall my necre decay.
Tho out of his pack a glass he took:
Wherein while kiddie unawares did look,
He was so enamored with the newell,
That naught he deemed dear for the jewel.
Tho opened he the door, and in came
The false Fox, as he were stark lame.
His tail he clapped betwixt his legs twain,
Lest he should be descried by his train.
Being within, the Kidde made him good glee,
All for the love of the glass he did see.
After his chere the Peddler can chat,
And tell many lesings of this, and that:
And how he could show many a fine knack.
Tho showed his ware, and opened his pack,
All save a bell, which he left behind
In the bas-ket for the Kidde to find.
Which when the Kidde stooped down to catch,
He popt him in, and his bas-ket did latch,
Ne stayed he once, the door to make fast,
But ran away with him in all have.
Home when the doubtful Damme had her hyde,
She might see the door stand open wide.
All aghast, lowdly she began to call
Her Kidde: but he nould answer at all.
Tho on the flore she saw the merchandise,
Of which her son had set to dear a prise.
What help? her Kidde she knew well was gone:
She weeped, and wayled, and made great moan.
Such end had the Kidde, for he nould warned be
Of craft, colored with simplicity:
And such end perdie does all hem remain,
That of such falsers freendship been feign.

PALINODIE. Truly Piers, thou art beside thy wit,
Furthest fro the mark, weening it to hit,
Now I pray thee, let me thy tale borrowe
For our sir John, to say to morrow
At the Kerke, when it is holliday:
For well he means, but little can say.
But and if Foxes been so crafty, as so,
Much needs all shepherds hem to know.

PIERS. Of their falshode more could I recount.
But now the bright Sun gynneth to dismount:
And for the deawie night now does nigh,
I hold it best for us, home to hye.

Palinodes Emblem.
(...)
Piers his Emblem.
(...)
GLOSS.
Thilke) this same month. It is applied to the season of the month, when all
men delight them selves with pleasaunce of fields, and gardens, and
garments.

Bloncket liueries) gray coats. Yclad) arrayed, Y, redoundeth, as before.

In every where) a strange, yet proper kind of speaking.

Buskets) a Diminutiue. s little bushes of hauthorne. Kirk) church. Queme)
please.

A shole) a multitude; taken of fish, whereof some going in great companies,
are said to swim in a shole.

Yode) went. Iouyssance) joy. Svvinck) labor. Inly) entirely Faytours)
vagabonds.

Great pan) is Christ, the very God of all shepherds, which calls himself
the great and good shepherd. The name is most rightly (me thinks) applied to
him, for Pan fignifieth all or omnipotent, which is only the Lord Jesus. And
by that name (as I remember) he is called of Eusebius in his fifte book de
Preparat. Euang; who thereof tells a proper storye to that purpose. Which
story is first recorded of Plutatch, in his book of the ceasing of oracles,
and of Lauetere translated, in his book of vvalking sprightes. who says,
that about the same time, that our Lord suffered his most bitter passion for
the redemtion of man, certain passengers sailing from Italy to Cyprus and
passing by certain Isles called Paxae, heard a voice calling alovvde Thamus,
Thamus, (now Thamus was the name of an Egyptian, which was Pilote of the
ship,) who giving ear to the cry, was bidden, when he came to Palodes, to
tell, that the great Pan was dead: which he doubting to do, yet for that when
he came to Palodes, there sodeinly was such a calm of wind, that the ship
stood still in the sea unmoved, he was forced to cry alovvd, that Pan was
dead: vvherevvithall there was heard such piteous outcryes and dreadful
shriking, as has not been the like. By which Pan, though of some be
understood the great Satamas, whose kingdom at that time was by Christ
conquered, the gates of hell broken up, and death by death delivered to
eternal death, (for at that time, as he says; all Oracles surceased, and
enchaunted spirits, that were wont to delude the people, thenceforth held
their peace) and also at the demand of the Emperor Tiberius, who that Pan
should be, answer was made him by the vvisest and best learned, that it was
the son of Mercury and Penelope, yet I think it more properly meant of the
death of Christ, the only and very Pan, then suffering for his flock.

I as I am) seems to imitate the commen proverb, Mal^^ Inuidere mihi omnes
quam miserescere.

Nas) is a syncope, for ne has, or has not: as nould, for would not.

Tho with them] does imitate the Epitaphe of the ryotous king Sardanapalus,
which caused to be written on his tomb in Greek: which verses be thus
translated by Tullie.

Haec habui quae edi, quaeque exaturata libido Hausit, at illa manent multaac
praeclara relicta. which may thus be turned into English.

All that I eat did I joy, and all that I greedily gorged: As for those many
goodly matters left I for others. Much like the Epitaph of a good old Earl of
Devonshire, which though much more wisdom bewraieth, then Sardanapalus, yet
has a smacke of his sensual delights and beastliness. the rymes be these.

Ho, Ho, who lies here?
I the good Earl of Deuonshere,
And Maulde my wife, that was full dear,
We lived together lv. year.
That we spent, we had:
That we gave, we have:
That we left, we lost.
Algrim) the name of a shepherd. Men of the Lay) Lay men. Enaunter) least that.

Souenaunce) remembrance. Miscreaunce) despeire or misbeliefe.

Cheuisaunce) sometime of Chaucer used for gain: sometime of other for spoil,
or booty, or enterprise, and sometime for chiefdome.

Pan himself) God. according as is said in Deuteronomie, That in division of
the land of Canaan, to the tribe of Levy no portion of heritage should be
allotted, for GOD himself was their inheritance

Some began) meant of the Pope, and his Antichristian prelates, which usurp a
tyrannical dominion in the Church, and with Peter's counterfeit keys, open a
vvide gate to al wickedness and insolent government. Naught here spoken, as of
purpose to deny fatherly rule and godly governance (as some maliciously of
late have done to the great vnreste and hinderaunce of the Church) but to
displaye the pride and disorder of such, as in steed of seeding their sheep,
indeed feed of their sheep.

Sourse) vvelspring and original. Borrovve) pledge or suertie.

The Geaunte) is the great Atlas, whom the poets feign to be a huge geaunt,
that bears Heaven on his shoulders: being in deed a merueilous high
mountain in Mauritania, that now is Barbary, which to man's seeming perceth
the clouds, and seems to touch the heavens. Other think, and they not
amiss, that this fable was meant of one Atlas king of the same country. (of
whom may be, that that hill had his denomination) brother to Prometheus (who
as the Greeks say) did first find out the hidden courses of the stars, by an
excellent imagination wherefore the poets feigned, that he sustained the
firmament on his shoulders. Many other conjectures needelesse be told hereof.

Vvarke) work: Encheason) cause, occasion.

Dear borovv) that is our savior, the commen pledge of all men's debts to
death.

VVyten) blame. Naught seems) is unseemly. Conteck) strife contention.

)(...), as uses Chaucer. Han) for have. Sam) together.

This tale is much like to that in Aesops fables, but the Catastrophe and end
is far different. By the Kidde may be understood the simple sort of the
saythfull and true Christians. By his dame Christ, that has already with
careful vvatchewords (as here does the got) warned his little ones, to
beware of such doubling deceit. By the Fox, the false and faithless Papists,
to whom is no credit to be given, nor fellowship to be used.

The gate) the Got: Northernely spoken to turn O into A. Yode) went.
afforesayd

She set) A figure called Fictio. which uses to attribute reasonable actions
and speeches to unreasonable creatures.

The bloosmes of lust) be the young and mossie hears, which then begin to
sproute and shoot forth, when lustful heat begins to kindle.

And with) A very Poetical (...).

Orphane) A youngling or pupil, that needs a Tutour and governor.

That word) A patheticall parenthesis, to increase a careful Hyperbaton.

The branch) of the fathers body, is the child.

For even so) Alluded to the saying of Andromache to Ascanius in Virgile. Sic
oculos, sic ille manus, sic ora ferebat.

A thrilling throb) a percing sighe. Liggen) lie.

Master of collusion). s colored guile, because the Fox of al beasts is most
wily and crafty.

Sperre the yate) shut the door.

For such) The gotes stombling is here noted as an evil sign. The like to be
marked in all histories: and that not the least of the Lord Hastingues in
king Richard the third his days. For beside his dangerous dream (which
was a shrevvde prophecy of his mishap, that followed) it is said that in the
morning ryding toward the tower of London, there to sit upon matters of
counsel, his horse stombled twice or thrice by the way: which of some, that
ryding with him in his company, were privy to his near destenie, was
secretly marked, and afterward noted for memory of his great mishap, that
ensevved. For being then as merye, as man might be, and least doubting any
mortal danger, he was with in two hovvres after, of the Tyranne put to a
shameful death.

As belles) by such trifles are noted, the relics and rags of popish
superstition, which put no small religion in Belles: and Babies. s Idols: and
glasses. s Paxes, and such like trumperies.

Great cold.) For they boast much of their outvvard patience, and voluntarye
sufferaunce as a work of merit and holy humbleness.

Svveete S. Charity. The Catholics comen oath, and only speech, to have
charity alvvayes in their mouth, and sometime in their outward Actions, but
never inwardly in faith and godly zeal.

Clincke.) a key hole. Whose diminutiue is clicket, used of Chaucer for a Key.

Stoundes) fittes: aforesaid. His lere) his lesson. Meddled) mingled.

Bestlihead.) agreeing to the person of a beast. Sibbe.) of kynne.

Nevvell) a nevve thing. To forestall) to praeuent. Glee] chere, afforesayde.

Dear a price.) his life, which be lost for those toys.

Such end) is an Epiphonema, or rather the moral of the whole tale, whose
purpose is to vvarne the protestaunt bevvare, how he gives credit to the
unfaithful Catholic: whereof we have daily proofs sufficient, but one
most famous of all, practiced of Late years in France by Charles the nynth.

Feign) glad or desirous.

Our sir John) a Popish priest, A saying fit for the grosenesse of a
shepherd, but spoken to taunte unlearned Priests.

Dismount) descend or set. Nigh) draws nere.

Emblem. Both these Emblemes make one whole Hexametre. The first spoken of
Palinodie, as in reproach of them, that be distrustful, is a piece of Theognis
verse, intending, that who does most mistrust is most false. For such
experience in falsehod breeds mistrust in the mind, thinking nolesse guile to
lurk in others, then in himself. But Piers thereto strongly replyeth with
another piece of the same verse, saying as in his former fable, what faith
then is there in the faythlesse. For if faith be the ground of religion, which
faith they daily false, what hold then is there of their religion. And this is
all that they say.

June.


Aegloga sexta.
ARGUMENT.
THis Aeglogue is wholly vowed to the complaining of Colins ill soccesse in his
love. For being (as is aforesaid) enamoured of a Country less Rosalind, and
having (as seems) found place in her heart, he lamenteth to his dear friend
Hobbinoll, that he is now forsaken unfaithfully, and in his steed Menalcas,
another shepherd received disloyally. And this is the whole Argument of this
Aeglogue.

HOBBINOL. COLIN Cloute.
LO Collin, here the place, whose pleasant syte
From other shades has weand my wandering mind,
Tell me, what wants me here, to work delight?
The simple air, the gentle warbling wind,
So calm, so cool, as no where else I find:
The grassye gronnd with daintye Daysies dight,
The Bramble bush, where Byrds of every kind
To the waters fall their tunes attemper right.

COLLIN. O happy Hobbinoll, I bless thy state,
That Paradise have found, which Adam lost.
Here wander may thy flock early or late,
Withouten dread of Wolves to been ytost:
Thy lovely lays here may thou freely boste.
But I unhappy man, whom cruel fate,
And angry Gods pursue from cost to cost,
Can nowhere find, to shouder my lucklesse pate.

HOBBINOLL. Then if by me thou list advised be,
Forsake the soil, that so does the bewitch:
Leave me those hills, where harbrough nis to see,
Nor holybush, nor brere, nor winding witch:
And to the dales resort, where shipheards rich,
And fruictfull flocks been every where to see.
Here no night Rauene lodge more black then pitche,
Nor eluish ghosts, nor ghastly owls do flee.
But friendly Faeries, met with many Graces,
And lightfote Nymphs can chase the lingering night,
With Heydeguyes, and trimly trodden traces,
Whilst systers nine, which dwell on Parnasse hight,
Do make them music, for their more delight:
And Pan himself to kiss their crystal faces,
Will pype and dance, when Phoebe shines bright:
Such pierlesse pleasures have we in these places.

COLLIN. And I, whylst youth, and course of careless years
Did let me walk withouten lincks of love,
In such delights did joy amongst my pecres:
But ryper age such pleasures does reprove,
My fancye eke from former follies move
To stayed steps. for time in passing wears
(As garments done, which wexen old above)
And draws new delights with hoary hears.
Tho couth I sing of love, and tune my pype
Unto my plaintiue pleas in verses made:
Tho would I seek for Queen apples unripe,
To give my Rosalind, and in Sommet shade
Dight gaudy Girlonds, was my comen trade,
To crown her golden locks, vnt years more ripe,
And loss of her, whose love as life I wayd,
Those weary wanton toys away did wype.

HOBBINOLL. Colin, to hear thy rymes and roundelayes,
Which thou were wont on wastfull hylls to singe,
I more delight, then lark in Summer days:
Whose Echo made the neighbor groves to ring,
And taught the byrds, which in the lower spring
Did shroude in shady leaves from sonny rays,
Frame to thy song their chereful cheriping,
Or hold their peace, for shame of thy sweet lays.
I saw Calliope with Muses more,
Soon as thy oaten pype began to sound,
Their yuory Luyts and Tamburins forgo:
And from the fountain, where they sat around,
Run after hastily thy silver sound.
But when they came, where thou thy skill did show,
They drew abacke, as half with shame confound,
Shepherd to see, them in their art outgoe.

COLLIN. Of Muses Hobbinol, I conne no skill:
For they been daughters of the highest Jove.
And holden scorn of homely shepherds quill.
For since I heard, that Pan with Phoebus strove,
Which him to much rebuke and Danger drove:
I never list presume to Parnasse hill,
But pyping low in shade of lowly grove,
I play to please my self, all be it ill.
Naught weigh I, who my song does praise or blame,
Ne strive to win renown, or pass the rest:
With shepherd sittes not, follow flying fame:
But feed his flock in fields, where falls hem best.
I wot my rymes been rough, and rudely dressed:
The fytter they, my careful case to frame:
Enough is me to paint out my unrest,
And poor my piteous plaints out in the same.
The God of shepherds Tityrus is dead,
Who taught me homely, as I can, to make.
He, whilst he lived, was the sovereign head
Of shepherds all, that been with love ytake:
Well couth he wayle his Woes, and lightly slake
The flames, which love within his heart had bredd,
And tell us merry tales, to keep us wake,
The while our sheep about us safely fed.
Now dead he is, and lies wrapped in lead,
(O why should death on him such outrage show?)
And all his passing skill with him is fled,
The fame whereof does daily greater grow.
But if on me some little drops would flow,
Of that the spring was in his learned hedde,
I soon would learn these woods, to wayle my woe,
And teach the trees, their trickling tears to shed.
Then should my plaints, causd of discurtesee,
As messengers of all my painful plight,
Fly to my love, where ever that she be,
And pierce her heart with point of worthy wight:
As she deserves, that wrought so deadly spite.
And thou Menalcas, that by trecheree
Did vnderfong my less, to wexe so light,
Should well be known for such thy villance.
But since I am not, as I wish I were,
Ye gentle shepherds, which your flocks do feed,
Whether on hylls, or dales, or other where,
Bear witness all of this so wicked deed:
And tell the less, whose flower is woxe a weed,
And faultlesse faith, is turned to faithless fere,
That she the truest shepherds heart made bleed,
That lives on earth, and loved her most dear.

HOBBINOL. O careful Colin, I lament thy case,
Thy tears would make the hardest flint to flow.
Ah faithless Rosalind, and void of grace,
That art the root of all this ruthful woe.
But now is time, I guess, home ward to go:
Then rise ye blessed flocks, and home apace,
Least night with stealing steps do you forsloe,
And wett your tender Lambs, that by you trace.

Colins Emblem.
Gia speme spenta.
GLOSS.
Syte) situation and place.

Paradise) A Paradise in Greek signifies a Garden of pleasure, or place of
delights. So he compares the soil, vvherin Hobbinoll made his abode, to that
earthly Paradise, in scripture called Eden; wherein Adam in his first creation
was placed. Which of the most learned is thought to be in Mesopotamia, the
most ferule and pleasant country in the world (as may appear by Diodorus
Syculus description of it, in the history of Alexanders conquest thereof.)
Lying between the two famous Ryuers (which are said in scripture to flow out
of Paradise) Tygris and Euphrates, whereof it is so denominate.

Forsake the soil) This is no poetical fiction, but vnseynedly spoken of the
Poet self, who for special occasion of private affairs (as I have been
partly of himself informed) and for his more preferment removing out of the
Northparts came into the South, as Hobbinoll indeed advised him privately.

Those hills) that is the North country, where he dwelled. Nis) is not.

The Dales) The Southpartes, where he now abides, which though they be
full of hills and vvoodes (for Kent is very hyllye and vvoodye; and therefore
so called: for Kantsh in the Saxons tongue signifies vvoodie) yet in respect
of the Northpartes they be called dales. For indede the North is counted the
higher country.

Night Ravens etc.) by such hateful birds, he means all misfortunes
(Whereof they be tokens) flying every where.

Friendly faeries) the opinion of Faeries and elfes is very old, and yet
sticks very religiously in the minds of some. But to root that rank
opinion of Elfes out of men's hearts, the truth is, that there be no such
things, nor yet the shadows of the things, but only by a sort of bald Friars
and knauish shauelings so feigned; which as in all other things, so in that,
sought to nousell the comen people in ignorounce, least being once acquainted
with the truth of things, they vvoulde in time smell out the untruth of their
packed pelf and Massepenie religion. But the sooth is, that when all Italy
was distraicte into the Factions of the Guelfes and the Gibelins, being two
famous houses in Florence, the name began through their great mischiefs and
many outrages, to be so odious or rather dreadful in the peoples ears, that
if their children at any time were froward and vvanton, they would say to
them that the Guelfe or the Gibeline came. Which words now from them (as
many thing else) be come into our usage, and for Guelfes and Gibelines, we say
Elfes and Goblins. No otherwise then the Frenchmen used to say of that valiant
captain, the very scourge of France, the Lord Thalbot, afterward Earl of
Shrevvsbury; whose noblesse bred such a terror in the hearts of the French,
that often times even great armies were defaicted and put to flight at the only
hearing of his name. In so much that the French women, to affray their
children, would tell them that the Talbot comes.

Many Graces) though there be indeed but three Graces or Charites (as before is
said) or at the utmost but four, yet in respect of many gifts of bounty,
there may be said more. And so Musaeus says, that in Heroes either eye there
satte a hundred graces. And by that authority, this same Poet in his
Pageaunts says. An hundred Graces on her eyeledde satte, etc.

Haydeguies) A country dance or rovvnd. The conceit is, that the Graces and
Nymphs do dance unto the Muses, and Pan his music all night by Moonelight.
To signify the pleasantness of the soil.

Peeres] Equalles and fellow shepherds. Queneapples unripe) imitating Virgils
verse.

Ipse ego cana legam tenera lanugine mala. Neighbor groves) a strange phrase
in English, but word for word expressing the Latin vicina nemora.

Spring) not of water, but of young trees springing. Calliope) afforesayde.
This staff is is full of very poetical invention. Tamburines) an old kind of
instrument, which of some is supposed to be the Clarion.

Pan with Phoebus) the tale is well known, how that Pan and Apollo striving
for excellency in music, chose Midas for their judge. Who being corrupted
with partial affection, gave the victory to Pan undeserved: for which
Phoebus set a pair of Asses ears upon his head etc.

Tityrus) That by Tityrus is meant Chaucer, has been already sufficiently
said, and by this more plain appears, that he says, he told merye tales.
Such as be his Canterbury tales. whom he calls the God of Poets for his
excellency, so as Tullie calls Lentulus, Deum vitae suae. s the God of his
life.

To make) to versifie. O vvhy] A pretye Epanorthosis or correction.

Discurtesie) he means the falseness of his lover Rosalinde, who forsaking
him, had chosen another.

Point of worthy wite] the prick of deserved blame.

Menalcas] the name of a shephearde in Virgile; but here is meant a person
unknown and secret, against whom he often bitterly inuayeth.

vndersonge] vndermynde and deceive by false suggestion.

Emblem. You remember, that in the first Aeglogue, Colins Poesy was Anchora
speme: for that as then there was hope of favor to be found in time. But
now being clean forlorn and rejected of her, as whose hope, that was, is
clean extinguished and turned into despeyre, he renounceth all comfort and
hope of goodness to come. which is all the meaning of this Emblem.

Julye.


Aegloga septima.
ARGUMENT.
THis Aeglogue is made in the honor and commendation of good shepebeardes, and
to the shame and disprayse of proud and ambitious Pastors. Such as Morrell is
here imagined to be.

Thomalin. Morrell.
IS not thilke same a goteheard proud, that sittes on yonder bancke,
Whose straying heard them self does shrowde among the bushes rank?

Morrell. What ho, thou iollye shepherds swayne, come up the hill to me:
Better is, then the lowly plain, als for thy flock, and thee.

Thomalin. Ah God shield, man, that I should clime, and learn to look alofte,
This reed is ryfe, that oftentime Great clymbers fall vnsoft.
In humble dales is footing fast, the trod is not so trickle:
And though one fall through heedlesse have, yet is his miss not mickle.
And now the Son has reared up his fyriefooted teme,
Making his way between the Cup, and golden Diadem:
The rampant Lion hunts he fast, with Dog of noisome breath,
Whose balefull barking bringes in have pyne, plagues, and dreery death.
Against his cruel scortching heat where have thou couerture?
The wastefull hylls unto his threate is a plain ouerture.
But if thee lust, to holden chat with seely shepherds swayne,
Come down, and learn the little what, that Thomalin can said.

Morrell. Syker, thous but a laesie loord, and rekes much of thy swinck,
That with fond terms, and weetlesse words to blere mine eyes do think.
In evil hour thou hentest in hond thus holy hills to blame,
For sacred unto saints they stond, and of them han their name.
S. Michels mount who does not know, that wards the Western cost?
And of S. Brigets bower. I trow, all Kent can rightly boaste:
And they that con of Muses skill, said most what, that they dwell
(As goteheards wont) upon a hill, beside a learned well.
And wonned not the great God Pan, upon mount Oliuet:
Feeding the blessed flock of Dan, which did himself beget?

Thomalin. O blessed sheep, O shepherd great, that bought his flock so dear,
And them did save with bloody sweat from Wolves, that would them tear.

Morrel. Beside, as holy fathers said, there is a hyllye place,
Where Titan ryseth from the main, to run his daily race.
Upon whose top the stars been stayed, and all the sky does lean,
There is the cave, where Phebe laid, the shepherd long to dream.
Whilome there used shepherds all to feed their flocks at will,
Till by his folly one did fall, that all the rest did spill.
And since shepheardes been foresaid from places of delight:
For thy I ween thou be affrayd, to clune this hills height.
Of Synah can I tell thee more, And of our Ladies bower:
But little needs to strew my store, suffice this hill of our.
Here han the holy Faunes resourse, and Syluanes haunten rathe.
Here has the salt Medway his sourse, wherein the Nymphs do bathe.
The salt Medway, that trickling stremis adowne the dales of Kent:
Till with his elder brother Themis His brackish waves be meynt.
Here grows Melampode every where, and Teribinth good for Gotes:
The one, my madding kiddes to smere, the next, to heal their throtes.
Hereto, the hills been nigher heaven, and thence the passage ethe.
As well can prove the piercing leuin, that seeldome falls bynethe.

Thomalin. Syker thou speaks like a lewd lorrell, of Heaven to demen so:
How be I am but rude and borrell, yet nearer ways I know.
To Kerke the narre, from God more far, has been an old said fawe.
And he that strives to touch the stars, often stombles at a straw,
Alsoone may shepherd clymbe to sky, that leads in lowly dales,
As Goteherd proud that sitting hye, upon the Moimtaine sails.
My seely sheep like well below, they need not Melampode:
For they been hale enough, I trow, and liken their abode,
But if they with thy Gotes should yede, they soon might be corrupted:
Or like not of the frowie feed, or with the weeds be glutted.
The hylls, where dwelled holy saints, I reverence and adore:
Not for themself, but for the sayncts, Which han be dead of yore.
And now they been to heaven fore went, their good is with them go:
Their sample only to us lent, That als we might do so.
Shepherds they weren of the best, and lived in lowlye leas:
And since their souls been now at rest, why done we them disease?
Such one he was, (as I have heard old Algrind often said)
That whilome was the first shepherd, and lived with little gain:
As meek he was, as meek might be, simple, as simple sheep,
Humble, and like in each degree the flock, which he did keep.
Often he used of his keep a sacrifice to bring,
Now with a Kidde, now with a sheep the Altars hallowing.
So lowted he unto his Lord, such favor couth he find,
That since never was abhord, the simple shepherds kind.
And such I ween the brethren were, that came from Canaan:
The brethren twelve, that kept yfere the flocks of mighty Pan.
But nothing such thilk shephearde was, whom Ida hill did bear,
That left his flock, to fetch a less, whose love he bought to dear:
For he was proud, that ill was paid, (no such might shepherds be)
And with lewd lust was ouerlayd: tway things done ill agree:
But shepherd might be meek and mylde, well eyed, as Argus was,
With fleshly follyes vndcfyled, and stout as steed of brass.
Sike one (said Algrin) Moses was, that saw his makers face,
His face more clear, then Crystal glass, and spoke to him in place.
This had a brother, (his name I knew) the first of all his cote,
A shepherd true, yet not so true, as he that erst I hot.
Whilome all these were low, and lief, and loved their flocks to feed,
They never strouen to be chief, and simple was their weed.
But now (thanked be God therefore) the world is well amend,
Their weeds been not so nighly wore, such simplesse might them shend:
They been yclad in purple and pall, so has their god them blist,
They reign and rulen over all, and lord it, as they list:
Ygyrt with belts of glitterand gold. (might they good sheepeheards been)
Their Pan their sheep to them has sold, I say as some have seen.
For Palinode (if thou him ken) yode late on Pilgrimage
To Rome, (if such be Rome) and then he saw thilke misusage.
For shepeheards (said he) there done lead, as Lords done other where,
Their sheep han crustes, and they the bread: the chippes, and they the chere:
They han the fleece, and eke the flesh, (O seely sheep the while)
The corn is theyrs, let other thresh, their hands they may not file.
They han great stores, and thriftye stocks, great friends and feeble foes:
What need hem caren for their flocks? their boys can look to those.
These wisards weltre in welths waves, pampred in pleasures deep,
They han fat kernes, and leany knaves, their fasting flocks to keep.
Sike mister men been all misgone, they heapen hills of wrath:
Sike syrlye shepherds han we none, they keepen all the path.

Morrell. Here is a great deal of good matter, lost for lack of telling,
Now sicker I see, thou do but clatter: harm may come of melling.
Thou medlest more, then shall have thank, to wyten shepherds wealth:
When folk been fat, and riches rank, it is a sign of health.
But say me, what is Algrin he, that is so often bynempt.

Thomalin. He is a shepherd great in gree. but has been long ypent.
One day he sat upon a hill, (as now thou would me:
But I am taught by Algrins ill, to love the low degree.)
For sitting so with bared scalpe, An Eagle sored hye,
That weening his white head was chalk, a shell fish down let fly:
She weend the shell fish to have broake, but therewith bruzd his brain,
So now astonished with the stroke, he lies in lingering pain.

Morrell. Ah good Algrin, his hap was ill, but shall be better in time.
Now farewell shepherd, since this hill thou have such doubt to climb.

Palinodes Emblem.
In medio virtus.
Morrells Emblem.
In summo foelicitas.
GLOSS.
A Goteheard] By Gotes in scripture be represented the wicked and reprobate,
whose pastor also must needs be such.

Banck) is the seat of honor. Straying heard] which wander out of the way of
truth.

Als] for also. Clymbe] spoken of Ambition. Great clymbers] according to
Seneneca his verse, Decidunt celsa grauiore lapsus. Mickle] much.

The sonne] A reason, why he refuses to dwell on Mountains, because there is
no shelter against the scortching sun. according to the time of the year,
which is the vvhotest month of all.

The Cupp and Diademe] Be two signs in the Firmament, through which the
son makes his course in the month of July.

Lion] This is Poetically spoken, as if the Sun did hunt a Lion with one
Dog. The meaning whereof is, that in July the son is in Leo At which time
the Dog star, which is called Syrius or Canicula reigns, with
immoderate heat causing Pestilence, drougth, and many diseases.

Ouerture] an open place. The word is borrowed of the French, and used in
good writers

To holden chatt) to talk and prate.

A loorde] was wont among the old Britons to signify a Lord. And therefore
the Danes, that long time usurped their Tyranny here in Brytanie, were called
for more dread and dignity, Lurdanes. s Lord Danes. At which time it is said,
that the insolency and pride of that nation was so outrageous in this Realm,
that if it fortuned a Briton to be going over a bridge, and savve the Dane set
foot upon the same, he must return back, till the Dane were clean over, or
else abide the price of his displeasure, which was no less, then present
death. But being afterward expelled that name of Lurdane became so odious
unto the people, whom they had long oppressed, that even at this day they use
for more reproach, to call the Quartane ague the Fever Lurdane.

Recks much of thy swinck) counts much of thy pains. VVeetelesse] not
understood.

S. Michels mount) is a promontorie in the West part of England.

A hill) Parnassus afforesayd. Pan Christ. Dan) One trybe is put for the whole
nation per Synecdochen

Where Titan) the Son. Which story is to be read in Diodorus Syc. of the
hyl Ida; from whence he says, all night time is to be seen a mighty fire,
as if the sky burned, which tovvard morning begins to gather into a rownd
form, and thereof ryseth the son, whom the Poets call Titan:

The Shepheard] is Endymion, whom the Poets feign, to have been so beloved of
Phoebe. s the Moon, that he was by her kept a sleep in a cave by the space
of xxx. years, for to enjoy his company.

There) that is in Paradise, where through error of shepherds understanding,
he says, that all shepherds did use to feed their flocks, till one, (that is
Adam by his follye and disobedience, made all the rest of his offspring be
debarred and shutoe out from thence.

Synah) a hill in Arabia, where God appeared.

Our Ladies bovvre) a place of pleasure so called.

Faunes or Syluanes] be of Poets feigned to be Gods of the Wood.

Medway] the name of a River in Kent, which running by Rochester, meets with
Thames; whom he calls his elder brother, borh because he is greater, and also
falls sooner into the Sea.

Meynt] mingled. Melampode and Terebinth] be herbs good to cure diseased
Gotes. of the one speaks Mantuane, and of the other Theocritus.

Nigher heauen] Note the shepherds simpleness, which supposes that from the
hylls is nearer way to heaven.

Leuin] Lightning; which he takes for an argument, to prove the nighnes to
heaven, because the lightning does comenly light on high mountains, according
to the saying of the Poet. Feriuntque summos fulmina montes.

Lorrell] A losell. A borrell.] a plain fellow. Narre] nearer.

Hale] for hole. Yede] go. Frovvye] mustye or mossie.

Of yore] long ago. Forevvente] gone before.

The first shepheard] was Abell the righteous, who (as scripture says) bent
his mind to keeping of sheep, as did his brother Cain to tilling the grownde.

His keepe] his charge s his flock. Lovvted] did honor and reverence.

The brethren] the twelve sons of Jacob, which were shepemaisters, and
lived one lie thereupon.

Whom Ida] Paris, which being the son of Priamus king of Troy, for his
mother Hecubas dream, which being with child of him, dreamed she brought
forth a firebrand, that set all the tower of Ilium on fire, was cast forth on
the hill Ida; where being fostered of shepherds, he eke in time be came a
shepherd, and lastly came to knowledge of his parentage.

A lasse] Helena the wife of Menelaus king of Lacedemonia, was by Venus for
the golden Aple to her given, then promised to Paris, who thereupon with a
sort of lustye Troyanes, stole her out of Lacedemonia, and kept her in Troy.
which was the cause of the ten years war in Troy, and the most famous
city of all Asia most lamentably sacked and defaced.

Argus] was of the Poets devised to be full of eyes, and therefore to him was
committed the keeping of the trans formed Covv Io: So called because that in
the print of a Covves foot, there is figured an I in the midst of an O.

His name) he means Aaron: whose name for more Decorum, the shephearde says
he has forgot, lest his remembrance and skill in antiquities of holy writ
should seem to exceed the mean nesse of the Person.

Not so true) for Aaron in the absence of Moses started aside, and committed
Idolatry.

In purple] Spoken of the Popes and Cardinals, which use such tyrannical
colors and pompous paynting. Belts) Girdles.

Glitterand) Glittering. a Participle used sometime in Chaucer, but altogether
in I. Goore Their Pan) that is the Pope, whom they count their God and
greatest shepherd.

Palinode) A shephearde, of whose report he seems to speak all this.

VVisards) great learned heads. VVelter) wallovve. Kerne) a Churl or Farmer.

Sike mister men) such kind of men. Surly) stately and provvde Melling)
meddling.

Bett) better. Bynempte) named. Gree) for degree.

Algrin the name of a shepherd afforesayde, whose myshap he alludeth to the
chance, that happened to the Poet Aeschylus, that was brayned with a
shellfishe.

Emblem. By this poesye Thomalin confirms that, which in his former speech
by sondrye reasons he had proved. for being both himself sequestered from all
ambition and also abhorring it in others of his cote, he takes occasion to
praise the mean and lowly state, as that wherein is safety without fear,
and quiet without dan ger, according to the saying of old Philosophers, that
virtue dwells in the midst, being environed with two contrary vices:
vvhereto Morrell replieth with continuance of the same Philosophers opinion,
that albeit all bountye dwells in mediocritie, yet perfect felicitye
dwells in supremacy. for they say, and most true it is, that happiness is
placed in the highest degree, so as if any thing be higher or better, then that
straight way cease to be perfect happiness. Much like to that, which once I
heard alleged in defense of humilitye out of a great doctor, Suorum Christus
humillimus: which saying a gentle man in the company taking at the rebownd,
beat back again with like saying of another Doctoure, as he said. Suorum
deus allissimus.

August.


Aegloga octaua.
ARGUMENT.
IN this Aeglogue is setforth a delectable controversy, made in imitation of
that in Theocritus: whereto also Virgile fashioned his third and seventh
Aeglogue. They choose for vmpere of their strife, Cuddie a neatheards boy, who
having ended their cause, recites also himself a proper song, whereof Colin
he says was Author.

VVillye. Perigot. Cuddie.
TEll me Perigot, what shall be the game,
Wherefore with mine thou dare thy music match?
Or been thy Bagpypes run far out of frame?
Or has the Crampe thy joints benoind with ache?

Perigot. Ah Willye, when the heart is ill assayde,
How can Bagpipe, or joints be well apayd?

VVillye. What the foul evil has thee so bestadde?
Whilom thou was peregall to the best,
And wont to make the jolly shepeheards glad
With pyping and dancing, did pass the rest.

Perigot. Ah Willye now I have learnd a new dance:
My old music mard by a new mischaunce.

VVillye. Mischief might to that new mischaunce befall,
That so has raft us of our meriment.
But reed me, what pain does thee so appall?
Or love thou, or been thy younglings (...)?

Perigot. Love has misled both my younglings, and me:
I pyne for pain, and they my pain to see,

VVillye. Perdie and wellawaye: isl may they thrive:
Never knew I lovers sheep in good plight.
But and if in rymes with me thou dare strive,
Such fond fantsies shall soon be put to flight.

Perigot. That shall I do, though mochell worse I fared:
Never shall be said that Perigot was dared.

VVillye. Then lo Perigot the Pledge, which I plight:
A mazer ywrought of the Maple war:
Wherein is enchased many a fair sight
Of Beres and Tygres, that maken sters war:
And over them spread a goodly wild vine,
Entrailed with a wanton Yuie twine.
Thereby is a Lamb in the Wolves jaws:
But see, how fast renneth the shepherd swayne,
To save the innocent from the be astes paws:
And here with his shepehooke has him slain.
Tell me, such a cup have thou ever seen?
Well might it beseme any harvest Queen.

Perigot. Thereto will I pawn yonder spotted Lamb,
Of all my flock there nis sike another:
For I brought him up without the Dambe.
But Colin Clout rafte me of his brother,
That he purchased of me in the plain field:
Sore against my will was I forced to yield.

VVillye. Sicker make like account of his brother.
But who shall judge the wager won or lost?

Perigot. That shall yonder heardgrome, and none other,
Which over the pousse hetherward does post.

VVillye. But for the Sunnebeame so sore does us beat,
Were not better, to shun the scortching heat?

Perigot. Well agreed Willy: then sit thee down swayne:
Sike a song never heardest thou, but Colin sing.

Cuddie. Gynne, when ye list, ye jolly shepherds twain:
Sike a judge, as Cuddie, were for a king.

Perigot. IT fell upon a holly eve,

Willye. hey ho hollidaye,

Per. When holly fathers wont to shrieue:

Will. now gynneth this roundelay.

Per. Sitting upon a hill so hye,

Will. hey ho the high hill,

Per. The while my flock did feed thereby,

Will. the while the shepherd self did spill:

Per. I saw the bouncing Bellibone,

Will. hey ho Bonibell,

Per. Tripping over the dale alone,

Will. she can trippe it very well:

Per. Well decked in a frocke of gray,

Will. hey ho gray is greet,

Per. And in a Kirtle of green say,

Will. the green is for maidens meet:

Per. A chapelet on her head she wore,

Will. hey ho chapelet,

Per. Of sweet Violets therein was store,

Will. she sweeter then the Violet.

Per. My sheep did leave their wonted food,

Will. hey ho seely sheep,

Per. And gazd on her, as they were wood,

Will. Wood as he, that did them keep.

Per. As the bonilasse passed bye,

Will. hey ho bonilasse,

Per. She roude at me with glauncing eye,

Will. as clear as the crystal glass:

Per. All as the Sunnye beam so bright,

Will. hey ho the Sun beam,

Per. Glaunceth from Phoebus face forthright,

Will. so love into my heart did stream:

Per. Or as the thonder cleaues the clouds,

Will. hey ho the Thonder,

Per. Wherein the lightsome leuin shroudes,

Will. so cleaues thy soul a sonder:

Per. Or as Dame Cynthias silver raye

Will. hey ho the Moonelight,

Per. Upon the glyttering wave does play:

Will. such play is a pitteous plight.

Per. The glaunce into my heart did glide,

Will. hey ho the glyder,

Per. Therewith my soul was sharply gryde,

Will. such wounds soon wexen wider.

Per. Hasting to raunch the arrow cut,

Will. hey ho Perigot,

Per. I left the head in my heart root:

Will. it was a desperate shot.

Per. There it ranckleth ay more and more,

Will. hey ho the arrowe,

Per. Ne can I find salve for my sore:

Will. love is a careless sorrow.

Per. And though my bale with death I bought.

Will. hey ho heavy cheer,

Per. Yet should thilk less not from my thought:

Will. so you may buy gold to dear.

Per. But whether in paynefull love I pyne,

Will. hey ho pinching pain,

Per. Or thrive in wealth, she shall be mine.

Will. but if thou can her obtain.

Per. And if for graceless grief I dye,

Will. hey ho graceless grief,

Per. Witness, she slew me with her eye:

Will. let thy follye be the priefe.

Per. And you, that saw it, simple sheep,

Will. hey ho the fair flock,

Per. For priefe thereof, my death shall weep,

Will. and moan with many a mock.

Per. So learnd I love on a hollye eve,

Will. hey ho holidaye,

Per. That ever since my heart did grieve.

Will. now ends our roundelay.

Cuddye, Sicker sike a roundle never heard I none.
Little lacks Perigot of the best.
And Willye is not greatly ouergone,
So weren his vndersongs well addressed.

VVillye. Herdgrome, I fear me, thou have a squint eye:
Areede uprightly, who has the victory?

Cuddie. Faith of my soul, I deem each have gained.
For thy let the Lamb be Willye his own:
And for Perigot so well has him payned,
To hin be the wroughten mazer alone.

Perigot. Perigot is well pleased with the doom:
Ne can Willye wite the witelesse herdgroome.

VVillye. Never dempt more right of beautye I ween,
The shepherd of Ida, that judged beauties Queen.

Cuddie. But tell me shepherds, should it not yshend
Your roundels fresh, to hear a doolefull verse
Of Rosalend (who knows not Rosalend?)
That Colin made, ylke can I you rehearse.

Perigot. Now say it Cuddie, as thou art a ladde:
With merry thing its good to meddle sad.

VVilly. Faith of my soul, thou shall ycrouned be
In Colins stead, if thou this song areede:
For never thing on earth so pleases me,
As him to hear, or matter of his deed,

Cuddie. Then listneth each unto my heavy lay,
And tune your pypes as ruthful, as ye may.
YE wastefull woods bear witness of my woe,
Wherein my plaints did oftentimes resound:
Ye careless byrds are privy to my cries,
Which in your songs were wont to make apart:
Thou pleasant spring have luld me often a sleep,
Whose streams my tricklinge tears did often augment.
Resort of people does my greefs augment,
The walled towns do work my greater woe:
The forest wide is fitter to resound
The hollow Echo of my careful cries,
I hate the house, since thence my love did part.
Whose wayle full want debarres mine eyes from sleep:
Let stremes of tears supply the place of sleep:
Let all that sweet is, void: and all that may augment
My doole, draw near. More meet to wayle my woe,
Been the wild woddes my sorrows to resound,
Then bed, or bower, both which I fill with cries,
When I them see so waist, and find no part
Of pleasure past. Here will I dwell apart
In gastfull grove therefore, till my last sleep
Do close mine eyes: so shall I not augment
With sight of such a change my restless woe:
Help me, ye banefull byrds, whose shrieking sound
Is sign of dreery death, my deadly cries
Most ruthfully to tune. And as my cries
(Which of my woe cannot be wray least part)
You hear all night, when nature craves sleep,
Increase, so let your yrksome yells augment.
Thus all the night in plaints, the day in woe
I vowed have to wayst, till safe and sound
She home return, whose voices silver sound
To cheerful songs can change my cherelesse cries.
Hence with the Nightingale will I take part,
That blessed byrd, that spends her time of sleep
In songs and plaintiue pleas, the more taugment
The memory of his misdeede, that bred her woe:
And you that feel no woe, when as the sound
Of these my nightly cries ye hear apart,
Let break your sounder sleep and pity augment.

Perigot. O Colin, Colin, the shepherds joy,
How I admire each turning of thy verse:
And Cuddie, fresh Cuddie the liefest boy,
How dolefully his doole thou did rehearse.

Cuddie. Then blow your pypes shepherds, til you be at home:
The night nigheth fast, yts time to be gone.

Perigot his Emblem.
Vincenti gloria victi.
Willyes Emblem.
Vinto non vitto.
Cuddies Emblem.
Felice chj puo.
GLOSS
Bestadde) disposed, ordered. Peregall) equal. VVhilome) once. Rafte) bereft,
deprived. Misvvent) gone a straye. Ill may) according to Virgile. Infelix o
semper ouis pecus.

A mazer) So also do Theocritus and Virgile feign pledges of their strife.

Enchased) engraven. Such pretty descriptions every where uses Theocritus, to
bring in his Idyllia. For which special cause indede he by that name terms
his Aeglogues: for Idyllion in Greek signifies the shape or picture of any
thing, vvherof his book is full. And not, as I have heard some fondly guosse,
that they be called not Idyllia, but Haedilia, of the Goteheards in them.

Entrailed) wrought between.

Harvest Queen) The manner of country folk in harvest time. Pousse.) Pease.

It fell upon) Perigot makes his song in praise of his love, to vvho^ VVilly
answers every under verse. By Perigot who is meant, I can not uprightly say:
but if it be, who is supposed, his love deserves no less praise, then he
gives her.

Greet) weeping and complaint. Chaplet) a kind of Garlond like a crown.

Leven) Lightning. Cynthia) was said to be the Moon. Gryde) perced.

But if) not unless. Squint eye) partial judgment. Each have) so says
Virgile.

Et vitula tu dignus, et hic etc.

So by enterchaunge of gyfts Cuddie pleases both parts.

Doom) judgment. Dempt) fordeemed, judged. VVite the vvitelesse) blame the
blameless. The shepherd of Ida) was said to be Paris.

Beauties Queen) Venus, to whom Paris adjudged the goldden Apple, as the
price of her beauty.

Emblem. The meaning hereof is very ambiguous: for Perigot by his poesy
claming the conquest, and VVillye not yielding, Cuddie the arbiter of their
cause, and Patron of his own, seems to challenge it, as his dew, saying, that
he, is happy which can, so abruptly ending but he means either him, that
can vvin the best, or moderate him self being best, and leave of with the
best.

September.


Aegloga Nona.
ARGUMENT.
HErein Diggon Dauie is devised to be a shepherd, that in hope of more gain,
drove his sheep into a far country. The abuses whereof, and loose living of
Popish prelates, by occasion of Hobbinols deman^d, he discourses at large.

Hobbinol. Diggon Dauie.
DIggon Dauie, I bid her god day:
Or Diggon her is, or I missaye.

Diggon. Her was her, while it was day light,
But now her is a most wretched wight.
For day, that was, is wightly past,
And now at erst the dirke night does have.

Hobbinoll. Diggon areede, who has thee so dight?
Never I wist thee in so poor a plight.
Where is the fair flock, thou was wont to lead?
Or been they chaffred? or at mischief dead?

Diggon. Ah for love of that, is to thee most leefe;
Hobbinol, I pray thee gall not my old grief:
Sike question ripeth up cause of new woe,
For one opened mote unfold many more.

Hobbinoll. Nay, but sorrow close shrouded in heart
I know, to keep, is a burdenous smart.
Each thing imparted is more eath to bear:
When the rain is fallen, the clouds wexen clear.
And now sithence I saw thy head last,
Thrice three Moons been fully spent and past:
Since when thou have measured much grownd,
And wandered I wene about the world round,
So as thou can many things relate:
But tell me first of thy flocks astate.

Diggon. My sheep been wasted, (wae is me therefore)
The jolly shepherd that was of yore,
Is now nor iollye, nor shepehearde more.
In foreign costs, men said, was plentye:
And so there is, but all of miserye.
I dempt there much to have eeked my store,
But such eeking has made my hartsore.
In tho countries, whereas I have been,
No being for those, that truly mean,
But for such, as of guile maken gain,
No such country, as there to remain.
They setten to sale their shops of shame,
And maken a Mart of their good name.
The shepherds there robben one another,
And layen baytes to beguile her brother.
Or they will buy bis sheep out of the cote,
Or they will caruen the shepherds throat.
The shepherds swayne you cannot well ken,
But it be by his pride, from other men:
They looken big as Bulls, that been bate,
And bearen the cragge so stiff and so state,
As cock on his dunghill, crowing cranck.

Hobbinoll. Diggon, I am so stiff, and so stanck,
That uneath may I stand any more:
And now the Western wind blows sore,
That now is in his chief souereigntee,
Beating the withered leaf from the tree.
Sit we down here under the hill:
Tho may we talk, and tellen our flll,
And make a mock at the blustering blast.
Now say on Diggon, what ever thou have.

Diggon. Hobbin, ah hobbin, I curse the stounde,
That ever I cast to have lorne this ground.
Wel-away the while I was so fond,
To leave the good, that I had in hand,
In hope of better, that was uncouth:
So lost the Dog the flesh in his mouth.
My seely sheep (ah seely sheep)
That here by there I whilome vsd to keep,
All were they lustye, as thou did see,
Been all sterued with pyne and penuree.
Hardly my self escaped thilke pain,
Driven for need to come home again.

Hobbinoll, Ah fon, now by thy loss art taught,
That seeldome change the better brought.
Content who lives with tried state,
Need fear no change of frowning fate:
But who will seek for unknown gain,
Often lives by loss, and leaves with pain.

Diggon. I wot ne Hobbin how I was bewitched
With vain desire, and hope to be enricht.
But sicker so it is, as the bright star
Seems ay greater, when it is sarre:
I thought the s^yle would have made me rich:
But now I wot, it is nothing sich.
For either the shepeheards been idle and still,
And led of their sheep, what way they will:
Or they been false, and full of couetise,
And casten to compass many wrong emprise.
But the more been freight with fraud and spite,
Ne in good nor goodness taken delight:
But kindle coals of contech and ire,
Wherewith they set all the world on fire:
Which when they thinken again to quench
With holy water, they done hem all drench.
They say they con to heaven the high way,
But by my soul I dare vndersaye,
They never set foot in that same troade,
But balk the right way, and strayen abroad.
They boast they han the devil at command:
But ask hem therefore, what they han paund.
Marry that great Pan bought with dear borrow,
To quite it from the black bower of sorrow.
But they han sold thilk same long ago:
For thy woulden draw with hem many more.
But let hem gange alone a Gods name:
As they han brewed, so let hem bear blame.

Hobbinoll. Diggon, I pray thee speak not so dirke.
Such myster saying me seems to mirke.

Diggon. Then plainly to speak of shepherds most what,
Badde is the best (this english is flatt.)
Their ill hauiour garres men missay,
Both of their doctrine, and of their faye.
They said the world is much war then it wont,
All for her shepherds been beastly and blont.
Other said, but how truly I note,
All for they holden shame of their cote.
Some stick not to say, (whote cole on her tongue)
That sike mischief graseth hem among,
All for they casten too much of worlds care,
To deck her Dame, and enrich her heir:
For such encheason, If you go nigh,
Few chymneis reeking you shall espy:
The fat Ox, that wont ligge in the stal,
Is now fast stalled in her crumenall.
Thus chatten the people in their steads,
Ylike as a Monster of many heads.
But they that shooten nearest the prick,
Said, other the fat from their beards done lick.
For big Bulls of Basan brace hem about,
That with their horns butten the more stout:
But the lean souls treaden under foot.
And to seek redress might little boot:
For liker been they to pluck away more,
Then ought of the gotten good to restore.
For they been like foul wagmoires ouergrast,
That if thy galage once sticks fast,
The more to wind it out thon do swinck,
Thou might ay deeper and deeper sinck.
Yet better leave of with a little loss,
Then by much wrestling to leese the gross.

Hobbinoll. Now Diggon, I see thou speak to plain:
Better it were, a little to feyne,
And cleanly cover, that cannot be cured.
Such il, as is forced, might needs be endured
But of sike pastoures how done the flocks creep?

Diggon. Sike as the shepherds, sike been her sheep,
For they nill listen to the shepherds voice,
But if he call hem at their good choice,
They wander at will, and stray at pleasure,
And to their foldes yield at their own leisure.
But they had be better come at their call:
For many han into mischief fall,
And been of ravenous Wolves yrent,
All for they nould be buxome and bent.

Hobbinoll. Fie on thee Diggon, and all thy foul leasing,
Well is known that since the Saxon king,
Never was Woolfe seen many nor some,
Nor in all Kent, nor in Chrisiendome:
But the fewer Woolues (the soth to said,)
The more been the Foxes that here remain.

Diggon. Yes, but they gang in more secret wise,
And with sheep clothing done hem disguise,
They walk not widely as they were wont
For fear of raungers, and the great hunt:
But privily prolling two and froe,
Enaunter they might be inly know.

Hobbinol. Or prive or pert if any been,
We han great Bandogs will tear their skin.

Diggon. Indeed thy ball is a bold big curre,
And could make a jolly hole in thoyr furre.
But not good Dogs hem needs to chase,
But heedy shepherds to difcerne their face.
For all their craft is in their countenance,
The been so grave and full of mayntenaunce.
But shall I tell thee what my self know,
Chanced to Roffynn not long ygoe?

Hobbinol. Say it out Diggon, what ever it hight,
For not but well might him betight.
He is so meek, wise, and merciable,
And with his word his work is conuenable.
Colin clout I wene be his self boy,
(Ah for Colin he whilome my joy)
Shepherds sich, God might us many send,
That done so carefully their flocks tend.

Diggon. Thilk same shepherd might I well mark:
He has a Dog to byte or to bark,
Never had shepherd so kene a kurre,
That waketh, and if but a lease stir.
Whilome there wonned a wicked Wolf,
That with many a Lamb had glutted his gulf.
And ever at night wont to repair
Unto the flock, when the Welkin shone fair,
Ycladde in clothing of seely sheep,
When the good old man used to sleep.
Tho at midnight he would bark and ball,
(For he had eft learned a curres call.)
As if a Woolfe were among the sheep.
With that the shepherd would break his sleep,
And send out Louder (for so his dog hot)
To raunge the fields with wide open throat.
Tho when as Louder was far away.
This Woluish sheep would catchen his pray,
A Lamb, or a Rid, or a weanell wast:
With that to the wood would he speed him fast.
Long time he used this slippery pranck,
Ere Roffy could for his labor him thanck
At end the shepherd his practice spyed,
(For Roffy is wise, and as Argus eyed)
And when at even he came to the flock,
Fast in their folds he did them lock,
And took out the Woolfe in his counterfect cote,
And let out the sheep blood at his throat.

Diggon. Marry Diggon, what should him affraye,
To take his own where ever it lay?
For had his wesand been a little widder,
He would have devoured both hidder and shidder.

Diggon. Mischiese light on him, and Gods great curse,
Too good for him had been a great deal worse:
For it was a perilous beast above all,
And eke had he cond the shepherds call.
And often in the night came to the shepecote,
And called Louder, with a hollow throat,
As if it the old man self had vene.
The dog his masters voice did it ween,
Yet half in doubt, he opened the door,
And ran out, as he was wont of yore.
No sooner was out, but swifter then thought,
Fast by the vyde the Wolf louder caught:
And had not Roffy run to the steven,
Louder had be slain thilke same even.

Hobbinoll. God shield man, he should so ill have thrive,
All for he did his deuoyr beliue.
If sike vene Wolves, as thou have told,
How might we Diggon, hem be-hold.

Diggon. How, but with heed and watch fullness,
For stallen hem of their wiliness?
For thy with shepherd sittes not play,
Or sleep, as some done, all the long day:
But ever liggen in watch and ward,
From soddein force their flocks for to guard.

Hobbinoll. Ah Diggon, thilke same rule were too straight,
All the cold season to wach and wait.
We been of flesh, men as other be.
Why should we be bound to such miseree?
What ever thing lackech chaungeable rest,
Might needs decay, when it is at best.

Diggon. Ah but Hobbinol, all this long tale,
Naught eases the care, that does me forhaile.
What shall I do? what way shall I wend,
My piteous plight and loss to amend?
Ah good Hobbinol, might I thee pray,
Of aid or counsel in my decay.

Hobbinoll. Now by my soul Diggon, I lament
The hapless mischief, that has thee hent,
Nethelesse thou see my lowly sail,
That froward fortune does ever avail.
But were Hobbinoll, as God might please,
Diggon should soon find favor and ease.
But if to my cotage thou will resort,
So as I can: I will thee comfort:
There may thou ligge in a vetchy bed,
Till fayrer Fortune show forth his head.

Diggon. Ah Hobbinol, God might it thee requite.
Diggon on few such friends did ever lite.

Diggons Emblem.
Jnopem me copia fecit.
GLOSS.
The Dialecte and phrase of speech in this Dialogue, seems somewhat to
differ from the comen. The cause whereof is supposed to be, by occasion of the
party herein meant, who being very friend to the Author hereof, had been long
in foreign countries, and there seen many disorders, which he here
recounteth to Hobbinoll.

Bid her) Bid good morrow. For to bid, is to pray, whereof comes
beads for prayers, and so they say, To bid his beads. s to say his prayers.

VVightly) quicklye, or suddenly. Chaffred) sold. Dead at mischiese) an
unusual speech, but much usurped of Lidgate, and sometime of Chaucer.

Leefe) dear. Ethe) easy. These three moons) nine months. Measured) for
traueled.

VVae) vvoe Northernly. Eeked) increased. Caruen) cut. Kenne) know.

Cragge) neck. State) stoutely Stanck) vvearie or fainte.

And now) He applies it to the time of the year, which is in thend of
harvest, which they call the fall of the leaf: at which time the Western
vvynde bears most svvaye.

A mock) Imitating Horace, Debes ludibrium ventis. Lome) left Soote) svvete.

Uncouth) unknown. Hereby there) here and there. As the brighte) Trarslated
out of Mantuane. Emprise) for enterprise. Per Syncopen. Contek) strife.

Trod) path. Marry that) that is, their souls, which by popish Exorcismes
and practices they damme to hell.

Black) hell. Gange) go. Mister) manner. Mirke) obscure. War) worse.

Crumenall) purse. Brace compasse^: Encheson) occasion. Ouergrast) ouergrovve^
with grass. Galage) shoe. The gross) the whole.

Buxome and bent) meek and obedient.

Saxon king) K. Edgare, that reigned here in Brytanye in the year of our
Lord. which king caused all the Wolves, whereof then was store in this
country, by a proper policy to be destroyed. So as never since that time,
there have been Wolves here found, unless they were brought from other
countries. And therefore Hobbinoll rebukes him of untruth, for saying there be
Wolves in England.

Nor in Christendom) This faying seems to be strange and unreasonable: but
indede it was wont to be an old proverb and comen phrase. The original
whereof was, for that most part of England in the reign of king Ethelbert
was christened, Kent only except, which remained long after in mysbeliefe
and unchristened, So that Kent was counted no part of Christendom.

Great hunt) Executing of laws and justice. Enaunter) least that.

Inly) inwardly. afforesayde. Preuely or pert) openly says Chaucer.

Roffy) The name of a shepehearde in Marot his Aeglogue of Robin and the King.
whom he here commends for great care and wise governance of his flock

Colin cloute) Now I think no man doubts but by Colin is ever meante the
Author self. whose especial good friend Hobbinoll says he is, or more
rightly Master Gabriel Haruey: of whose special commendation, asvvell in
Poetrye as Rhetorike and other choice learning, we have lately had a
sufficient trial in diverse his works, but specially in his Musarum
Lachrymae, and his late Gratulationu^ Valdinensium which book in the progress
at Audley in Essex, he dedicated in vvriting to her Majesty. afterward
presenting the same in print unto her Highness at the worshipful Master
Capells in Hertfordshire. Beside other his sundry most rare and very notable
vvritings, partly under unknown Tytles, and partly under counterfayt names, as
his Tyrannomastix, his Ode Natalitia, his Rameidos, and esspecially that part
of Philomusus, his divine Anticosmopolita, and diverse other of like importance.
As also by the names of other shepheardes, he covers the persons of diverse
other his familiar friends and best acquayntaunce.

This tale of Roffy seems to color some particular Action of his. But
what, I certain lie know not. VVonned) haunted. VVelkin) sky. afforesaid.

A VVeanell waste) a vveaned youngling. Hidder and shidder) He and she. Male
and Female. Steven) Noise. Beliue) quickly. What ever) Ouids verse translated.
Quod caret alterna requie, durabile non est.

Forehaile) dravve or distress. Vetchie) of Pease straw.

Emblem. This is the saying of Narcissus in Ovid. For when the foolish boy
by beholding his face in the brook, fell in love with his own likeness:
and not hable to content him self with much lookng thereon, he cried out,
that plentye made him poor. meaning that much gazing had bereft him of sense.
But our Diggon uses it to other purpose, as who that by trial of many vvayes
had found the vvorst, and through great plentye was fallen into great
penury. This poesy I know, to have been much used of the author, and to
such like effect, as first Narcissus spoke it.

October.


Aegloga decima.
ARGUMENT.
IN Cuddie is set out the perfect pattern of a Poet, whishe finding no
maintenance of his state and studies, complayneth of the contempt of Poetry,
and the causes thereof: Specially having been in all ages, and even amongst the
most barbarous always of singular accounpt and honor, and being indede so
worthy and commendable an art: or rather no art, but a divine gift and
heavenly instinct not to be gotten by labor and learning, but adorned with
both: and poured into the wit by a certain (...) and celestial inspiration,
as the Author hereof else where at large discourses, in his book called the
English Poet, which book being lately come to my hands, I mind also by Gods
grace upon further aduisement to publish.

Pierce. Cuddie.
CVddie, for shame hold up thy heavy head,
And let us cast with what delight to chase:
And weary this long lingering Phoebus race.
Whilome thou wont the shepherds laddes to lead,
In rymes, in ridles, and in bydding base:
Now they in thee, and thou in sleep art dead?

Cuddye. Piers, I have pyped erst so long with pain,
That all mine Oten reeds been rent and wore:
And my poor Muse has spent her spared store,
Yet little good has got, and much less gavne.
Such pleasaunce makes the Grasshopper so poor,
And ligge so laid, when Winter does her strain:
The dapper ditties, that I wont devise,
To feed youths fancy, and the flocking fry,
Delighten much: what I the bett for thy?
They han the pleasure, I a sclender prise.
I beat the bush, the byrds to them do fly:
What good there of to Cuddie can arise?

Pires. Cuddie, the praise is better, then the price,
The glory eke much greater then the gain:
O what an honor is it, to restrain
The lust of lawless youth with good advice:
Or prick them forth with pleasaunce of thy vain,
Whereto thou list their trained wills entice.
Soon as thou gynst to set thy notes in frame,
O how the rural routes to thee do cleave:
Seems thou do their soul of sense bereave,
All as the shepherd, that did fetch his dame
From Plutoes balefull bower withouten leave:
His musicks might the hellish hound did tame.

Cuddie. So praysen babes the Peacoks spotted train,
And wondren at bright Argus blazing eye:
But who rewards him ere the more for thy?
Or feeds him once the fuller by a grain?
Sike praise is smoke, that sheddeth in the sky,
Sike words been wynd, and wasten soon in vain.

Piers. Abandon then the base and viler clown,
Lift up thy self out of the lowly dust:
And sing of bloody Mars, of wars, of giusts,
Turn thee to those, that weld the awful crown.
To doubted Knights, whose woundlesse armor rusts,
And helmes vnbruzed wexen daily brown.
There may thy Muse display her fluttryng wing,
And stretch her self at large from East to West:
Whither thou list in fair Elisa rest,
Or if thee please in bigger notes to sing,
Advance the worthy whom she loves best,
That first the white bear to the stake did bring.
And when the stubborn stroke of stronger stounds,
Has somewhat slackt the tenor of thy string:
Of love and lustihead tho may thou sing,
And carrol loud, and lead the Myllers rownde,
All were Elisa one of thilke same ring.
So might our Cuddies name to Heaven fownde.

Cuddye. Indeed the Romish Tityrus, I hear,
Through his Mecoenas left his Oaten reed,
Whereon he erst had taught his flocks to feed,
And labored lands to yield the timely ear,
And eft did sing of wars and deadly dread,
So as the Heavens did quake his verse to here.
But ah Mecoenas is yclad in claye,
And great Augustus long ygoe is dead:
And all the worthies liggen wrapped in lead,
That matter made for Poets on to play:
For ever, who in derring do were dread,
The lofty verse of hem was loved aye.
But after virtue began for age to stoop,
And mighty manhood brought a bed of ease:
The vaunting Poets found naught worth a pease,
To put in preace among the learned troop.
Tho began the streams of flowing wits to cease,
And sonnebright honor pend in shameful coupe.
And if that any buddes of Poesy,
Yet of the old stock began to shoot again:
Or it men's follies mote be forced to feign,
And roll with rest in rymes of rybaudrye.
Or as it sprung, it wither must again:
Tom Piper makes us better melody.

Piers. O pierlesse Poesye, where is then the place?
If nor in Princes palace thou do sit:
(And yet is Princes palace the most fit)
Ne breast of baser birth does thee embrace.
Then make thee wings of thine aspyring wit,
And, whence thou camst, fly back to heaven apace.

Cuddie. Ah Percy it is all to weak and wanne,
So high to sore, and make so large a flight:
Her peeced pyneons been not so in plight,
For Colin fittes such famous flight to scanne:
He, were he not with love so ill bedight,
Would mount as high, and sing as soote as Swanne.

Pires Ah fon, for love does teach him climb so hie,
And lyftes him up out of the loathsome mire:
Such immortal mirrhor, as he does admire,
Would raise ones mind above the starry sky.
And cause a caytiue courage to aspire,
For lofty love does loath a lowly eye.
All otherwise the state of Poet stands,
For lordly love is such a Tyranne fell:
That where he rules, all power he does expel.
The vaunted verse a vacant head demaundes.
Ne wont with crabbed care the Muses dwell,
Unwisely weaues, that takes two webbes in hand.
Who ever casts to compass weightye prise,
And thinks to throw out thondring words of threate:
Let power in lavish cups and thriftie bitts of meat,
For Bacchus fruit is friend to Phoebus wise.
And when with Wine the brain begins to sweat,
The nombers flow as fast as spring does rise.
Thou kenst not Percie how the ryme should rage.
O if my temples were distaind with wine,
And girt in girlonds of wild Yuie twine,
How I could rear the Muse on stately stage,
And teach her tread aloft in bus-kin fine,
With queint Bellona in her equipage.
But ah my courage cooles ere it be warm,
For thy, content us in this humble shade:
Where no such troublous tides han us assayde,
Here we our slender pipes may safely charm.

Pires. And when my Gates shall han their bellies laid:
Cuddie shall have a Kidde to store his farm.

Cuddies Emblem.
Agitante calescimus illo etc.
GLOSS.
This Aeglogue is made in imitation of Theocritus his xvi. Idilion, wherein
he reproved the Tyranne Hiero of Syracuse for his nigardise toward Poets, in
whom is the power to make men immortal for their good deeds, or shameful for
their naughty life. And the like also is in Mantuane, The style hereof as also
that in Theocritus, is more loftye then the rest, and applied to the heighte of
Poetical vvitte.

Cuddie] I doubt whether by Cuddie be specified the author self, or some
other. For in the eight Aeglogue the same person was brought in, singing a
Cantion of Colins making, as he says. So that some doubt, that the persons be
different.

VVhilome) sometime. Oaten reeds) Auena.

Ligge so laid) lie so saint and vnlustye. Dapper) pretye.

Frye) is a bold Metaphore, forced from the spawning fishes. for the multitude
of young fish be called the frye.

To restrain:) This place seems to conspyre with Plato, who in his first
book de Legibus says, that the first invention of Poetry was of very
virtuous intent. For at what time an infinite number of youth usually came to
their great solemn feasts called Panegyrica, which they used every five
year to hold, some learned man being more hable the^ the rest, for special
gifts of wit and Music, would take upon him to sing fine verses to the
people, in praise eythet of virtue or of victory or of immortality or such
like. At whose wonderful gift al men being astonished and as it were ravished,
with delight, thinking (as it was indeed) that he was inspired from above,
called him vatem: which kind of men afterward framing their verses to
lighter music (as of music be many kinds, some sadder, some lighter, some
martial, some heroical: and so diuersely eke affect the mynds of me^) found
out lighter matter of Poesy also, some playing with love, some scorning at
men's fashions, some povvred out in pleasures, and so were called Poets or
makers.

Sense bereave) what the secret vvorking of Music is in the minds of men,
asvvell appears hereby, that some of the ancient Philosophers, and those the
most wise, as Plato and Pythagoras held for opinion, that the mind was made
of a certain harmony and musical nombers, for the great compassion and
likeness of assection in the one and in the other as also by that memorable
history of Alexander: to whom when as Timotheus the great Musician played the
Phrygian mclodie, it is said, that he was distraught with such vnvvonted
fury, that straight way rising from the table in great rage, he caused
himself to be armed, as ready to go to war (for that music is very war
like:) And immediately whenas the Musician changed his stroke into the Lydian
and Ionique harmony, he was so ^urr from warring, that he sat as still, as if
he had been in mattes of counsel. Such might is in music. wherefore Plato
and Aristotle forbid the Aradian Melody from children and youth. for that
being altogether on the fyft and vij, tone, it is of great force to molifie and
quench the kindly courage, which uses to burn in young breasts. So that it is
not incredible which the Poet here says, that Music can bereave the soul of
sense.

The shepherd that) Orpheus: of whom is said, that by his excellent skill in
Music and Poetry, he recovered his wife Eurydice from hell.

Argus eyes) of Argus is before said, that Juno to him committed her husband
Jupiter his Paragon Io, because he had an hundred eyes: but afterward Mercury
with his Music lulling Argus aslepe, slew him and brought Io away, whose
eyes it is said that Inno for his eternal memory placed in her byrd the
Peacocks tail. for those colored spots indeed resemble eyes.

VVoundlesse armor) vnvvounded in war, do rust through long peace.

Display) A poetical metaphore: whereof the meaning is, that if the Poet list
show his skill in matter of more dignity, then is the homely Aeglogue, good
occasion is him offered of higher vein and more Heroical argument, in the
person of our most gracious soueraign, vvho^ (as before) he calls Elisa. Or
if matter of knighthoode and cheualrie please him better, that there be many
Noble and valiant men, that are both worthy of his pain in their deserved
praises, and also favorers of his skill and faculty.

The worthy) he means (as I guess) the most honorable and renowned the Earl
of Leycester, vvho^ by his cognizance (although the same be also proper to
other) rather then by his name he bevvrayeth, being not likely, that the names
of noble princes be known to country clovvne.

Slack) that is when thou chaungest thy verse from stately discourse, to
matter of more pleasaunce and delight.

The Millers) a kind of dance. Ring) company of dauncers.

The Romish Tityrus) well known to be Virgile, who by Mecaenas means was
brought into the favor of the Emperor Augustus, and by him moved to write in
loftier kind, then he erst had done.

VVhereon) in these three verses are the three several works of Virgile
intended. For in teaching his flocks to feed, is meant his Aeglogues. In
laboring of lands, is his Bucoliques. In singing of wars and deadly dread,
is his divine Aeneis figured.

In derring do) In manhood and cheualrie.

For ever) He shows the cause, why Poets were wont be had in such honor
of noble men; that is, that by them their worthiness and valor should through
their famous Posies be commended to al posterities. wherefore it is said, that
Achilles had never been so famous, as he is, but for Homeres immortal verses.
which is the only advantage, which he had of Hector. And also that Alexander
the great coming to his tomb in Sigeus, with natural tears blessed him,
that ever was his hap to be honored with so excellent a Poets work: as so
renowned, and ennobled only by his means. which being declared in a most
eloquent Oration of Tullies, is of Petrarch no less worthily set forth in a
sonet

Giunto Alexandro a la famosa tomba
Del fero Achille sospirando disse
O fortunato che si chiara tromba. Trouasti etc.
And that such account has been alvvayes made of Poetes^, as well shows
this that the worthy Scipio in all his vvarres against Carthage and Numantia
had evermore in his company, and that in a most familiar sort the good old
Poet Ennius: as also that Alexander destroying Thebes, when he was informed
that the famous Lyrick Poet Pindarus was borne in that city, not only
commanded straightly, that no man should upon pain of death do any violence
to that house by fire or otherwise: but also specially spared most, and some
highly rewar ded, that were of his kin. So favored he the only name of a
Poet. which praise otherwise was in the same man no less famous, that when
he came to ransacking of king Darius coffers, whom he lately had overthrown,
he found in a little coffer of silver the two books of Homers works, as laid
up there for special ievvells and richesse, which he taking thence, put one
of them daily in his bofome, and tho there every night laid under his pillovve.

Such honor have Poets alvvayes found in the sight of princes and noble men.
which this author here very well shows, as else where more notably.

But after) he shows the cause of contempt of Poetry to be idleness and
baseness of mind. Pent) shut up in sloth, as in a coope or cage.

Tom piper) An Ironicall Sacrasmus, spoken in derision of these rude wits,
which make more account of a ryming rybaud, then of skill grounded upon
learning and judgment.

Ne breast) the meaner sort of men. Her peeced pineons) imperfect skill. Spoken
with humble modesty.

As soote as Svvanne) The comparison seems to be strange: for the svvanne
has ever vvonne small commendation for her svvete singing: but it is said of
the learned that the svvan a little before her death, sings most pleasantly,
as prophesying by a secret instinct her near destiny As well says the Poet
elsvvhere in one of his sonetts.

The silver svvanne does sing before her dying day
As she that feels the deep delight that is in death etc.
Immortal myrrhour) Beauty, which is an excellent object of Poetical
spirits, as appears by the worthy Petrachs saying.

Fiorir faceua il mio debile ingegno
A la sua ombra, et crescer ne gli affanni.
A caytiue courage) a base and abject mind.

For lofty love) I think this playing with the letter to be rather a sault then
a figure, as well in our English tongue, as it has been alvvayes in the Latin,
called Cacozelon.

A vacant) imitateth Mantuanes saying. va cuum curis diuina cerebrum Poscit.

Lavish cups) Resembles that comen verse Faecundi calices quem non fecere
disertum.

O if my) He seems here to be ravished with a Poetical fury. For (if one
rightly mark) the numbers rise so full, and the verse grows so big, that it
seems he has forgot the meandness of shepherds state and style.

VVild yuie) for it is dedicated to Bacchus and therefore it is said that the
Maenades (that is Bacchus frantic priests) used in their sacrifice to carry
Thyrsos, which were pointed staves or Iauelins, vvrapped about with yuie.

In buskin) it was the manerof Poets and plaiers in tragedies to were
buskins, as also in Comedies to use stocks and light shoes. So that the buskin
in Poetry is used for tragical matter, as it said in Virgilc. Sola sophocleo
tua carmina digna cothurno. And the like in Horace, Magnum loqui, nitique
cothurno.

Queint) strange Bellona; the goddess of battle, that is Pallas, which may
therefore well be called queint for that (as Lucian says) when Jupiter her
father was in traueile of her, he caused his son Vulcane with his axe to hevv
his head. Out of which leaped forth lustely a valiant damsel armed at all
points, whom seeing Vulcane so fair and comely, lightly leaping to her,
proferred her some cortesie, which the Lady disdeigning, shaked her spear at
him, and threatened his sauciness. Therefore such strangeness is well
applied to her.

Aequipage.) order. Tides) seasons.

Charm) temper and order. for Charms were wont to be made by verses as Ovid
says. Aut si carminibus.

Emblem. Hereby is meant, as also in the whole course of this Aeglogue, that
Poetry is a divine instinct and unnatural rage passing the reach of comen
reason. Whom Piers answers Epiphonematicos as admiring the excellencye of
the skyll whereof in Cuddie he had already had a taste.

November.


Aegloga vndecima.
ARGUMENT.
Jn this xi. Aeglogue he bewayleth the death of some maiden of great blood,
whom he calls Dido. The personage is secret, and to me altogether unknown,
albe of him self I often required the same. This Aeglogue is made in imitation
of Marot his song, which he made upon the death of Loys the french Queen. But
far passing his reach, and in mine opinion all other the Eglogues of this
book.

Thenot. Colin.
COlin my dear, when shall it please thee sing,
As thou were wont songs of some iouisaunce?
Thy Muse to long slombreth in sorrowing,
Lulled a sleep through loves misgouernaunce,
Now somewhat sing, whose endless souenaunce,
Among the shepeheards swains may aye remain,
Whether thee list thy loved less advance,
Or honor Pan with hymns of higher vain.

Colin. Thenot, now nis the time of merimake.
Nor Pan to herye, nor with love to play:
Sike mirth in May is meetest for to make,
Or summer shade under the cocked hay.
But now sad Winter welked has the day,
And Phoebus weary of his yearly tas-ke:
Ystabled has his steedes in lowlye lay,
And taken up his ynne in Fishes has-ke.
Thilke sollein season sadder plight does ask:
And loatheth sike delights, as thou do praise:
The mornefull Muse in mirth now list ne mas-ke,
As she was wont in youngth and summer days.
But if thou algate lust light virelayes,
And looser songs of love to vndersong
Who but thy self deserves sike Poets praise?
Relieve thy Oaten pypes, that sleepen long.

Thenot. The Nightingale is sovereign of song,
Before him sits the Titmose silent be:
And I unfit to thrust in s-kilfull thronge,
Should Colin make judge of my fooleree.
Nay, better learn of hem, that learned be,
And han be watered at the Muses well:
The kindlye dewedrops from the higher tree,
And wets the little plants that lowly dwell.
But if sad winters wrath and season chill,
Accord not with thy Muses meriment:
To sadder times thou may attune thy quill,
And sing of sorrow and deaths dreeriment.
For dead is Dido, dead alas and (...),
Dido the great shepehearde his daughter sheene:
The fairest May she was that ever went,
Her like she has not left behind I ween.
And if thou will bewail my woeful tene:
I shall thee give yond Cosset for thy pain:
And if thy rymes as rownd and rufull been,
As those that did thy Rosalind complain,
Much greater gyfts for guerdon thou shall gain,
Then Kidde or Cosset, which I thee bynempt:
Then up I say, thou jolly shepeheard swayne,
Let not my small demand be so contempt.

Colin. Thenot to that I choose, thou do me tempt,
But ah to well I wot my humble vain,
And how my rymes been rugged and unkempt:
Yet as I conne, my conning I will strain.
UP then Melpomene thou mournefulst Muse of nine,
Such cause of mourning never had before:
Up grisly ghostes and up my rufull ryme,
Matter of mirth now shall thou have no more.
For dead she is, that mirth thee made of yore.
Dido my dear alas is dead,
Dead and lies wrapped in lead:
O heavy hearse,
Let streaming tears be poured out in store:
O careful verse.
Shepherds, that by your flocks on Kentish downs abide,
Wail ye this woeful waste of natures warke:
Wail we the wight, whose presence was our pride:
Wail we the wight, whose absence is our carke.
The son of all the world is dim and dark:
The earth now lacks her wonted light,
And all we dwell in deadly night,
O heavy hearse.
Break we our pypes, that shrild as loud as Lark,
O careful verse.
Why do we longer live, (ah why live we so long)
Whose better days death has shut up in woe?
The fairest flower our gyrlond all among,
Is faded quite and into dust ygoe.
Sing now ye shepherds daughters, sing no more
The songs that Colin made in her praise,
But into weeping turn your wanton lays,
O heavy hearse,
Now is time to dye. Nay time was long ygoe,
O careful verse.
Whence is it, that the flouret of the field does fade,
And lies buried long in Winters bale:
Yet soon as spring his mantle does displaye,
It floureth fresh, as it should never fail?
But thing on earth that is of most avail,
As virtues branch and beauties budde.
Reliuen not for any good.
O heavy hearse,
The branch once dead, the budde eke needs must quail,
O careful verse.
She while she was, (that was, a woeful word to said)
For beauties praise and plesaunce had no pere:
So well she couth the shepherds entertayne,
With cakes and cracknells and such country chere.
Ne would she scorn the simple shepherds swain,
For she would call hem often heme
And give hem curds and clouted Cream.
O heavy hearse,
Als Colin cloute she would not once disdain.
O careful verse.
But now sike happy cheer is turned to heavy chance,
Such pleasaunce now displast by dolors dint:
All Music sleeps, where death does lead the dance,
And shepherds wonted solace is extinct.
The blew in black, the green in gray is tinct,
The gaudie girlonds deck her grave,
The faded flowers her corse embraue.
O heavy hearse,
Morn now my Muse, now morn with tears besprint.
O careful verse.
O thou great shepherd Lobbin, how great is thy grief,
Where been the nosegayes that she dight for thee:
The colored chaplets wrought with a chief,
The knotted rushrings, and gilte Rosemaree?
For she deemed nothing too dear for thee.
Ah they been all yclad in clay,
One bitter blast blewe all away.
O heavy hearse,
Thereof naught remaynes but the memores.
O careful verse.
Ay me that dreerie death should strike so mortal stroke,
That can undo Dame natures kindly course:
The faded locks fall from the lofty oak,
The floods do gasp, for dried is their sourse,
And floods of tears flow in their stead perforse.
The mantled meadows morune,
Their sundry colors torune.
O heavy hearse,
The heavens do melt in tears without remorse.
O carsefull verse.
The feeble flocks in field refuse their former food,
And hang their heads, as they would learn to weep:
The beasts in forest wayle as they were wood,
Except the Wolves, that chase the wandering sheep:
Now she is gone that safely did hem keep,
The Curtle on the bared branch,
Laments the wound, that death did launch.
O heavy hearse,
And Philomele her song with tears does steep.
O careful verse.
The water Nymphs, that wont with her to sing and dance,
And for her girlond Olive branches bear,
Now bale full boughs of Cypres done advance:
The Muses, that were wont green bays to wear,
Now bringen bitter Eldre branches sear,
The fatal sisters eke repent,
Her vital threde so soon was spent.
O heavy hearse,
Morn now my Muse, now morn with heavy cheer.
O careful verse.
O trustlesse state of earthly things, and slipper hope
Of mortal men, that swincke and sweat for naught,
And shooting wide, do miss the marked scope:
Now have I learnd (a lesson derely bought)
That nys on earth assurance to be sought:
For what might be in earthly mould,
That did her buried body hold.
O heavy hearse,
Yet saw I on the bear when it was brought
O careful verse.
But maugre death, and dreaded sisters deadly spite,
And gates of hell, and fyrie furies forse:
She has the bonds broke of eternal night,
Her soul unbodied of the burdenous corpse.
Why then weeps Lobbin so without remorse?
O Lobb, thy loss no longer lament,
Dido nis dead, but into heaven hent.
O happy hearse,
Cease uow my Muse, now cease thy sorrows sourse,
O joyful verse.
Why wayle we then? why weary we the Gods with playnts,
As if some evil were to her betight?
She reigns a goddess now among the saints,
That whilome was the saint of shepherds light:
And is enstalled now in heavens hight.
I see thee blessed soul, I see,
Walk in Elisian sieldes so free.
O happy hearse,
Might I once come to thee (O that I might)
O joyful verse.
Unwise and wretched men to weete what is good or ill,
We deem of Death as doom of ill desert:
But knew we fools, what it us bringes until,
Dye would we daily, once it to expert.
No danger there the shepherd can astert:
Fair fields and pleasant lays there been,
The fields ay fresh, the grass ay green:
O happy hearse,
Make have ye shepherds, thither to reuert,
O joyful verse.
Dido is gone before (whose turn shall be the next?)
There lives she with the blessed Gods in bliss,
There drincks she Nectar with Ambrosia mixed,
And joys enioyes, that mortal men do miss.
The honor now of highest gods she is,
That whilome was poor shepherds pride,
While here on earth she did abide.
O happy hearse,
Cease now my song, my woe now wasted is.
O joyful verse.

Thenot. Ay francke shepherd, how been thy verses meint
With doolful pleasaunce, so as I ne wotte,
Whether rejoice or weep for great constrainte?
Thine be the cossette, well have thou it got,
Up Colin up, enough thou morned have,
Now gynnes to mizzle, hye we homeward fast.

Colins Emblem.
La mort ny mord.

GLOSS.
Iouisaunce) mirth. Souenaunce) remembrance. Herie) honor.

VVelked) shortened or empayred. As the Moon being in the vvaine is said of
Lidgate to vvelk.

In lowly lay) according to the season of the month November, when the son
draws low in the South toward his Tropic or return.

In fishes haske) the son, reigns that is, in the sign Pisces all
November. a haske is a vvicker pad, wherein they use to carry fish.

Virelaies) a light kind of song.

Be vvatred) For it is a saying of Poets, that they have dronk of the Muses
well Castlias, whereof was before sufficiently said.

Dreriment) dreery and heavy cheer.

The great shepherd) is some man of high degree, and not as some vainly
suppose God Pan. The person both of the shephearde and of Dido is unknown and
closely buried in the Authors conceit. But out of doubt I am, that it is not
Rosalind, as some imagine: for he speaks soon after of her also.

Shene) fair and shining. May) for maid. Tene) sorrow.

Guerdon) reward. Bynempt) bequethed. Cosset) a lamb brought up without the
dam. Unkempt) Inco^pti Not comed, that is rude and unhandsome.

Melpomene) The sad and waylefull Muse used of Poets in honor of Tragedies:
as says Virgile Melpomene Tragico proclamat maesta boatu.

Up griesly gosts) The manner of Tragical Poets, to call for help of Furies
and damned ghostes: so is Hecuba of Euripides, and Tantalus brought in of
Seneca. And the rest of the rest. Hearse) is the solemn obsequie in funeralles.

VVast of) decay of so beautiful a piece. Carke) care.

Ah why) an elegant Epanorthosis. as also soon after. nay time was long ago.

Flouret) a diminutiue for a little flower. This is a notable and sententious
comparison A minore ad maius.

Reliuen not) live not again. s not in their earthly bodies: for in heaven
they enjoy their due reward.

The branch) He means Dido, who being, as it were the main branch now
withered the buddes that is beauty (as he said before) can no more flourish.

With cakes) fit for shepherds bankets. Heame) for home. after the northern
pronouncing. Tuict) deyed or stained.

The gaudie) the meaning is, that the things, which were the ornaments of her
life, are made the honor of her funeral, as is used in burialls.

Lobbin) the name of a shepherd, which seems to have been the lover and
dear friend of Dido. Rushrings) agreeable for such base gifts

Faded locks) dried leaves. As if Nature her felfe bewailed the death of the
Maid.

Sourse) spring. Mantled meadows) for the sundry flowers are like a Mantle or
couerlet wrought with many colors.

Philomele) the Nightingale. whom the Poets feign once to have been a Lady
of great beauty, till being ravished by her sisters husband, she desired to be
turned into a byrd of her name. whose complaints be very well set forth of
Ma. George Gaskin a witty gentleman, and the very chief of our late rymers,
who and if some parts of learning wanted not (albee it is well known he
altogyther vvanted not learning) no doubt would have attained to the
excellencye of those famous Poets. For gifts of wit and natural promptness
appear in him abundantly.

Cypress) used of the old Paynims in the (...)shing of their funeral Pomp.
and properly the of all sorrow and heaviness.

The fatal sisters) Clotho Lachesis and Atropodas, ughters of Herebus and the
Night, whom the Poets feign to spinne the life of man, as it were a long
threde, which they dravve out in length, till his fatal hour and timely death
be come; but if by other casualtie his days be abridged, then one of them,
that is Atropos, is said to have cut the threde in twain. Hereof comes a
common verse.

Clotho colum baiulat, lachesis trahit, Atrhpos occat. O trustlesse) a gallant
exclamation moralized with great wisdoms and passionate with great affection.
Bear) a frame, whereon they use to lay the dead corse.

Furies) of Poets be feyned to be three, Persephone Alecto and Megera, which
are said to be the Authors of all evil and mischief.

Eternal might) Is death or darkness of hell. Betight) happened,

I see) A lively Icon, or representation as if he saw her in heaven present.

Elysian fields) be devised of Poets to be a place of pleasure like Paradise,
where the hap pie souls do rest in peace and eternal happiness.

Dye would) The very epresse saying of Plato in Phaedone.

Astert] befall vnvvares.

Nectar and Ambrosia) be feigned to be the drink and food of the gods:
Ambrosia they liken to Manna in scripture and Nectar to be white like Creme,
whereof is a proper tale of Hebe, that spilt a cup of it, and stained the
heavens, as yet appears. But I have already discoursed that at large in my
Commentarye upon the dreams of the same Author. Meynt) Mingled.

Emblem. Which is as much to say, as death biteth not. For although by course
of nature we be borne to dye, and being ripened with age, as with a timely
harvest, we must be gathered in time, or else of our selves we fall like
rotted ripe fruit fro the tree: yet death is not to be counted for evil, nor
(as the Poet said a little before) as doom of ill desert) For though the
trespass of the first man brought death in to the world, as the guerdon of
sin, yet being overcome by the death of one, that dyed for all, it is now
made (as Chaucer says) the grene path way to life. So that it agrees well
with that was said, that Death byteth not (that is) hurts not at all.

December.


Aegloga Duodecima.
ARGUMENT.
THis Aeglogue (even as the first began) is ended with a complaynte of Colin
to God Pan. wherein as weary of his former ways, he proportioneth his life to
the four seasons of the year, comparing his youth to the spring time, when
he was fresh and free from loves follye. His manhood to the summer, which he
says, was consumed with great heat and excessive drouth caused through a
Comet or blasinge star, by which he means love, which passion is comenly
compared to such flames and immoderate heat. His riper years he resembles
to an unseasonable harueste wherein the fruits fall ere they be ripe. His
latter age to winters chyll and frostie season, now drawing near to his last
end.

THe gentle shepherd satte beside a spring,
All in the shadow of a bushye brere,
That Colin hight, which well could pype and singe,
For he of Tityrus his songs did lere.
There as he satte in secreate shade alone,
Thus began he make of love his piteous moan.
O sovereign Pan thou God of shepherds all,
Which of our tender Lambkins take keep:
And when our flocks into mischaunce might fall,
Do save from mischief the unwary sheep:
Als of their masters have no less regard,
Then of the flocks, which thou do watch and ward:
I thee beseech (so be thou deigne to hear,
Rude ditties tund to shepherds Oaten reed,
Or if I ever sonet song so clear,
As it with pleasaunce might thy fancy feed)
Hearken awhile from thy green cabinet,
The rural song of careful Colinet.
Whilome in youth, when flowrd my joyful spring,
Like Swallow swift I wandered here and there:
For heat of heedlesse lust me so did sting,
That I of doubted danger had no fear.
I went the wastefull woods and forest wide,
Withouten dread of Wolves to been espied,
I wont to raunge amydde the mazie thickette,
And gather nuttes to make me Christmas gain:
And ioyed often to chase the trembling Pricket,
Or hunt the hartlesse hare, til she were tame.
What wreaked I of wintrye ages waste,
Tho deemed I, my spring would ever last.
How often have I scaled the craggie Oak,
All to dislodge the Raven of her neste:
How have I wearied with many a stroke,
The stately Walnut tree, the while the rest
Under the tree fell all for nuts at strife:
For ylike to me was libertee and life.
And for I was in thilke same looser years,
(Whether the Muse, so wrought me from my birth,
Or I tomuch believed my shepherd peers)
Somedele ybent to song and musicks mirth.
A good old shephearde, Wrenock was his name,
Made me by art more cunning in the same.
Fro thence I durst in derring to compare
With shepherds swayne, what ever fed in field:
And if that Hobbinol right judgment bare,
To Pan his own self pype I need not yield.
For if the flocking Nymphs did follow Pan.
The wiser Muses after Colin ran.
But ah such pride at length was ill repayde,
The shepherds God (perdie God was he none)
My hurtlesse pleasaunce did me ill vpbraide,
My freedom lorne, my life he left to moan.
Love they him called, that gave me checkmate,
But better might they have behote him Hate.
Tho began my lovely Spring bid me farewell,
And Summer season sped him to display
(For love then in the Lions house did dwell)
The raging fire, that kindled at his ray.
A comett stird up that unkindly heat,
that reigned (as men said) in Venus seat.
Forth was I led, not as I wont before,
When choice I had to choose my wandering way:
But whether luck and loves unbridled lore
Would lead me forth on Fancies bitte to play.
The bush my bed, the bramble was my bower,
The Woods can witness many a woeful stowre.
Where I was wont to seek the honey Be,
Working her formal rowines in Wexen frame:
The grisly Todestoole grown there might I se
And loathed Paddocks lording on the same.
And where the chaunting birds luld me a sleep,
The ghastly Owl her grievous ynne does keep.
Then as the spring gives place to elder time,
And brings forth the fruit of summers pride:
Also my age now passed youngthly pryme,
To things of ryper reason self applied.
And learnd of lighter timber cotes to frame,
Such as might save my sheep and me fro shame.
To make fine cages for the Nightingale,
And Bas-kets of bulrushes was my wont:
Who to entrappe the fish in winding sale
Was better seen, or hurtful beasts to hont?
I learned als the signs of heaven to ken,
How Phoebe fayles, where Venus sittes and when.
And tried time yet taught me greater things,
The sudden rising of the raging seas:
The soothe of byrds by beating of their wings,
The power of herbs, both which can hurt and ease:
And which be wont to tenrage the restless sheep,
And which be wont to work eternal sleep.
But ah unwise and witless Colin cloute,
That kydst the hidden kinds of many a wede:
Yet kydst not ene to cure thy sore heart root,
Whose ranckling wound as yet dors rifelye bleed.
Why live thou still, and yet have thy deaths wound?
Why dyest thou still, and yet alive art found?
Thus is my summer worn away and wasted,
Thus is my harvest hastened all to rathe:
The ear that budded fair, is burnt and blasted,
And all my hoped gain is turned to scathe.
Of all the seed, that in my youth was sown,
Was naught but brakes and brambles to be mowne.
My boughs with bloosmes that crowned were at first,
And promised of tunely fruit such store,
Are left both bare and barrein now at erst:
The flattering fruit is fallen to ground before.
And rotted, ere they were half mellow ripe:
My harvest wast, my hope away did wipe.
The fragrant flowers, that in my garden grew,
Been withered, as they had been gathered long.
Their roots been dried up for lack of dew,
Yet dewed with tears they han be ever among.
Ah who has wrought my Rosalind this spite
To spil the flowers, that should her girlond dight,
And I, that whilome wont to frame my pype,
Unto the shifting of the shepherds foot:
Sike follies now have gathered as too ripe,
And cast hem out, as rotten and vnsoote.
The loser Less I cast to please no more,
One if I please, enough is me therefore.
And thus of all my harvest hope I have
Naught reaped but a weedye crop of care:
Which, when I thought have thresht in swelling sheaue,
Cockel for corn, and chafe for barley bare.
Soon as the chafe should in the fan be find,
All was blown away of the wavering wynd.
So now my year draws to his latter term,
My spring is spent, my summer burnt up quite:
My harueste hasts to stir up winter stern,
And bids him claim with rigorous rage his right.
So now he storms with many a sturdy stoure,
So now his blustering blast each cost does scour.
The careful cold has nypt my rugged rynde,
And in my face deep furrows eld has pight:
My head besprent with hoary frost I find,
And by mine eye the Crow his clawe does wright,
Delight is laid abedde, and pleasure past,
No son now shines, clouds han all over cast.
Now leave ye shepherds boys your merry glea,
My Muse is hoarse and weary of this stounde:
Here will I hang my pype upon this tree,
Was never pype of reed did better sound.
Winter is come, that blows the bitter blaste,
And after Winter comes death does have.
Gather ye together my little flock,
My little flock, that was to me so liefe:
Let me, ah let me in your folds ye lock,
Ere the breme Winter breed you greater grief.
Winter is come, that blows the balefull breath,
And after Winter comes timely death.
Adieu delights, that lulled me asleep,
Adieu my dear, whose love I bought so dear:
Adieu my little Lambs and loved sheep,
Adieu ye Woods that often my witness were:
Adieu good Hobbinol, that was so true,
Tell Rosalind, her Colin bids her adieu.
Colins Emblem.

GLOSS.
Tityrus) Chaucer as has been often said. Lambkins) young lambs.

Als of their) Seems to express Virgils verse Pan curat oues ouiumque
magistros.

Deigne) voutchsafe. Eabinet) Colinet) diminutines.

Mazie) For they be like to a maze whence it is hard to get out again.

Peers) fellows and companions.

Music) that is Poetry as Terence says Qui artem tractant musicam, speking of
Poets.

Derring do) aforesaid.

Lions house) He imagines simply that Cupid, which is love, had his abode in
the whote sign Leo, which is in midst of somer; a pretty allegory, where
of the meaning is, that love in him wrought an extraordinary heat of lust.

His ray) which is Cupides beam or flames of Love.

A Comete) a blasing star, meant of beauty, which was the cause of his
vvhote love.

Venus) the goddess of beauty or pleasure. Also a sign in heaven, as it is
here taken. So he means that beauty, which has alvvayes aspect to Venus,
was the cause of all his unquietness in love.

Where I was) a fine description of the change of his life and liking; for
all things now seemed to him to have altered their kindly course.

Lording) Spoken after the manner of Paddocks and Frogs sitting which is
indeed Lordly, not removing nor looking once a side, unless they be sturred.

Then as) The second part. That is his manhood.

Cotes) sheepecotes. for such be the exercises of shepherds.

Sale) or Salovv a kind of vvoodde like VVyllovv, fit to vvreath and bind in
leapes to catch fish vvithall.

Phaebe sails) The Eclipse of the Moon, which is always in Cauda or Capite
Draconis, signs in heaven.

Venus) s. Venus star otherwise called Hesperus and Vesper and Lucifer, both
because he seems to be one of the brightest stars, and also first ryseth
and sets last. All which still in stars being convenient for shepheardes
to know as Theocritus and the rest use.

Raging seaes) The cause of the swelling and ebbing of the sea comes of the
course of the Moon, sometime increasing, sometime wayning and decreasing.

Sooth of birds) A kind of sooth saying used in elder times, which they
gathered by the flying of byrds; First (as is said) niuented by the Thulcanes,
and from them derived to the Romans, who(as is said in Liuie) were so
supersticiously rooted in the same, that they agreed that every Noble man
should put his son to the Thuscanes, by them to be broughr up in that
knowledge.

Of herbs) That vvonderous things be wrought by herbs, asvvell appears by
the common vvorking of them in our bodies, as also by the wonderful
enchauntments and sorceries that have been wrought by them; in so much that it
is said that Circe a famous sorceresse turned me^ into sundry kinds of beasts
and Monsters, and only by herbs: as the Poet says Dea saeua potentibus
heibis etc.

Kidst) knew. Ear) of corn. Scathe) loss hinderaunce.

Ever among) Ever and anon.

This is my) The third part wherein is set sorth his ripe years as an
untimely harvest, that brings little fruit.

The flagraunt flovvres) sundry studies and laudable parts of learning,
wherein how our Poet is seen, be they witness which are privy to his
study.

So now my year) The last part, wherein is described his age by comparison of
vvyntrye storms.

Careful cold) for care is said to cool the blood. Glee mirth)

Hoary frost) A metaphore of hoar^y hears scattred like to a gray frost.

Breeme) sharp and bitter.

Adievv delights) is a conclusion of all. where in six verses he
comprehends briefly all that was touched in this book. In the first verse
his delights of youth generally. in the second, the love of Rosalind, in the
third, the keeping of sheep, which is the argument of all Aeglogues. In the
fourth his complaints. And in the last two his prosessed friendship and good
will to his good friend Hobbinoll.

Emblem. The meaning whereof is that all things perish and come to their last
end, but works of learned wits and monuments of Poetry abide for ever. And
therefore Horace of his Odes a work though full indede of great wit and
learning, yet of no so great weight and importance boldly says.

Exegi monimentum aere perennius.
Quod nec imber nec aquilo vorax etc.
Therefore let not be envied, that this Poet in his Epilogue says he has
made a Calendar, that shall endure as long as time etc. following the ensample
of Horace and Ovid in the like.

Grande opus exegi quae nec Iouis ira nec ignis,
Nec ferum poterit nec edax abolere vetustas etc.
Lo I have made a Calender for every year,
That steel in strength, and time in durance shall out wear:
And if I marked well the stars revolution,
It shall continewe till the worlds dissolution.
To teach the ruder shepherd how to feed his sheep,
And from the falsers fraud his folded flock to keep.
Go little Calender, thou have a free passeporte,
Go but a lowly gate emongste the meaner sort.
Dare not to match thy pype with Tityrus his style,
Nor with the Pilgrim that the Ploughman playde a while:
But follow them far off, and their high steps adore,
The better please, the worse despise, I ask no more.
Merce non mercede.


Jmprinted at London by Hugh Singleton, dwelling in Creed lane at the sign of
the gylden Tuon near unto Ludgate.


