Complaints. Containing sundry small Poemes of the Worlds Vanity.

Whereof the next Page makes mention.

By ED. SP.

LONDON. Imprinted for William Ponsonbie, dwelling in Paul's Churchyard at the
sign of the Bishops head.

1591.

A note of the sundry Poemes contained in this Volume.
1 The Ruins of Time. 2 The Tears of the Muses. 3 Virgils Gnat. 4
Prosopopoia, or Mother Hubberds Tale. 5 The Ruins of Rome: by Bellay. 6
Muiopotmos, or The Tale of the Butterfli^. 7 Visions of the Worlds vanity. 8
Bellayes visions. 9 Petrarches visions.
The Printer to the Gentle Reader.
SINCE my late setting forth of the Faerie Queen, finding that it has found
a favorable passage amongst you; I have sithence endeavored by all good means
(for the better increase and accomplishment of your delights,) to get into my
hands such small Poemes of the same Authors; as I heard were dispersed abroad
in sundry hands, and not easy to be come by, by himself; some of them
having been diversely imbeziled and purloyned from him, since his departure
over Sea. Of the which I have by good means gathered together these few
parcels present, which I have caused to be imprinted altogether, for that
they al seem to contain like matter of argument in them: being all complaints
and meditations of the worlds vanitie^ very grave and profitable. To which
effect I understand that he besides wrote sundry others, namely Ecclesiastes,
and Canticum canticorum translated, A senights slumber, The hell of lovers, his
Purgatory, being all dedicated to Ladies; so as it may seem he meant them all
to one volume. Besides some other Pamphlets looselie scattered abroad: as The
dying Pelican, The hours of the Lord, The sacrifice of a sinner, The seven
Psalms, etc. which when I can either by himself, or otherwise attain too, I
mean likewise for your favor sake to set forth. In the mean time praying
you gently to accept of these, and graciously to entertain^ the new Poet. I
take leave.

Dedicated To the right Noble and beautiful Lady, the La. Marie Countess of
Pembrooke.
MOST Honorable and bountiful Lady, there be long since deep sowed in my
breast, the seed of most entire love and humble affection unto that most brave
Knight your noble brother deceased; which taking root began in ^is life time
somewhat to bud forth: and to show themselves to him, as then in the weakness
of their first spring: And would in their riper strength (had it pleased high
God till then to draw out his days) spired forth fruit of more perfection.
But since God has disdeigned the world of that most noble Spirit, which was
the hope of all learned men, and the Patron of my young Muses; together with
him both their hope of any further fruit was cut off: and also the tender
delight of those their first blossoms nipped and quite dead. Yet since my
late cumming into England, some friends of mine (which might much prevail with
me, and indeed command me) knowing with how straight bands of duty I was
tied to ^im: as also bound unto that noble house, (of which the chief hope
then rested in him) have sought to revive them by vpbraiding me: for that I
have not showed any thankful remembrance toward him or any of the^; but
suffer their names to sleep in silence and forgetfulness. Whom chiefly to
satisfy, or else to avoid that ^owle blot of unthankfulness, I have
conceived this small Poem, entitled by a general name of the worlds Ruins:
yet specially intended to the renowming of that noble race, from which both
you and he sprung, and to the eternizing of some of the chief of them late
deceased. The which I dedicate unto your La. as whom it most specially
concerns: and to whom I acknowledge my self bounden, by many singular
favors and great graces. I pray for your Honorable happiness: and so humbly
kiss your haudes.

Your Ladyships ever humbly at command. E. S.

The Ruins of Time.
IT chanced me on day beside the shore
Of silver streaming Thamesis to be,
Nigh where the goodly Verlame stood of yore,
Of which there now remains no memory,
Nor any little moniment to see,
By which the trauailer, that fares that way,
This once was she, may warned be to say.
There on the other side, I did behold
A Woman sitting sorrowfully wailing,
Rending her yeolow locks, like wyrie gold,
About her shoulders carelessly down trailing,
And streams of tears from her fair eyes forth railing.
In her right hand a broken rod she held,
Which toward heaven she seemd on high to weld.
Whether she were one of that Rivers Nymphs,
Which did the loss of some dear love lament,
I doubt; or one of those three fatal Impes,
Which draw the days of men forth in extent^
Or th'auncient Genius of that City brent:
But seeing her so piteously perplexed,
I (to her calling) asked what her so vexed.
Ah what delight (quoth she) in earthly thing,
Or comfort can I wretched creature have?
Whose happiness the heavens envying,
From highest staire to lowest step me drove,
And have in mine own bowels made my grave,
That of all Nations now I am forlorn,
The worlds sad spectacle, and fortunes scorn.
Much was I moved at her piteous plaint,
And felt my heart nigh riuen in my breast
With tender ruth to see her sore constraint,
That shedding tears a while I still did rest,
And after did her name of her request.
Name have I none (quoth she) nor any being,
Bereft of both by Fates unjust decreeing.
I was that City, which the garland wore
Of Britains pride, delivered unto me
By Roman Victors, which it won of yore;
Though naught at all but ruins now I be,
And lie in mine own ashes, as ye see:
Verlame I was; what boots it that I was,
Since now I am but weeds and wastfull gras?
O vain worlds glory, and unsteadfast state
Of all that lives, on face of sinful earth,
Which from their first until their utmost date
Taste no one hour of happiness or merth,
But like as at the ingate of their berth,
They crying creep out of their mothers woomb,
So wailing back go to their woeful toomb.
Why then does flesh, a bubble glass of breath,
Hunt after honor and advancement vain,
And rear a trophee for devouring death,
With so great labor and long lasting pain,
As if his days for ever should remain?
Since all that in this world is great or gaie,
Does as a vapor vanish, and decaie.
Look back, who list, unto the former ages,
And call to count, what is of them become:
Where be those learned wits and antique Sages,
Which of all wisdom knew the perfect sum:
Where those great warriors, which did ouercomme
The world with conquest of their might and maine,
And made one meare of the earth and of their rain?
What now is of the Assyrian Lioness,
Of whom no footing now on earth appeares^
What of the Persian Bears outragiousnesse,
Whose memory is quite worn out with years?
Who of the Grecian Libbard now ought hears,
That ouerran the East with greedy power,
And left his whelps their kingdoms to devour?
And where is that same great seven headded beast,
That made all nations vassals of her pride,
To fall before her feet at her beheast,
And in the neck of all the world did ride?
Where does she all that wondrous wealth now hide^
With her own weight down pressed now she lies,
And by her heaps her hugeness testifies.
O Rome thy ruin I lament and rue,
And in thy fall my fatal overthrow,
That whilom was, whilst heavens with equal vewe
Deignd to behold me, and their gifts bestow,
The picture of thy pride in pompous show:
And of the whole world as thou wast the Empress,
So I of this small Northern world was Princess,
To tell the beawtie of my buildings fair,
Adornd with purest gold, and precious stone^
To tell my riches, and endowments rare
That by my foes are now all spent and gone:
To tell my forces matchable to none,
Were but lost labor, that few would believe,
And with rehearsing would me more agreeue.
High towers, fair temples, goodly theaters,
Strong walls, rich porches, princely palaces,
Large streets, brave houses, sacred sepulchers,
Sure gates, sweet gardens, stately galleries,
Wrought with fair pillours, and fine imageries,
All those (o pity) now are turned to dust,
And ouergrowen with black obliuions rust.
Theretoo for warlike power, and peoples store,
In Britannie was none to match with me;
That many often did abie full sore:
Ne Troynouant, though elder sister she,
With my great forces might compared be;
That stout Pendragon to his peril felt,
Who in a siege seven years about me dwelt.
But long ere this Bunduca Britonnesse
Her mighty host against my bulwarks brought,
Bunduca, that victorious conqueresse,
That lifting up her brave heroic thought
Boue women's weakness, with the Romans fought,
Fought, and in field against them thrice prevailed:
Yet was she foyld, when as she me assailed.
And though at last by force I conquered were
Of hardy Saxons, and became their thrall;
Yet was I with much bloodshed bought full dear,
And prizde with slaughter of their General:
The moniment of whose sad funeral,
For wonder of the world, long in me lasted;
But now to naught through spoil of time is wasted.
Wasted it is, as if it never were,
And all the rest that me so honored made,
And of the world admired every where,
Is turned to smoke, that does to nothing fade;
And of that brightness now appears no shade,
But greislie shades, such as do haunt in hell
With fearful fiends, that in deep darkness dwell.
Where my high steeples whilom used to stand,
On which the lordly Faulcon wont to tower,
There now is but an heap of lyme and sand,
For the Shriche-owle to build her balefull bower:
And where the Nightingale wont forth to power
Her restles plaints, to comfort wakefull Lovers,
There now hau^t yelling Mewes and whining Plouers.
And where the crystal Thamis wont to slide
In silver channel, down along the Lee,
About whose flowrie banks on either side
A thousand Nymphs, with mirthfull iollitee
Were wo^t to play, from all annoyance free;
There now no rivers course is to be seen,
But moorish fennes, and marshes ever green.
Seems, that that gentle River for great grief
Of my mishaps, which often I to him plai^ed;
Or for to shun the horrible mischie^e,
With which he saw my cruel ^oes me pained,
And his pure streams with guiltles blood often stained,
From my unhappy neighborhood far fled,
And his sweet waters away with him led.
There also where the wing^d ships were seen
In liquid waves to cut their fomie way,
And thousand Fishers numbered to have been,
In that wide lake looking for plenteous pray
Of fish, which they with baits used to betraie,
Is now no lake, nor any fishers store,
Nor ever ship shall sail there any more,
They all are gone, and all with them is gone,
Ne ought to me remains, but to lament
My long decay, which no man else does moan,
And mourn my fall with doleful dreriment.
Yet it is comfort in great languishment,
To be bemoned with compassion kind,
And mitigates the anguish of the mind.
But me no man bewaileth, but in game,
Ne sheddeth tears from lamentable eye:
Nor any lives that mentions my name
To be remembered of posterity,
Save One that maugre fortunes injury,
And times decay, and enuies cruel tort,
Has writ my record in true-seeming sort.
Cambden the nourice of antiquity,
And lantern unto late succeeding age,
To see the light of simple verity,
Buried in ruins, through the great outrage
Of her own people, led with warlike rage,
Cambden, though time all moniments obscure,
Yet thy just labors ever shall endure,
But why (unhappy wight) do I thus cry,
And grieve that my remembrance quite is raced
Out of the knowledge of posterity,
And all my antique moniments defaced?
Since I do daily see things highest placed,
So soon as fates their vital thread have shorn,
Forgotten quite as they were never borne.
It is not long, since these two eyes beheld
A mighty Prince, of most renowned race,
Whom England high in count of honor held,
And greatest ones did sue to gain his grace;
Of greatest ones he greatest in his place,
Sat in the bosom of his Sovereign,
And Right and loyal did his word maintain.
I saw him die, I saw him die, as one
Of the mean people, and brought forth on bear,
I saw him die, and no man left to moan
His doleful fate, that late him loved dear:
Scarce any left to close his eylids near;
Scarce any left upon his lips to lay
The sacred sod, or Requiem to say.
O trustlesse state of miserable men,
That build your blis on hope of earthly thing,
And vainly think your selves half happy then,
When painted faces with smooth flattering
Do fawn on you, and your wide praises sing,
And when the courting masker louteth low,
Him true in heart and trusty to you trow.
All is but fained, and with oaker did,
That every shower will wash and wipe away,
All things do change that under heaven abide,
And after death all friendship does decaie.
Therefore what ever man bearst worldly sway,
Living, on God, and on thy self rely;
For when thou die, all shall with thee die.
H^ now is dead, and all is with him dead,
Save what in heavens store house he vplaid:
His hope is faild, and come to pass his dread,
And evil men now dead, his deeds vpbraid:
Spite bites the dead, that living never baid.
He now is gone, the whiles the Fox is crept
Into the hole, the which the Badger swept.
He now is dead, and all his glory gone,
And all his greatness vapoured to naught,
That as a glass upon the water shone,
Which vanished quite, so soon as it was sought^
His name is worn already out of thought,
Ne any Poet seeks him to revive;
Yet many Poets honored him alive.
Ne does his Colin, careless Colin Cloute,
Care now his idle bagpipe up to raise,
Ne tell his sorrow to the listening rout
Of shepherd grooms, which wo^t his songs to praise^
Praise who so list, yet I will him dispraise,
Until he quite him of this guilty blame:
Wake shepherds boy, at length awake for shame.
And who so else did goodness by him gain,
And who so else his bounteous mind did try,
Whether he shepherd be, or shepherds swain,
(For many did, which do it now deny)
Awake, and to his Song a part apply:
And I, the whilst you mourn for his decease,
Will with my mourning plaints your plaint increase.
He did, and after him his brother did,
His brother Prince, his brother noble Peer,
That whilste he lived, was of none enuyde,
And dead is now, as living, counted dear,
Dear unto all that true affection bear:
But unto thee most dear, o dearest Dame,
His noble Spouse, and Paragon of fame.
He whilst he lived, happy was through thee,
And being dead is happy now much more;
Living, that lincked chaunst with thee to be,
And dead, because him dead thou do adore
As living, and thy lost dear love deplore.
So whilst that thou, fair flower of chastity,
Do live, by thee thy Lord shall never die.
Thy Lord shall never die, the whiles this verse
Shall live, and surely it shall live for ever:
For ever it shall live, and shall rehearse
His worthy praise, and virtues dying never,
Though death his soul do from his body sever.
And thou thy self herein shall also live;
Such grace the heavens do to my verses give,
Ne shall his sister, ne thy father die,
Thy father, that good Earl of rare renown,
And noble Patron of weak poverty;
Whose great good deeds in country and in town
Have purchased him in heaven an happy crown;
Where he now lives in ete^n^ll blis,
And left his son ^'ensue those steps of his.
He noble bud, his Grandsires lively hair,
Under the shadow of thy countenance
Now ginnes to shoot up fast, and flourish fair
In learned arts and goodly governance,
That him to highest honor shall advance.
Brave Impe of Bedford, grow apace in bounty,
And count of wisdom more than of thy County.
Ne may I let thy husbands sister die,
That goodly Lady, since she eke did spring
Out of this stock, and famous family,
Whose praises I to future age do sing,
And forth out of her happy womb did bring
The sacred brood of learning and all honor;
In whom the heavens powrde all their gifts upon her.
Most gentle spirit breathed from above,
Out of the bosom of the makers blis,
In whom all bounty and all virtuous love
Appeared in their native propertis,
And did enrich that noble breast of his,
With treasure passing all this worlds worth,
Worthy of heaven it self, which brought it forth.
His blessed spirit full of power divine
And influence of all celestial grace,
Loathing this sinful earth and earthly slime,
Fled back too soon unto his native place,
Too soon for all that did his love embrace,
Too soon for all this wretched world, whom he
Robbed of all right and true nobility.
Yet ere his happy soul to heaven w^nt
Out of this fleshly goal, he did devise
Unto his heavenly maker to present
His body, as a spotles sacrifise;
And chose, that guilty hands of enemies
Should power forth th'offring of his guiltles blood:
So life exchanging for his countries good.
O noble spirit, live there ever blessed,
The worlds late wonder, and the heavens new joy,
Live ever there, and leave me here distressed
With mortal cares, and cumbrous worlds anoy.
But where thou do that happiness enjoy,
Bid me, o bid me quickly come to thee,
That happy there I may thee always see.
Yet whilst the fates afford me vital breath,
I will it spend in speaking of thy praise,
And sing to thee, until that timely death
By heavens doom do end my earthly days:
Thereto do thou my humble spirit raise,
And into me that sacred breath inspire,
Which thou there breathest perfect and entire.
Then will I sing, but who can better sing,
Than thine own sister, peerles Lady bright,
Which to thee sings with deep hearts sorrowing^
Sorrowing tempered with dear delight,
That her to hear I feel my feeble spright
Robbed of sense, and ravished with joy,
O sad joy made of mourning and anoy.
Yet will I sing, but who can better sing,
Than thou thy self, thine own selfs valiance,
That whilst thou liuedst, made the forests ring,
And fields resownd, and flocks to leap and dance,
And shepherds leave their lambs unto mischaunce,
To run thy shrill Arcadian Pipe to hear:
O happy were those days, thrice happy were.
But now more happy thou, and wetched we,
Which want the wonted sweetness of thy voice,
Whiles thou now in Elisian fields so free,
With Orpheus, and with Linus, and the choice
Of all that ever did in rimes rejoice,
Conuer^est, and do hear their heavenly lays,
And they hear thine, and thine do better praise.
So there thou live, singing evermore,
And here thou live, being ever song
Of us, which living loved thee before,
And now thee worship, among that blessed throng
Of heavenly Poets and Heroes strong.
So thou both here and there immortal art,
And every where through excellent desert.
But such as neither of themselves can sing,
Nor yet are sung of others for reward,
Die in obscure oblivion, as the thing
Which never was, ne ever with regard
Their names shall of the later age b^ heard,
But shall in rustie darkness ever lie,
Unless they mentiond be with infamy.
What booteth it to have been rich alive?
What to be great? what to be gracious?
When after death no token does survive,
Of former being in this mortal house,
But sleeps in dust dead and inglorious,
Like beast, whose breath but in his nostrels is,
And has no hope of happiness or blis.
How many great ones may remembered be,
Which in their days most famouslie did flourish;
Of whom no word we hear, nor sign now see,
But as things wipt out with a sponge to perish,
Because they living, cared not to cherishe
No gentle wits, through pride or couertize,
Which might their names for ever memorize.
Provide therefore (ye Princes) whilst ye live,
That of the Muses ye may friended be,
Which unto men eternity do give;
For they be daughters of Dame memory,
And Jove the father of eternity,
And do those men in golden thrones repose,
Whose merits they to glorify do chose.
The seven fold iron gates of grisly Hell,
And horrid house of sad Proserpina,
They able are with power of mighty spell
To break, and thence the souls to bring away
Out of dread darkness, to eternal day,
And them immortal make, which else would die
In soul forgetfulness, and nameles lie.
So whilome raised they the puissant brood
Of golden g^rt Al^mena, for great merit,
Out of the dust, to which the Oetaean wood
Had him consumed, and spent his vital spirit:
To highest heaven, where now he does inherit^
All happiness in Hebes silver bower,
Chosen to be her dearest Paramoure.
So raisde they eke fair Ledaes warlick twins,
And interchanged life unto them lent,
That when the one dies, the other then begins
To show in Heaven his brightness orient^
And they, for pity of the sad wayment,
Which Orpheus for Eurydice did make,
Her back again to life sent for his sake.
So happy are they, and so fortunate,
Whom the Pierian sacred sisters love,
That freed from bands of impacable fate,
And power of death, they live for aye above,
Where mortal wreakes their blis may not remove:
But with the Gods, for former virtues meede,
On Nectar and Ambrosia do feed.
For deeds do die, how ever nobly done,
And thoughts of men do as themselves decay,
But wise words taught in numbers for to run,
Recorded by the Muses, live for ay;
Ne may with storming showers be washed away,
Ne bitter breathing winds with harmfull blast,
Nor age, nor envy shall them ever wast.
In vain do earthly Princes then, in vain
Seek with Pyramides, to heaven aspired;
Or huge Colosses, built with costly pain;
Or brazen Pillours, never to be fired,
Or Shrines, made of the metal most desired;
To make their memories for ever live:
For how can mortal immortality give.
Such one Mansolus made, the worlds great wonder,
But now no remnant does thereof remain:
Such one Marcellus, but was torn with thunder:
Such one Lisippus, but is worn with rain:
Such one King Edmond, but was rent for gain.
All such vain moniments of earthly mass,
Devoured of Time, in time to naught do pass.
But fame with golden wings aloft does fly,
Above the reach of ruinous decay,
And with brave plumes does beat the azure sky,
Admired of base-borne men from far away:
Then who so will with virtuous deeds assay
To mount to heaven, on Pegasus must ride,
And with sweet Poets verse be glorifide.
For not to have been dipped in Lethe lake,
Could save the son of Thetis from to die;
But that blind bard did him immortal make
With verses, dipped in deaw of Castalie:
Which made the Eastern Conqueror to cry,
O fortunate yong-man, whose virtue found
So brave a Trompe, thy noble acts to sound.
Therefore in this half happy I do read
Good Melibae, that has a Poet got,
To sing his living praises being dead,
Deseruiug never here to be forgot,
In spite of envy, that his deeds would spot:
Since whose decease, learning lies unregarded,
And men of arms do wander unrewarded.
Those two be those two great calamities,
That long ago did grieve the noble spright
Of Solomon with great indignities;
Who whilome was alive the wisest wight.
But now his wisdom is disprooued quite^
For he that now welds all things at his will,
Scorns the one and the other in his deeper skill.
O grief of griefs, o gall of all good hearts,
To see that virtue should despised be
Of him, that first was raisde for virtuous parts,
And now broad spreading like an aged tree,
Lets none shoot up, that nigh him planted be:
O let the man, of whom the Muse is scorned,
Nor alive, nor dead be of the Muse adorned.
O vile worlds trust, that with such vain illusion
Has so wise men bewitched, and ouerkest,
That they see not the way of their confusion,
O vainesse to be added to the rest,
That do my soul with inward grief infest:
Let them behold the piteous fall of me:
And in my case their own ensample see.
And who so else that sits in highest seat
Of this worlds glory, worshipped of all,
Ne fears change of time, nor fortunes threate,
Let him behold the horror of my fall,
And his own end unto remembrance call;
That of like ruin he may warned be,
And in himself be moved to pity me.
Thus having ended all her piteous plaint,
With doleful shrikes she vanished away,
That I through inward sorrow wexen fain^,
And all astonished with deep dismay,
For her departure, had no word to say^
But sat long time in senseless sad affright,
Looking still, if I might of her have sight.
Which when I missed, having looked long,
My thought returned grieved home again,
Renewing her complaint with passion strong,
For ruth of that same woman's pi^eous pain;
Whose words recording in my troubled braine^
I felt such anguish wound my feeble heart,
That frosen horror r^n through every part.
So inlie greeuing in my groaning breast,
And deeply muzing at her doubtful speech,
Whose meaning much I labored forth to wreste,
Being above my slender reasons reach;
At length by demonstration me to teach,
Before mine eyes strange sights presented were,
Like tragic Pageants seeming to appear.
1
I saw an Image, all of massy gold,
Placed on high upon an Altar fair,
That all, which did the same from far behold,
Might worship it, and fall on lowest staire.
No^ that great Idol might with this compaire,
To which the Assyrian tyrant would have made
The holy brethren, falsely to have praid,
But th'Altare, on the which this Image staid,
Was (o great pity) built of brickle clay,
That shortly the ^oundation decaid,
With showers of heaven and tempests worn away,
Then down it fell, and low in ashes lay,
Scorned of every one, which by it went^
That I it seeing, dearly did lament.
2
Next unto this a stat^lie Tower appeared,
Built all of richest stone, that might be found,
And nigh unto the Heavens in height vpreared,
But placed on a plot of sandy ground:
Not that great Tower, which is so much renownd
For tongues confusion in holy writ,
King Ninus work might be compared to it.
But o vain labors of terrestrial wit,
That buildes so strongly on ^o frail a soil,
As with each storm does fall away, and flit,
And gives the fruit of all your travails toil,
To be the pray of Time, and Fortunes spoil:
I saw this Tower fall suddenly to dust,
That nigh with grief thereof my heart was brust.
3
Then did I see a pleasant Paradize,
Full of sweet flowers and daintiest delights,
Such as on earth man could not more deuize,
With pleasures choice to feed his cheerful sprights:
Not that, which Merlin by his Magic slights
Made for the gentle squire, to entertain
His fair Belphoebe, could this gardine stain.
But o short pleasure bought with lasting pain,
Why will hereafter any flesh delight
In earthly blis, and joy in pleasures vain,
Since that I saw this gardine wasted quite,
That where it was scarce seemed any sight?
That I, which once that beauty did behold,
Could not from tears my melting eyes with-holde.
4
Soon after this a Giaunt came in place,
Of wondrous power, and of exceeding stature,
That none durst vewe the horror of his face,
Yet was he mild of speech, and meek of nature
Not he, which in despite of his Creator
With railing terms defied the Jewish hoast^
Might with this mighty one in hugenes boast.
For from the one he could to the other coast,
Stretch his strong thighs, and th'Occaean ouerstride^
And reatch his hand into his enemies host.
But see the end of pomp and fleshly pride;
One of his feet unawares from him did slide^
That down he fell into the deep Abisse,
Where drowned with him is all his earthly bliss.
5
Then did I see a Bridge, made all of gold,
Over the Sea from one to other side,
Withouten prop or pillour it t'vpholde,
But like the coulored Rainbowe arched wide:
Not that great Arche, with Traian edifide,
To be a wonder to all age ensuing,
Was matchable to this in equal vewing.
But (ah) what boots i^ to see earthly thing
In glory, or in greatness to excel,
Since time does greatest things to ruin bring?
This goodly bridge, one foot not fastened well,
Began fail, and all the rest down shortly fell,
Ne of so brave a building ought remained,
That grief thereof my spirit greatly pained.
6
I saw two Bears, as white as any milk,
Lying together in a mighty cave,
Of mild aspect, and hair as soft as silk,
That saluage nature seemed not to have,
Nor after greedy spoil of blood to crave:
Two fairer beasts might not elsewhere be found,
Although the compast world were sought around.
But what can long abide above this ground
In state of blis, or steadfast happiness?
The Cave, in which these Bears lay sleeping sound,
Was but earth, and with her own weightinesse
Upon them fell, and did unawares oppress,
That for great sorrow of their sudden fate,
Henceforth all words felicity I hate.
Much was I troubled in my heavy spright,
At sight of these sad spectacles forepast,
That all my senses were bereaved quight,
And I in mind remained sore aghast,
Distraught twixt fear and pitie^ when at last
I heard a voice, which loudly to me called,
That with the suddein shrill I was appalled.
Behold (said it) and by ensample see,
That all is vanity and grief of mind,
Ne other comfort in this world can be,
But hope of heaven, and heart to God inclinde;
For all the rest must needs be left behind:
With that it bad me, to the other side
To cast mine eye, where other sights I spide?
1
Upon that famous Rivers further shore,
There stood a snowie Swan of heavenly hiew,
And gentle kind, as ever Foul before;
A fairer one in all the goodly criew
Of white Strimonian brood might no man view:
There he most sweetly sung the prophecy
Of his own death in doleful Elegy.
At last, when all his mourning melody
He ended had, that both the shores resounded,
Feeling the fit that him forewarnd to die,
With lofty flight above the earth he bounded,
And out of sight to highest heaven mounted:
Where now he is become an heavenly sign;
There now the joy is his, here sorrow mine.
2
Whilst thus I looked, lo adowne the Lee,
I saw an Harp stroong all with silver twyne,
And made of gold and costly yuorie,
Swimming, that whilome seemed to have been
The harp, on which Dan Orpheus was seen
Wild beasts and forests after him to lead,
But was th'Harpe of Philisides now dead.
At length out of the River it was reard
And borne above the clouds to be diuin'd,
Whilst all the way most heavenly noise was heard
Of the strings, stirred with the warbling wind,
That wrought both joy and sorrow in my mind:
So now in heaven a sign it does appear,
The Harp well known beside the Northern Bear.
3
Soon after this I saw on the other side,
A curious Coffer made of Heben wood,
That in it did most precious treasure hide,
Exceeding all this baser worlds good:
Yet through the ouerflowing of the flood
It almost drowned was, and done to naught,
That sight thereof much grieved my pensive thought.
At length when most in peril it was brought,
Two Angels down descending with swift flight,
Out of the swelling stream it lightly caught,
And twixt their blessed arms it carried quight
Above the reach of any living sight:
So now it is transformed into that star,
In which all heavenly treasures locked are.
4
Looking aside I saw a stately Bed,
Adorned all with costly cloth of gold,
That might for any Princes couche be red,
And decked with dainty flowers, as if it should
Be for some bride, her joyous night to hold:
Therein a goodly Virgin sleeping lay:
A fairer wight saw never summers day.
I heard a voice that called far away
And her awaking bad her quickly dight,
For lo her Bridegroom was in ready ray
To come to her, and seek her loves delight:
With that she started up with cherefull sight,
When suddeinly both bed and all was gone,
And I in languor left there all alone.
5
Still as I gazed, I beheld where stood
A Knight all armed, upon a winged steed,
The same that was bred of Medusaes blood,
On which Dan Perseus borne of heavenly seed,
The fair Andromeda from peril freed:
Full mortally this Knight ywounded was,
That streams of blood forth flowed on the gr^s.
Yet was he decked (small joy to him alas)
With many garlands for his victories,
And with rich spoils, which late he did purchase
Through brave atcheiuements from his enemies:
Fainting at last through long infirmities,
He smote his steed, that straight to heaven him bore,
And left me here his loss for to deplore.
6
Lastly I saw an Arc of purest gold
Upon a brazen pillour standing hie,
Which th'ashes seemed of some great Prince to hold,
Enclosde therein for endless memory
Of him, whom all the world did glorify:
Seemed the heavens with the earth did disagree^
Whether should of those ashes keeper be.
At last me seemed wing footed Mercury,
From heaven descending to appease their strife,
The Arc did bear with him above the sky,
And to those ashes gave a second life,
To live in heaven, where happiness is ri^e:
At which the earth did grieve exceed^ngly,
And I for dole was almost like to die.
L^ Envoy.
Immortal spirit of Philisides,
Which now art made the heavens ornament,
That whilome wast the worlds chiefst riches;
Give leave to him that lou'de thee to lament
His loss, by lack of thee to heaven hent,
And with last duties of this broken verse,
Broken with sighs, to deck thy sable Hearse.
And ye fair Lady th'honor of your days,
And glory of the world, your high thoughts scorn;
Vouchsafe this moniment of his last praise,
With some few silver dropping tears t'adorne:
And as ye be of heavenly off spring borne,
So unto heaven let your high mind aspire,
And loath this dross of sin^ull worlds desire.
FINIS.
THE Tears of the Muses.

By ED. SP.

LONDON. Imprinted for William Ponsonbie, dwelling in Paul's Churchyard at the
sign of the Bishops head.

1591.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE the Lady Strange.
MOst brave and noble Lady, the things that make ye so much honored of the
world as ye be, are such, as (without my simple lines testimony) are
thoroughly known to all men; namely, your excellent beauty, your virtuous
behauior, and your noble match with that most honorable Lord the very Pattern
of right Nobility: But the causes for which ye have thus deserved of me to be
honored (if honor it be at all) are, both your particular bounties, and also
some private bands of affinity, which it has pleased your Ladyship to
acknowledge. Of which when as I found my self in no part worthy, I devised
this last slender means, both to intimate my humble affection to your Ladyship
and also to make the same universally known to the world; that by honoring
you they might know me, and by knowing me they might honor you. Vouch safe
noble Lady to accept this simple remembrance, though not worthy of your self,
yet such, as perhaps by good acceptance thereof, ye may hereafter cull out a
more meet and memorable euidenc^ of your own excell^nt deserts. So recommending
the same to your Ladyships good liking, I humbly take leave.

Your La: humbly eue^. Ed. Sp

The Tears of the Muses.
REhearse to me ye sacred Sisters nine:
The golden brood of great Apolloes wit,
Those piteous plaints and sorrowful sad tine,
Which late ye powered forth as ye did sit
Beside the silver Springs of Helicone,
Making your music of hart-breaking moan.
For since the time that Phoebus foolish son
Ythundered through Jove's auengefull wrath,
For traversing the charret of the Sun
Beyond the compass of his pointed path,
Of you his mournful Sisters was lamented,
Such mournful tunes were never since invented.
Nor since that fair Calliope did lose
Her loved Twins, the dearlings of her joy,
Her Palici, whom her unkindly foes
The fatal Sisters, did for spite destroy,
Whom all the Muses did bewail long space^
Was ever heard such wayling in this place.
For all their groves, which with the heavenly noys^s
Of their sweet instruments were wont to sound,
And th'hollow hills, from which their silver voices
Were wont redoubled Echoes to rebound,
Did now rebound with naught but rufull cries,
And yelling shrieks thrown up into the skies.
The trembling st^eames which wont in channels clear
To romble gently down with murmur soft,
And were by them right tunefull taught to bear
A Bases part amongst their consorts often;
Now forced to ouerflowe with brackish tears,
With troublous noise did dull their dainty ears.
The joyous Nymphs and lightfoote Faeries
Which thither came to hear their music sweet,
And to the measure of their melodies
Did learn to move their nimble shifting feet;
Now hearing them so heavily lament,
Like heavily lamenting from them went.
And all that else was wont to work delight
Through the divine infusion of their skill,
And all that else seemd fair and fresh in sight,
So made by nature for to serve their will,
Was turned now to dismal heaviness,
Was turned now to dreadful ugliness.
Ay me, what thing on earth that all thing breeds,
Might be the cause of so impatient plight?
What fury, or what ^eend with felon deeds
Has stirred up so mischievous despite?
Can grief then enter into heavenly hearts,
And pierce immortal breasts with mortal smarts?
Vouchsafe ye then, whom only it concerns,
To me those secret causes to display;
For none but you, or who of you it learnes
Can rightfully aread so doleful lay.
Begin thou eldest Sister of the crew^
And let the rest in order thee ensew.
Clio.
Hear thou great Father of the Gods on hie
That most art dreaded for thy thunder darts:
And thou our Sire that raignst in Castalie
And mount Parnasse, the God of goodly Arts:
Hear and behold the miserable state
Of us thy daughters, doleful desolate.
Behold the foul reproach and open shame,
The which is day by day unto us wrought
By such as hate the honor of our name,
The foes of learning, and each gentle thought;
They not contented us themselves to scorn,
Do seek to make us of the world forlorn.
Ne only they that dwell in lowly dust,
The sons of darkness and of ignorance;
But they, whom thou great Jove by doom unjust
Did to the type of honor erst advance;
They now puffed up with sdeignfull insolence,
Despise the brood of blessed Sapience.
The sectaries of my celestial skill,
That wont to be the worlds chief ornament,
And learned Impes that wont to shoot up still,
And grow to hight of kingdoms government
They vnderkeep, and with their spredding arms
Do beat their buds, that perish through their harms.
It most behoues the honorable race
Of mighty Peers, true wisdom to sustain,
And with their noble countenance to grace
The learned forheads, without gifts or gain:
Or rather learnd themselves behoues to be;
That is the girlond of Nobility.
But (ah) all otherwise they do esteem
Of th'heauenly gift of wisdoms influence,
And to be learned it a base thing deem;
Base minded they that want intelligence:
For God himself for wisdom most is praised,
And men to God thereby are nighest raised.
But they do only strive themselves to raise
Through pompous pride, and foolish vanity;
In the eyes of people they put all their praise,
And only boast of Arms and Auncestrie:
But virtuous deeds, which did those Arms first give
To their Grandsyres, they care not to a^chiue.
So I, that do all noble feats profes^e
To register, and sound in trump of gold;
Through their bad doings, or base slothfulness,
Find nothing worthy to be writ, or told:
For better far it were to hide their names,
Than telling them to blazon out their blames.
So shall succeeding ages have no light
Of things forepast, nor moniments of time,
And all that in this world is worthy hight
Shall die in darkness, and lie hid in slime:
Therefore I mourn with deep hearts sorrowing,
Because I nothing noble have to sing.
With that she raynd such store of streaming tears,
That could have made a stony heart to weep,
And all her Sisters rent their golden hears,
And their fair faces with salt humor steep.
So ended she: and then the next anew,
Began her grievous plaint as does ensew.
Melpomene.
O who shall power into my swollen eyes
A sea of tears that never may be dryde,
A brazen voice that may with shrilling cries
Pierce the dull heavens and fill the air wide,
And iron sides that sighing may endure,
To wail the wretchedness of world impure?
Ah wretched world the den of wickedness,
Deformd with filth and foul iniquity;
Ah wretched world the house of heaviness,
Filled with the wreaks of mortal misery;
Ah wretched world, and all that is therein
The vassals of Gods wrath, and slaves of sin.
Most miserable creature under sky
Man without understanding does appear,
For all this worlds affliction he thereby,
And Fortunes freakes is wisely taught to beare^
Of wretched life the only joy she is,
And the only comfort in calamities.
She arms the breast with constant patience,
Against the bitter throws of dolours darts,
She solaceth with rules of Sapience
The gentle minds, in midst of worldly smarts:
When he is sad, she seeks to make him merry,
And does refresh his sprights when they be werie.
But he that is of reasons skill bereft,
And wants the staff of wisdom him to stay,
Is like a ship in midst of tempest left
Withouten helm or Pilo^ her to sway,
Full sad and dreadful is that ships event:
So is the man that wants intendiment.
Why then do foolish men so much despize
The precious store of this celestial riches?
Why do they banish us, that patronize
The name of learning? Most unhappy wretches,
The which lie drowned in deep wretchedness,
Yet do not see their own unhappiness.
My part it is and my professed skill
The Stage with Tragic buskin to adorn,
And fill the Scene with plaint and outcries shrill
Of wretched persons, to misfortune borne:
But none more tragic matter I can find
Than this, of men deprived of sense and mind.
For all man's life me seems a Tragedy,
Full of sad sights and sore Catastrophees;
First coming to the world with weeping eye,
Where all his days like dolorous Trophies,
Are heapt with spoils of fortune and of fear,
And he at last laid forth on balefull bear.
So all with rufull spectacles is filled
Fit for Megera or Persephone;
But I that in true Tragedies am skild,
The flower of wit, find naught to busy me
Therefore I mourn, and pitifully moan,
Because that mourning matter I have none.
Then began she woefully to wail, and wring
Her wretched hands in lamentable wise;
And all her Sisters thereto answering.
Threw forth loud shricks and drerie doleful cries^
So rested she: and then the n^xt in rue,
Began her grievous plaint as does ensew.
Thalia.
Where ^e the sweet delights of learnings treasure,
That won^ with Comic sock to beautefie
The painted Theaters, and fill with pleasure
The listners eyes, and ears with melody;
In which I late was wont to rain as Queen,
And mask in mirth with Graces well befeeue^
O all is gone, and all that goodly glee,
Which wont to be the glory of gay wits,
Is laid abed, and no where now to see;
And in her room unseemly Sorrow sits,
With hollow brows and greisly countenance,
Marring my joyous gentle dalliaunce.
And him beside sits ugly Barbarism,
And brutish Ignorance, ycrept of late
Out of dredd darkness of the deep Abysme,
Where being bredd, he light and heaven does hate:
They in the minds of men now tyrannize,
And the fair Scene with rudenes foul disguize.
All places they with folly have possessed,
And with vain toys the vulgar entertain;
But me have banished, with all the rest
That whilome wont to wait upon my train,
Fine Counterfesaunce and vnhurtf^ll Sport,
Delight and Laughter decked in seemly sort.
All these, and all that else the Comic Stage
With seasoned wit and goodly pleasance graced^
By which man's life in his likest image
Was limned forth, are wholly now defaced;
And those sweet wits which wont the like to frame,
Are now despizd, and made a laughing game.
And he the man, whom Nature self had made
To mock her self, and Truth to imitate,
With kindly counter under Mimick shade,
Our pleasant Willy, ah is dead of late:
With whom all joy and jolly meriment
Is also deaded, and in dolor drent.
In stead thereof scoffing Scurrilitie,
And scornful Folly with Contempt is crept,
Rolling in rymes of shameless ribaudrie
Without regard, or due Decorum kept,
Each idle wit at will presumes to make,
And does the Learneds task upon him take.
But that same gentle Spirit, from whose pen
Large streams of honnie and sweet Nectar flow,
Scorning the boldness of such base-borne men,
Which dare their follies forth so rashly throw;
Does rather choose to sit in idle Cell,
Than so himself to mockery to sell.
So am I made the servant of the many,
And laughing stock of all that list to scorn,
Not honored nor cared for of any;
But loathed of losels as a thing forlorn:
Therefore I mourn and sorrow with the rest,
Until my cause of sorrow be redrest.
Therewith she lowdly did lament and shrike,
Pouring forth streams of tears abundantly,
And all her Sisters with compassion like,
The breaches of her singul^s did supply.
So rested she: and then the next in rue
Began her grievous plaint, as does ensew.
Euterpe.
Like as the dearling of the Summers pride,
Fair Philomele, when winters stormy wrath
The goodly fields, that erst so gay were did
In colors diverse, quite despoyled has,
All comfortless does hide her chearlesse head
During the time of that her widowhead:
So we, that erst were wont in sweet accord
All places with our pleasant notes to fill,
Whilst favorable times did us afford
Free liberty to chaunt our charms at will:
All comfortless upon the bared bow,
Like woeful Culuers do sit wayling now.
For far more bitter storm than winters stowre
The beauty of the world has lately wasted,
And those fresh buds, which wont so fair to flower,
Has marred quite, and all their blossoms blasted:
And those young pla^ts, which wont with fruit t'abou^d,
Now without fruit or leaves are to be found.
A stony coldness has benumbd the sense
And lively spirits of each living wight,
And dimd with darkness their intelligence,
Darkness more than Cymerians daily night?
And monstrous error flying in the air,
Has mard the face of all that seemed fair.
Image of hellish horror Ignorance,
Borne in the bosom of the black Abyss,
And fed with furies milk, for sustenaunce
Of his weak infancy, begot amiss
By yawning Sloth on his own mother Night;
So he his sons both Sire and brother hight.
He armd with blindness and with boldness stout,
(For blind is bold) has our fair light defaced;
And gathering unto him a ragged rout
Of Faunes and Satyrs, has our dwellings raced
And our chaste bowers, in which all virtue rained,
With brutishness and beastly filth has stained.
The sacred springs of horsefoot Helicon,
So often bedeawed with our learned lays,
And speaking streams of pure Castalion,
The famous witness of our wonted praise,
They trampled have with their foul footings trade,
And like to troubled puddles have them made.
Our pleasant groves, which planted were with pains,
That with our music wont so often to ring,
And arbors sweet, in which the Shepherds swains
Were wont so often their Pastoralls to sing,
They have cut down and all their pleasaunce mard,
That now no pastoral is to be hard.
In stead of them foul Goblins and Shriekowles,
With fearful howling do all places fill;
And feeble Echo now laments and howles,
The dreadful accents of their outcries shrill.
So all is turned into wilderness,
Whilst ignorance the Muses does oppress.
And I whose joy was erst with Spirit full
To teach the warbling pipe to sound aloft,
My spirits now dismayed with sorrow dull,
Do moan my misery in silence soft.
Therefore I mourn and wail incessantly,
Till please the heavens afford me remedy.
Therewith she wayled with exceeding woe
And pitious lamentation did make,
And all her sisters seeing her do so,
With equal plaints her sorrow did partake.
So rested she: and then the next in rue,
Began her grievous plaint as does ensew.
Terpsi^hore.
Who so has in the lap of soft delight
Been long time luld, and fed with pleasures sweet,
Feareles through his own fault or Fortunes spite,
To tumble into sorrow and regreet,
If chance him fall into calamity,
Finds greater burden of his misery.
So we that erst in ioyance did abound
And in the bosom of all blis did sit,
Like virgin Queens with laurel garlands cround,
For virtues meed and ornament of wit.
Since ignorance our kingdom did confound,
Be now become most wretched wightes on ground:
And in our royal thrones which lately stood
In th'hearts of men to rule them care^ully,
He now has placed his accursed brood,
By him begotten of foul infamy;
Blind Error, scornful Folly, and base Spite,
Who hold by wrong, that we should have by right.
They to the vulgar ^ort now pipe and sing,
And make them merry with their fooleries,
They cherelie chaunt and rymes at randon fling,
The fruitful spawne of their rank fanta^ies:
They feed the ears of fools with flattery,
And good men blame, and losels magnify:
All places they do with their toy^s possess,
And reign in liking of the multitude,
The schools they fill with fond new fanglenesse,
And sway in Court with pride and rashness rude;
Among simple shepherds they do boast their skill,
And say their music matcheth Phoebus quill.
The noble hearts to pleasures they allure,
And tell their Prince that learning, is but vain,
Fair Ladies loves they spot with thoughts impure,
And gentle minds with lewd delights distaine:
Clerks they to loathly idleness entice,
And fill their books with discipline of vice.
So every where they rule and tyrannize,
For their usurped kingdoms maintenance,
The whiles we silly Maids, whom they dispize,
And with reproachful scorn discountenaunce,
From our own native heritage exilde,
Walk through the world of every one reuilde.
Nor any one does care to call us in,
Or once vouchsafes us to entertain,
Unless some one perhaps of gentle kin,
For pitties sake compassion our pain:
And yield us some relief in this distress,
Yet to be so relieved is wre^chednesse.
So wander we all careful comfortless,
Yet none does care to comfort us at all;
So seek we help our sorrow to redress,
Yet none vouchsafes to answer to our call:
Therefore we mourn and pitiless complain,
Because none living pittieth our pain.
With that she wept and woefully waymented,
That naught on earth her grief might pacifie^
And all the rest her doleful din augmented,
With shrikes and groans and grievous agony.
So ended she: and then the next in rue,
Began her piteous plaint as does ensew.
Erato
Ye gentle Spirits breathing from above,
Where ye in Venus silver bower were bred,
Thoughts half divine full of the fire of love,
With beawtie kindled and with pleasure fed,
Which ye now in security possess,
Forgetful of your former heaviness:
Now change the tenor of your joyous lays,
With which ye use your loves to deifie,
And blazon forth an earthly beauties praise,
Above the compass of the arched sky:
Now change your praises into piteous c^ies,
And Eulogies turn into Elegies.
Such as ye wont whenas those bitter stounds
Of raging love first began you to torment,
And launch your hearts with lamentable wounds
Of secret sorrow and sad languishment,
Before your Loves did take you unto grace;
Those now renew as fitter for this place.
For I that rule in measure moderate
The tempest of that stormy passion,
And use to pai^t in ^i^^s the troublous state
Of Lovers li^^ in like^^ ^a^^ion,
Am put from (...) my ^^ndlie skill,
Banished by t^o^^ (...) with leawdnes fill.
Love wont to b^ schoolmaster of my skill,
And the deuicefull matter of my song;
Sweet Love deuoyd of villainy or ill,
But pure and spotle^^ as at first he sprung
Out of The Almighty's bosom, where he nests;
From thence infused into mortal breasts.
Such high conceit of that celestial fire,
The base-borne brood of blindness cannot gesse^
N^ ever dare their dunghill thoughts aspire
Unto so lofty pitch of perfectnes^e,
But rhyme at riot, and do rage in love;
Yet little wot what does thereto behoue.
Fair Cytheree the Mother of delight,
And Queen of beauti^, now thou may go pack,
For lo thy Kingdom is de^a^d quight,
Thy scepter rent, and power put to wrack;
And thy gay Son, that winged God of Love,
May now go prune his plumes like ruffed Dove.
And ye three Twins to light by Venus brought,
The sweet companions of the Muses late,
From whom whateuer thing is goodly thought
Does borrow grace, the fancy to aggrate;
Go beg with us, and be companions still
As heretofore of good, so now of ill.
For neither you nor we shall any more
Find entertainment, or in Court or School:
For that which was accounted heretofore
The learneds meed, is now lent to the fool,
He sings of love, and makes loving lays,
And they them hear, and they them highly praise.
With that she powered forth a brackish flood
Of bitter tears, and made exceeding moan;
And all her Sisters seeing her sad mood,
With loud laments her answered all at one.
So ended she: and then the next in rue
Began her grievous plaint, as does ensew.
Calliope.
To whom shall I my evil case complain,
Or tell the anguish of my inward smart,
Since none is left to remedy my pain,
Or deignes to pity a perplexed heart;
But rather seeks my sorrow to augment
With foul reproach, and cruel banishment.
For they to whom I used to apply
The faithful service of my learned skill,
The goodly offspring of Jove's progeny,
That wont the world with famous acts ^o fill;
Whose living praises in heroic style,
It is my chief profession to compyle.
They all corrupted through the rust of time,
That does all fairest things on earth deface,
Or through unnoble sloth, or sinful rain,
That does degenerate the noble race;
Have both desire of worthy deeds forlorn,
And name of learning utterly do scorn.
Ne do they care to have the auncestrie
Of the old Heroes memorizde anew,
Ne do they care that late posterity
Should know their names, or speak their praises dew:
But die forgot from whence at first they sprung,
As they themselves shall be forgot ere long.
What boots it then to come from glorious
Forefathers, or to have been nobly bred?
What odds twixt Irus and old Inachus?
Twixt best and worst, when both alike are ded;
If none of neither mention should make,
Nor out of dust their memories awake.
Or who would ever care to do brave deed,
Or strive in virtue others to excel;
If none should yield him his deserved meed,
Due praise, that is the spur of doing well?
For if good were not praised more than ill,
None would choose goodness of his own freewill.
Therefore the nurse of virtue I am hight,
And golden Trompet of eternit^e,
That lowly thoughts lift up to heavens hight,
And mortal men have power to deifie:
Bacchus and Hercules I raisd to heaven,
And Charlemaine, amongst the Starris seven.
But now I will my golden Clarion rend,
And will henceforth immortalize no more:
Since I no more find worthy to commend
For prize of value, or for learned lore:
For noble Peers whom I was wont to raise,
Now only seek for pleasure, naught for praise.
Their great revenues all in sumptuous pride
They spend, that naught to learning they may spare;
And the rich fee which Poets wont divide,
Now Parasites and Sycophants do share:
Therefore I mourn and endless sorrow make,
Both for my self and for my Sisters sake.
With that she lowdly began to wail and shrike,
And from her eyes a sea of tears did power,
And all her sisters with compassion like,
Did more increase the sharpnes of her shower.
So ended she: and then the next in rue
Began her plaint, as does herein ensew.
Urania.
What wrath of Gods, or wicked influence
Of Stars conspiring wretched men t'afflict,
Has powrd on earth this noyous pestilence,
That mortal minds does inwardly infect
With love of blindness and of ignorance,
To dwell in darkness without souerance?
What difference twixt man and beast is left,
When th'heauenlie light of knowledge is put out,
And th'ornaments of wisdom are bereft?
Then wandreth he in error and in doubt,
Vnweeting of the danger he is in,
Through fleshes frailty and deceit of sin.
In this wide world in which they wretches stray,
It is the only comfort which they have,
It is their light, their loadstarre and their day;
But hell and darkness and the grisly grave
Is ignorance, the enemy of grace,
That minds of men borne heavenly does debace.
Through knowledge we behold the worlds creation,
How in his cradle first he fostred was;
And judge of Natures cunning operation,
How things she formed of a formelesse mas:
By knowledge we do learn our selves to know,
And what to man, and what to God we owe.
From hence we mount aloft unto the sky,
And look into the Crystal firmament,
There we behold the heavens great Hierarchy,
The Stars pure light, the Spheres swift mouement,
The Spirits and Intelligences fair,
And Angels waighting on The Almighty's chair.
And there with humble mind and high insight,
The Eternal Makers majesty we view,
His love, his truth, his glory, and his might,
And mercy more than mortal men can view.
O sovereign Lord, o sovereign happiness
To see thee, and thy m^rcie measurelesse:
Such happiness have they that do embrace
The precepts of my heavenly discipline,
But shame and sorrow and accursed case
Have they, that scorn the school of arts divine.
And banish me which do profess the skill
To make men heavenly wise, through humbled will.
How ever yet they me despise and spite,
I feed on sweet contentment of my thought,
And please my self with mine own selfe-delight,
In contemplation of things heavenly wrought:
So loathing earth, I look up to the sky,
And being driven hence I thither fly.
Thence I behold the misery of men
Which want the blis that wisdom would the^ breed,
And like brute beasts do lie in loathsome den,
Of ghostly darkness, and of gastlie dreed:
For whom I mourn and for my self complain,
And for my Sisters eake whom they disdain.
With that she wept and waild so pityouslie,
As if her eyes had been two springing wells:
And all the rest her sorrow to supply,
Did throw forth shrieks and cries and dreery yells.
So ended she, and then the next in rue,
Began her mournful plaint as does ensew.
Polyhymnia.
A doleful case desires a doleful song,
Without vain art or curious complements,
And squallid Fortune into baseness flong,
Does scorn the pride of wonted ornaments.
Then fittest are these ragged rimes for me,
To tell my sorrows that exceeding be:
For the sweet numbers and melodious measures,
With which I wont the winged words to tie,
And make a fruitful Diapase of pleasures,
Now being let to run at liberty
By those which have no skill to rule them right,
Have now quite lost their natural delight.
Heaps of huge words vphoorded hideously,
With horrid sound though having little sense,
They think to be chief praise of Poetry;
And thereby wanting due intelligence,
Have mard the face of goodly Poesy,
And made a monster of their fantasy:
Whilom in ages past none might profess
But Princes and high Priests that secret skill,
The sacred laws therein they wont express,
And with deep Oracles their verses fill:
Then was she held in sovereign dignity,
And made the noursling of Nobility.
But now nor Prince nor Priest does her maintain,
But suffer her profaned for to be^e
Of the base vulgar, that with hands unclean
Dares to pollute her hidden mystery.
And treads under foot her holy things,
Which was the care of Kesars and of Kings.
One only lives, her ages ornament,
And myrrour of her Makers majesty;
That with rich bounty and dear cherishment,
Supports the praise of noble Poesy:
Ne only favors them which it profess,
But is her self a peer^les Poetresse.
Most peereles Prince, most peereles Poetresse,
The true Pandora of all heavenly graces,
Divine Elisa, sacred Emperesse:
Live she for ever, and her royal P'laces
Be filled with praises of diuinest wits,
That her eternize with their heavenly writs.
Some few beside, this sacred skill esteem,
Admirers of her glorious excellence,
Which being lightened with her beawties beme,
Are thereby filled with happy influence:
And lifted up above the worlds gaze,
To sing with Angels her immortal praize.
But all the rest as borne of saluage brood,
And having been with Acorns always fed;
Can no whit savor this celestial food,
But with base thoughts are into blindness led,
And kept from looking on the lightsome day:
For whom I wail and weep all that I may.
Eftsoons such store of tears she forth did power,
As if she all to water would have gone^
And all her sisters seeing her sad stowre,
Did weep and wail and made exceeding moan:
And all their learned instruments did break,
The ^^st vnto^d no lo^^ng tongue can speak.
FINIS.
Virgils Gnat. Long since dedicated To the most noble and excellent Lord, the
Earl of Leicester, late deceased.
VVRong'd, yet not daring to express my pain,
To you (great Lord) the causer of my care,
In clowdie tears my case I thus complain
Unto yourselfe, that only privy are:
But if that any O^dipus unware
Shall chance, through power of some divining spright,
To read the secret of this riddle rare,
And know the purporte of my evil plight,
Let him rest pleased with his own insight,
Ne further seek to gloss upon the text:
For grief enough it is to grieved wight
To feel his fault, and not be further vexed.
But what so by my self may not be showen,
May by this Gnatts complaint be easily known.
We now have playde ( Augustus) wantonly,
Tuning our song unto a tender Muse,
And like a cobweb weauing slenderly,
Have only playde: let thus much then excuse
This Gnats small Poem, that the whole history
Is but a jest, though envy it abuse:
But who such sports and sweet delights does blame,
Shall lighter ^eeme than this Gnats idle name.
Hereafter, when as season more secure
Shall bring forth fruit, this Muse shall speak to thee
In bigger notes, that may thy sense allure,
And for thy worth frame some fit Poesy,
The golden offspring of Latona pure,
And ornament of great Jove's progeny,
Phoebus shall be the author of my song,
Playing on yuorie harp with silver strong.
He shall inspire my verse with gentle mood
Of Poets Prince, whether he won beside
Fair Xanthus sprincled with Chimaeras blood;
Or in the woods of Astery abide;
Or whereas mount Parnasse, the Muses brood,
Does his broad forhead like two horns divide,
And the sweet waves of sounding Castaly
With liquid foot does slide down easily.
Wherefore ye Sisters which the glory be
Of the Pierian streams, fair Naiades,
Go too, and dancing all in company,
Adorn that God: and thou holy Pales,
To whom the honest care of husbandry
Returns by continual success,
Have care for to pursue his footing light;
Through the wide woods, and groves, with green leaves dight.
Professing thee I lifted am aloft
Betwixt the forest wide and starrie sky:
And thou most dread ( Octauius) which often
To learned wits give courage worthily,
O come (thou sacred child) come sliding soft,
And favor my beginnings graciously:
For not these leaves do sing that dreadful stound,
When Giants blood did stain Phlegraean ground.
Nor how th'halfe horsy people, Centaures hight,
Fought with the bloody Lapithaes at board,
Nor how the East with tyranous despite
Burnt the Attick towers, and people slew with sword^
Nor how mount Athos through exceeding might
Was dug down, nor iron bands abord
The Pontick sea by their huge Navy cast,
My volume shall renown, so long since past.
Nor Hellespont trampled with horses feet,
When flocking Persians did the Greeks affray^
But my soft Muse, as for her power more meet,
Delights (with Phoebus friendly leave) to play
An easy running verse with tender feet.
And thou (dread sacred child) to thee always,
Let everlasting lightsome glory strive,
Through the worlds endless ages to survive.
And let an happy room remain for thee
Among heavenly ranks, where blessed souls do rest^
And let long lasting life with joyous glee,
As thy due meede that thou deseruest best,
Hereafter many years remembered be
Amongst good men, of whom thou often are blessed;
Live thou for ever in all happiness:
But let us turn to our first business.
The fiery Sun was mounted now on hight
Up to the heavenly towers, and shot each where
Out of his golden Charet glistering light;
And fair Aurora with her rosy hear,
The hateful darkness now had put to flight,
When as the shepherd seeing day appear,
His little Goats began drive out of their stalls,
To feed abroad, where pasture best befalls.
To an high mountains top he with them went,
Where thickest grass did cloth the open hills:
They now amongst the woods and thickets meant,
Now in the valleies wandering at their wills,
Spread themselves far abroad through each descent;
Some on the soft green grass feeding their fills;
Some clambring through the hollow cliffes on hy,
Nibble the bushie shrubs, which grow thereby.
Others the utmost boughs of trees do crop,
And bronze the woodbine twigges, that freshly bud;
This with full bit does cat^h the utmost top
Of some soft Willow, or new grown stud;
This with sharp teeth the bramble leaves does lop,
And chaw the tender prickles in her Cud;
The whiles another high does ouerlooke
Her own like image in a crystal brook.
O the great happiness, which shepherds have,
Who so loathes not too much the poor estate,
With mind that ill use does before deprave,
Ne measures all things by the costly rate
Of riotise, and semblants outward brave;
No such sad cares, as wont to macerate
And rend the greedy minds of covetous men,
Do ever creep into the shepherds den.
Ne cares he if the fle^ce, which him arayes,
Be not twice steeped in Assyrian dye,
Ne glistering of gold, which vnderlayes
The summer beams, do blind his gazing eye.
Ne pictures beauty, n^r the glauncing rays
Of precious stones, whence no good comes by;
Ne yet his cup embost with Imagery
Of Baetus or of Alcons vanity.
Ne ought the whelky pearls esteems he,
Which are from Indian seas brought far away:
But with pure breast from careful sorrow free,
On the soft grass his limbs does often display,
In sweet spring time, when flowers variety
With sundry colors paints the sprincled lay;
There lying all at ease, from guile or spite,
With pype of fennie reeds does him delight.
There he, Lord of himself, with palm bedight,
His looser locks does wrap in wreath of vine:
There his milk dropping Goats be his delight,
And fruitful Pales, and the forest green,
And darkesome caves in pleasant valleys pight,
Whereas continual shade is to be seen,
And where fresh springing wells, as crystal neat,
Do always flow, to quench his thirsty heat.
O who can lead then a more happy life,
Than he, that with clean mind and hear sincere,
No greedy riches knows nor bloody strife,
No deadly fight of warlick fleet does fear,
Ne runs in peril of foes cruel knife,
That in the sacred temples he may rear,
A trophee of his glittering spoils and treasure,
Or may abound in riches above measure.
Of him his God is worshipped with his sithe,
And not with skill of craftsman polished:
He joys in groves, and makes himself full blythe,
With sundry flowers in wild fields gathered;
Ne frankincens he from Panchaea buyth,
Sweet quiet harbors in his harmeles head,
And perfect pleasure buildes her joyous bower,
Free from sad cares, that rich men's hearts deuowre.
This all his care, this all his whole endeavor,
To this his mind and senses he does bend,
How he may flow in quiets matchles treasour,
Content with any food that God does send;
And how his limbs, resolved through idle leisour,
Unto sweet sleep he may securely lend,
In some cool shadow from the scorching heat,
The whiles his flock their chawed cuds do eat,
O flocks, O Faunes, and O ye pleasant springs
Of Tempe, where the country Nymphs are rife,
Through whose not costly care each shepherd sings
As merry notes upon his ^usticke Fife,
As that Astraean bard, whose fame now rings
Through the wide world, and leads as joyful life^
Free from all troubles and from worldly toil,
In which fond men do all their days turmoyle.
In such delights whilst thus his careless time
This shepherd drives, vpleaning on his batt,
And on shrill reeds chaunting his rustic rhyme,
Hyperion throwing forth his beams full hott,
Into the highest top of heaven began clime,
And the world parting by an equal lot,
Did shed his whirling flames on either side,
As the great O^ean does himself divide.
Then began the shepherd gather into one
His straggling Goats, and drove them to a foord,
Whose caerule stream, rombling in Pible stone,
Crept under moss as green as any goord.
Now had the Sun half heaven ouergone,
When he his heard back from that water foord,
Drove from the force of Phoebus boiling ray,
Into thick shadows, there themselves to lay.
Soon as he them placed in thy sacred wood
(O Delian Goddess) saw, to which of yore
Came the bad daughter of old Cadmus brood,
Cruel Agaue, flying vengeance sore
Of king Nictileus for the guilty blood,
Which she with cursed hands had shed before;
There she half frantic having slain her son,
Did shroud her self like punishment to shonne.
Here also playing on the grassy green,
Woodgods, and Satyrs, and swift Dryades,
With many Fairies often were dancing seen.
Not so much did Dan Orpheus repress,
The streams of Hebrus with his songs I ween,
As that fair troop of woodie Goddesses
Stayed thee, (O Peneus) pouring forth to thee,
From cheereful looks great mirth and gladsome glee.
The very nature of the place, resounding
With gentle murmr of the breathing air,
A pleasant bower with all delight abounding
In the fresh shadow did for them prepayre,
To rest their limbs with wearines redounding^
For first the high Palm trees with branches ^aire,
Out of the lowly valleys did arise,
And high shoot up their heads into the skies.
And them amongst the wicked Lotos grew,
Wicked, for holding guilefully away
Ulysses men, whom rapt with sweetenes new,
Taking to host, it quite from him did stay,
And eke those trees, in whose transformed hew
The Suns sad daughters waylde the rash decay
Of Phaeton, whose limbs with lightening rent,
They gathering up, with sweet ^eares did lament.
And that same tree, in which Demophoon,
By his disloyalty lam^nted sore,
Eternal hurt left unto many one:
Whom als accompanied the Oak, of yore
Through fatal charms transformd to such an one:
The Oak, whose Acornes were our food, before
That Ceres seed of mortal men were known,
Which first Triptoleme taught how to be sown.
Here also grow the rougher rinded Pine,
The great Argoan ships brave ornament
Whom golden Fleece did make an heavenly sign;
Which coue^ing, with his high tops extent,
To make the mountains touch the stars divine,
Decks all the forest with embellishment,
And the black Holme that loves the watrie vale,
And the sweet Cypres^e sign of deadly bale.
Emongst the rest the clambring Yu^e grew,
Kni^ting his wanton arms with grasping hold,
Least that the Poplar happily should rue
Her brothers strokes, whose boughs she does enfold
With her lythe twigs, till they the top survew,
And paint with pallid green her buds of gold.
Next did the Myrtle tree to her approach,
Not yet unmindful of her old reproach.
But the small Birds in their wide boughs embowring,
Chaunted their sundry tunes with sweet consent,
And under them a silver Spring forth pouring
His trickling streams, a gentle murmr sent;
Thereto the frogs, bred in the slimie scowring
Of the moist moors, their iarring voices bent;
And shrill grasshoppers chirped them around:
All which the ayrie Echo did resound.
In this so pleasant place this Spe^eards flock
Lay every where, their weary limbs to rest,
On every bush, and e^erie hollow rock
Where breathe on the^ the whistling wind mote best;
The whiles the Shepherd self tending his stock,
Sat by the fountain side, in shade to rest,
Where gentle slumbring sleep oppres^ed him,
Displaid on ground, and seized every ^im.
Of treachery or trains naught took he keep,
But looslie on the grassie green dispredd,
His dearest life did trust to careless sleep;
Which weighing down his drouping drowsy hedd,
In quiet rest his molten heart did steep,
Deuoid of care, and fear of all falshedd:
Had not inconstant fortune, bent to ill,
Bid strange mischance his quietness to spill.
For at his wonted time in that same place
An huge great Serpent all with speckles pide,
To drench himself in moorish slime did trace,
There from the boiling heat himself to hide:
He passing by with rolling wreathed pace,
With brandisht tongue the empty air did gride,
And wrapped his scaly boughts with fell despite,
That all things seemed appalled at his sight.
Now more and more having himself en^olde,
His glittering breast he lifts up on hie,
And with proud vaunt his head aloft does hold;
His creste above spotted with purple die,
On every side did shine like scaly gold,
And his bright eyes glauncing full dreadfullie,
Did seem to flame out flakes of flashing fire,
And with stern looks to threaten kindled ire.
Thus wise long time he did himself dispace
There round about, when as at last he spide
Lying along before him in that place,
That flocks grand Captain, and most trusty guide^
E^tsoones more fierce in visage, and in pace,
Throwing his fiery eyes on every ^ide,
He comes on, and all things in his way
Full stearnly rends, that might his passage stay.
Much he disdaines, that any one should dare
To come unto his haunt; for which intent
He inly burns, and gins straight to prepare
The weapons, which Nature to him has lent;
Fellie he hisseth, and does fiercely stare,
And has his jaws with angry spirits rent,
That all his tract with bloody drops is stained,
And all his foldes are now in length outstrained.
Whom thus at point prepared, to prevent,
A little noursling of the humid air,
A Gnat unto the sleepie Shepherd went,
And marking where his ey-lids twinkling rare,
Showed the two pearls, which sight unto him lent,
Through their thin couerings appearing fair,
His little needle there infixing deep,
Warnd him awake, from death himself to keep.
Wherewith enraged, he fiercely began vpstart,
And with his hand him rashly bruzing, slew
As in auengement of his heedles smart,
That straight the spirit out of his senses ^^^w,
And life out of his members did depart:
When suddenly casting aside his view,
He spide his foe with felonous intent,
And fervent eyes to his destruction bent.
All suddenly dismayed, and hartles quight,
He fled abacke, and catching hasty hold
Of a young alder hard beside him pight,
It rent, and straight about him began behold,
What God or Fortune would assist his might.
But whether God or Fortune made him bold
Its hard to read: yet hardy will he had
To overcome, that made him less adrad.
The scaly back of that most hideous snake
Enwrapped round, often faining to retire,
And often him to assail, he fiercely struck
Whereas his temples did his creast front tire;
And for he was but slow, did slowth off shake,
And gazing ghastly on (for fear and ire
Had blent so much his sense, that less he feared;)
Yet when he saw him slain, himself he cheard.
By this the night forth from the darksome bower
Of Herebus her teemed steedes began call,
And laesie Vesper in his timely hour
From golden Oeta began proceed withall^
Whenas the Shepherd after this sharp stowre,
Seeing the doubled shadows low to fall,
Gathering his straying flock, does homeward fare,
And unto rest his weary joints prepare.
Into whose sense so soon as lighter sleep
Was entered^ and now loosing every lim,
Sweet slumbring deaw in carelessness did steep,
The Image of that Gnat appeard to him,
And in sad terms began sorrowfully weep,
With greislie countenance and visage grim,
Wailing the wrong which he had done of late,
In steed of good hastening his cruel fate.
Said he, what have I wretch deserved, that thus
Into this bitter bale I am outcast,
Whilst that thy life more dear and precious
Was than mine own, so long as it did last?
I now in lieu of pains so gracious,
Am tossed in the air with every windy blast:
Thou safe delivered from sad decay,
Thy careless limbs in loose sleep do display.
So live thou, but my poor wretched ghost
Is forced to ferrie over Lethes River,
And spoyld of Charon too and fro am tossed.
See thou, how all places quake and quiver
Lightened with deadly lamps on every post?
Tisiphone ^ach where does shake and shiuer
Her flaming fire brond, encountering me,
Whose locks vncombed cruel adders be.
And Cerberus, whose many mouths do bay,
And bark out flames, as if on fire he fed;
Adowne whose neck in terrible array,
Ten thousand snakes cralling about his head
Do hang in heaps, that horribly a^^ray,
And bloody eyes do glister fiery red;
He oftentimes me dreadfullie does threaten,
With painful torments to be sorely beaten.
Ay me, that thanks so much should ^aile of meed,
For that I thee restored to life again,
Even from the door of death and deadly dreed.
Where then is now the guerdon of my pain?
Where the reward of my so piteous deed?
The praise of pity vanished is in vain,
And th'antique faith of Justice long agone
Out of the land is fled away and gone.
I saw another fate approaching fast,
And left mine own his safety to tender^
Into the same mishap I now am cast,
And shunned destruction does destruction render:
Not unto him that never has trespast,
But punishment is due to the offender.
Yet let destruction be the punishment,
So long as thankful will may it relent,
I carried am into waste wilderness,
Waste wilderness, amongst Cymerian shades,
Where endless pains and hideous heaviness
Is round about me heapt in darksome glades.
For there huge Othos sits in sad distress,
Fast bound with serpents that him often inuades;
Far of beholding Ephialtes tide,
Which once assai'd to burn this world so wide.
And there is mournful Tityus mindful yet
Of thy displeasure, O Latona fair;
Displeasure too implacable was it,
That made him meat for wild fowls of the air:
Much do I fear among such fiends to sit;
Much do I fear back to them to repair,
To the black shadows of the Stygian shore,
Where wretched ghosts sit wailing evermore.
There next the utmost brinck does he abide,
That did the bankets of the Gods bewray,
Whose threat through thirst to naught nigh being dride
His sense to seek for ease turns every way:
And he that in auengement of his pride,
For scorning to the sacred Gods to pray,
Against a mountain rolls a mighty stone,
Calling in vain for rest, and can have none.
Go y^ with them, go cursed damosells,
Whose bridale torches foul Erynnis tynde,
And Hymen at your Spousalls ^ad, foretells
Tidings of death and massacre unkind:
With them that cruel Colchid mother dwells,
The which conceived in her reuengefull minde^
With bitter wounds her own dear babes to slay,
And murdered troops upon great heaps to lay.
There also those two Pandionian maids,
Calling on Itis, Itis evermore,
Whom wretched boy they slew with guilty blades^
For whom the Thracian king lamenting sore,
Turned to a Lapwing, fowlie them vpbraydes,
And flattering round about them still does sore;
There now they all eternally complain
Of others wrong, and suffer endless pain.
But the two brethren borne of Cadmus blood,
Whilst each does for the Sovereignty contend,
Blind through ambition, and with vengeance wood
Each does against the others body bend
His cursed steele^ of neither well withstood,
And with wide wounds their carcases does rend;
That yet they both do mortal foes remain,
Since each with brothers bloody hand was slain.
Ah (waladay) there is no end of pain,
Nor change of labor may entreated be:
Yet I beyond all these am carried feign,
Where other powers far different I see,
And must pass over to the Elisian plain:
There grim Persephone ^ncountring me,
Does urge her fellow Furies earnestly,
With their b^ight firebronds me to terrify.
There chaste A^^este lives inuiolate,
Free from all care, for that her husbands days
She did prolong by changing fate for fate,
Lo there lives also the immortal praise
Of womankinde, most faithful to her mate,
Penelope: and from her far awayes
A rulesse rout of yongmen, which her wooed
All slain with darts, lie wallowed in their blood.
And sad Eurydi^e thence now no more
Must turn to life, but there detained be,
For looking back, being forbid before:
Yet was the guilt thereof, Orpheus, in thee.
Bold sure he was, and worthy spirit bore,
That durst those lowest shadows go to see,
And could believe that any thing could please
Fell Cerberus, or Stygian powers appease.
Ne feared the burning wa^es of Phlegeton,
Nor those same mournful kingdoms, compassed
With rustie horror and foul fashion,
And deep digd vawtes, and Tartar covered
With bloody night, and dark confusion,
And judgment seats, whose Judge is deadly dred,
A judge, that after death does punish sore
The faults, which life has trespassed before.
But valiant fortune made Dan Orpheus bold:
For the swift running rivers still did stand,
And the wild beasts their fury did withhold,
To follow Orpheus music through the land:
And th'Okes deep grounded in the earthly molde
Did move, as if they could him understand;
And the shrill woods, which were of sense bereaved,
Through their hard bark his silver sound received.
And eke the Moon her hasty steedes did stay,
Drawing in teemes along the starrie sky,
And did (o monthly Virgin) thou delay
Thy nightly course, to hear his melodie^
The same was able with like lovely lay
The Queen of hell to move as easily,
To yield Eurydice unto her fere,
Back to be borne, though it unlawful were.
She (Lady) having well before approved,
The feends to be too cruel and severe,
Observed the appointed way, as her behooued,
Ne ever did her ey sight turn arere,
Ne ever spoke, ne cause of speak^ng moved:
But cruel Orpheus, thou much crueller,
Seeking to kiss her, brok'st the Gods decree,
And thereby made her ever dam^'d to be.
Ah but sweet love of pardon worthy is,
And does deserve to have small faults remitted;
I^ Hell at least things lightly done amiss
Knew how to pardon, when ought is omitted:
Yet are ye both received into blis,
And to the seats of happy souls admitted.
And you, beside the honou^able band
Of great Her^es do in order stand.
There be the two stout sons of Aeacus,
Fierce Peleus, and the hardy Telamon,
Both seeming now full glad and ioyeous
Through their Syres dreadful jurisdiction,
Being the Judge of all that horrid house:
And both of them by strange occasion,
Renowned in choice of happy marriage
Through Venus grace, and virtues carriage.
For the one was ravished of his own bondmaide,
The fair Ixione captived from Troy:
But the other was with Thetis love assaid,
Great N^reus his daughter, and his joy.
On this side them there is a yongman laid,
Their match in glory, mighty, fierce and coy;
That from th'Argolick ships, with furious ire,
Bett back the fury of the Trojan fire.
O who would not recount the strong divorces
Of that great war, which Troianes often beheld,
And often beheld the warlike Greekish forces,
When Teucrian ^oyle with bloody rivers swelde,
And wide Sigaean shores were spread with corses,
And Simois and Xanthus blood outwelde,
Whilst Hector raged with outrageous mind,
Flames, weapons, wounds in Greeks fleet to have tynde.
For Ida self, in aid of that fierce fight,
Out of her mountains ministered supplies,
And like a kindly nourse, did yield (for spite)
Store of firebronds out of her nourseries,
Unto her foster children, that they might
Inflame the Navy of their enemies,
And all the Rhetaean shore to ashes turn,
Where lay the ships, which they did seek to burn.
Against which the noble son of Telamon
Opposd' himself, and thwarting his huge shield,
Them battle bad, against whom appeard anon
Hector, the glory of the Trojan field:
Both fierce and furious in contention
Encountered, that their mighty strokes so shrild,
As the great clap of thunder, which does ryue
The rattling heavens, and clouds asunder drive.
So the one with fire and weapons did contend
To cut the ships, from turning home again
To Argos, the other strove for to defend
The force of Vulcane with his might and maine^
Thus the one A^acide did his fame extend:
But the other joyed, that on the Phrygian plain
Having the blood of vanquished Hector shedd,
He compast Troy thrice with his body dedd.
Again great dole on either party grew,
That him to death unfaithful Paris sent;
And also him that false Ulysses slew,
Drawn into danger through close ambushment:
Therefore from him Laertes son his vewe
Does turn aside, and boasts his good event
In working of Strymonian Rhaesus fall,
And efte in Dolons slye surprysall.
Again the dreadful Cycones him dismay,
And black Laestrigones, a people stout:
Then greedy Scilla, under whom there bay
Many great bandogs, which her gird about:
Then do the Aetnean Cyclops him affray,
And deep Charybdis gulphing in and out:
Lastly the squalid lakes of Tartarie,
And griesly Feends of hell him terrify.
There also goodly Agamemnon bosts,
The glory of the stock of Tantalus,
And famous light of all the Greekish hosts,
Under whose conduct most victorious,
The Dorick flames consumed the Iliack posts.
Ah but the Greeks themselves more dolorous,
To thee, o Troy, paid penance for thy fall,
In the Hellespont being nigh drowned all.
Well may appear by proof of their mischaunce,
The chaungfull turning of men's slipperie state,
That none, whom fortune freely does advance,
Himself therefore to heaven should eleuate:
For lofty type of honor through the glaunce
Of enuies dart, is down in dust prostrate;
And all that vaunts in worldly vanity,
Shall fall through fortunes mutabilitie.
The Argolicke power returning home again,
Enricht with spoils of the Ericthonian tower,
Did happy wind and weather entertain,
And with good speed the fomie billows scowre:
No sign of storm, no fear of future pain,
Which soon ensued them with heavy stowre.
Nereis to the Seas a token gave,
The whiles their crooked keeles the surges claue.
Suddenly, whether through the Gods decree,
Or hapless rising of some froward star,
The heavens on every side enclowded be:
Black storms and fogs are blow^n up from far,
That now the Pylote can no loadstarre see,
But skies and seas do make most dreadful war;
The billowe striving to the heavens to reach,
And th'heauens striving them for to impeach.
And in auengement of their bold attempt,
Both Sun and stars and all the heavenly powers
Conspire in one to wreake their rash contempt,
And down on them to fall from highest towres^
The sky in pieces seeming to be rent,
Throws lightning forth, and hail, and harmful showers
That death on every side to them appears
In thousand forms, to work more ghastly fears.
Some in the greedy floods are sunk and drent,
Some on the rocks of Caphareus are thrown;
Some on the Euboick Cliffs in pieces rent;
Some scattred on the Hercaean shores unknown;
And many lost, of whom no moniment
Remains, nor memory is to be shown:
Whilst all the purchase of the Phrigian pray
Tossed on salt billows, round about does stray.
Here many other like Heroes be,
Equal in honor to the former crew,
Whom ye in goodly seats may placed see,
Descended all from Rome by lineage due,
From Rome, that holds the world in souereigntie,
And does all Nations unto her subdue:
Here Fabij and D^cij do dwell,
Horatij that in virtue did excel.
And here the antique fame of stout Camill
Does ever live, and constant Curtius,
Who stiffly bent his vowed life to spill
For Countries health, a gulf most hideous
Amidst the Town with his own corpse did fill,
To Appease the powers; and prudent Mutius,
Who in his flesh endured the scorching flame,
To daunt his foe by ensample of the same.
And here wise Curious, companion
Of noble virtues, lives in endless rest;
And stout Flaminius, whose devotion
Taught him the fires scorned fury to detest;
And here the praise of either S^ipion
Abides in highest place above the best,
To whom the ruined walls of Carthage vowed,
Trembling their forces, sound their praises loud.
Live they for ever through their lasting praise:
But I poor wretch am forced to return
To the sad lakes, that Phoebus sunnie rays
Do never see, where souls do always mourn,
And by the wayling shores to waste my days,
Where Phlegeton with quenchles flames does burn;
By which just Minos righteous souls does sever
From wicked ones, to live in bliss for ever.
Me therefore thus the cruel fiends of hell
Girt with long snakes, and thousand iron chains,
Through doom of that their cruel Judge, compel
With bitter torture and impatient pains,
Cause of my death, and just complaint to tell.
For thou art he, whom my poor ghost complains
To be the author of her ill unawares,
That careless hear'st my intolerable cares.
Them therefore as bequeathing to the wind,
I now depart, returning to thee never,
And leave this lamentable plaint behind.
But do thou haunt the soft down rolling river,
And wild green woods, and fruitful pastures mind,
And let the flitting air my vain words sever.
Thus having said, he heavily departed
With piteous cry, that any would have smarted.
Now, when the sloathfull fit of life's sweet rest
Had left the heavy Shepherd, wondrous cares
His inly grieved mind full sore oppressed;
That balefull sorrow he no longer bears,
For that Gnats death, which deeply was impressed:
But bends what ever power his aged years
Him lent, yet being such, as through their might
He lately ^lue his dreadful foe in fight.
By that same River lurking under green,
Eftsoons he gins to fashion forth a place,
And squaring it in compass well beseene,
There plotteth out a tomb by measured space:
His iron headed spade tho making cleene,
To dig up sods out of the flowrie grass,
His work he shortly to good purpose brought,
Like as he had conceived it in his thought.
An heap of earth he hoorded up on hie,
Enclosing it with banks on every side,
And thereupon did raise full busily
A little mount, of green turffs edifide;
And on the top of all, that passers by
Might it behold, the toomb he did provide
Of smoothest marble stone in order set,
That never might his luckie escape forget.
And round about he taught sweet flowers to grow,
The Rose engrained in pure scarlet die,
The Lilly fresh, and Violet below,
The Marigolde, and cherefull Rosemarie,
The Spartan Myrtle, whence sweet gumb does flow,
The purple Hyacinthe, and fresh Costmarie,
And Saffron sought for in Cilician soil,
And Laurel th'ornament of Phoebus toil.
Fresh Rhododaphne, and the Sabine flower
Matching the wealth of th'auncient Frankincence.
And pallid Yuie building his own bower,
And Box yet mindful of his old offense,
Red Amaranthus, lucklesse Paramour,
Oxeye still green, and bitter Patience;
Ne wants there pale Narcisse, that in a well
Seeing his beauty, in love with it fell.
And whatsoever other flower of worth,
And whatso other herb of lovely hew
The joyous Spring out of the ground brings forth,
To cloth her self in colors fresh and new;
He planted there, and reard a mount of ^arth,
In whose high front was writ as does ensue.
To thee, small Gnat, in lieu of his life saved,
The Shepherd has thy deaths record engra^ed.
FINIS.
PROSOPOPOIA. Or Mother Hubberds Tale.

By ED. SP.

Dedicated to the right Honorable the Lady Compton and Mountegle.

LONDON. Imprinted for William Ponsonbie, dwelling in Paul's Churchyard at the
sign of the Bishops head.

1591.

To the right Honorable, the Lady Compton and Mountegle.
MOst fair and virtuous Lady; having often sought opportunity by some good
means to make known to your Ladyship, the humble affection and faithful
duty, which I have always professed, and am bound to bear to that House,
from whence ye spring, I have at length found occasion to remember the same,
by making a simple present to you of these my idle labors; which having long
since composed in the raw conceit of my youth, I lately amongst other papers
lighted upon, and was by others, which liked the same, moved to set the^
forth. Simple is the device, and the composition mean, yet carries some
delight, even the rather because of the simplicity and meannesse thus
personated. The same I beseech your Ladyship take in good part, as a pledge of
that profession which I have made to you, and keep with you until with some
other more worthy labor, I do redeem it out of your hands, and discharge my
utmost duty. Till then wishing your Ladyship all increase of honor and
happiness, I humbly take leave.

Your La: ever humbly; Ed. Sp.

Prosopopoia: or Mother Hubberds Tale.
IT was the month, in which the righteous Maid,
That for disdain of sinful worlds vpbraide,
Fled back to heaven, whence she was first conceived,
Into her silver bower the Sun received;
And the hot Syrian Dog on him awayting,
After the chafed Lions cruel bayting,
Corrupted had the air with his noisome breath^
And powered on the earth plague, pestilence, and death.
Emongst the rest a wicked malady
Reigned emongst men, that many did to die,
Deprived of sense and ordinary reason;
That it to Leaches seemed strange and g^ason.
My fortune was among many others more,
To be partaker of their common woe;
And my weak body set on fire with gri^fe,
Was robbed of rest, and natural relief.
In this ill plight, there came to visit me
Some friends, who sorry my sad case to see,
Began to comfort me in cheerful wise,
And means of gladsome solace to devise.
But seeing kindly sleep refuse to do
His office, and my feeble eyes forgo,
They sought my troubled sense how to deceau^
With talk, that might unquiet fancies reau^^
And sitting all in seats about me round^
With pleasant tales (fit for that idle stound)
They cast in course to waste the weary hours:
Some told of Ladies, and their Paramoures;
Some of brave Knights, and their renowned Squires^
Some of the Faeries and their strange attires;
And some of Giaunts hard to be believed,
That the delight thereof me much relieved.
Amongst the rest a good old woman was,
Hight Mother Hubberd, who did far surpas
The rest in honest mirth, that seemed her well:
She when her turn was come her tale to tell,
Told of a strange adventure, that betided
Betwixt the Fox and th'Ape by him misguided;
The which for that my sense it greatly pleased,
All were my spirit heavy and diseased,
I Will write in terms, as she the same did say,
So well as I her words remember may.
No Muses aid me needs here too to call;
Base is the style, and matter mean withal.
Whilome (said she) before the world was civil,
The Fox and th'Ape disliking of their evil
And hard estate, determined to seek
Their fortunes far abroad, lyeke with his lyeke:
For both were crafty and unhappy witted;
Two fellows might no where be better fitted.
The Fox, that first this cause of grief did find,
Began first thus plain his case with words unkind.
Neighbor Ape, and my Goship eke beside,
(Both two sure bands in friendship to be tide,)
To whom may I more trustely complain
The evil plight, that does me sore constrain,
And hope thereof to find due remedy?
Hear then my pain and inward ago^ie.
Thus many years I now have spent and w^rne,
In mean regard, and basest fortunes scorn,
Doing my Country service as I might,
No less I dare say than the prowdest wight;
And still I hoped to be up advanced,
For my good parts; but still it has mischaunced.
Now therefore that no longer hope I see,
But froward fortune still to follow me,
And losels lifted up on high, where I did look,
I mean to turn the next leaf of the book.
Yet ere that any way I do betake,
I mean my Gossip privy first to make.
Ah my dear Gossip, (answered then the Ape,)
Deeply do your sad words my wits awhape,
Both for because your grief does great appear,
And eke because my self am touched near:
For I likewise have wasted much good time,
Still waiting to preferment up to clime,
Whilst others always have before me stepped,
And from my beard the fat away have swept;
That now unto despair I gin to grow
And mean for better wind about to throw.
Therefore to me, my trusty friend, aread
Thy council: two is better than one head.
Certes (said he) I mean me to disguize
In some strange habit, after uncouth wize,
Or like a Pilgrim, or a Lymiter,
Or like a Gipsen, or a Iuggeler,
And so to wander to the worlds end,
To seek my fortune, where I may it mend:
For worse than that I have, I cannot meet.
Wide is the world I wot, and every street
Is full of fortunes, and adventures strange,
Continually subject unto change.
Say my fair brother now, if this device
Does like you, or may you to like entice,
Surely (said th'Ap^) it likes me wondrous well;
And would ye not poor fellowship expel,
My self would (...) you t'accompanie
In this adventures chauncefull ieopardie.
For to wexe old at home in idleness,
Is disaduen^rous, and quite fortunelesse:
Abroad where change is, good may gotten be.
The Fox was glad, and quickly did agree:
So both ^esolu'd, the morrow next ensuing,
So soon as day appeard to peoples vowing,
On their (...) ^ourney to proceed;
And over night, whatso theretoo did need,
Each did prepare, in readiness to be.
The morrow next, so soon as one might see
Light out of heavens windows forth to look,
Both the^^ h^biliments unto them took,
And put themselves (a Gods name) on their way.
Whenas the Ape beginning well to wey
This hard adventure, thus began t'aduise;
Now read Sir Reynold, as ye be right wise,
What course ye ween is best for us to take,
That for our selves we may a li^ing make.
Whether shall we profess some trade or skill?
Or shall we vary our device at will,
Even as new occasion appears?
Or shall we ^ie our selves for certain years
To any service, or to any place?
For it behoues ere that into the race
We enter, to resolve first hereupon.
Now surely brother (said the Fox anon)
Ye have this matter motioned in season:
For every thing that is begun with reason
Will come by ready means unto his end;
But things miscounselled must needs miswend.
Thus therefore I aduize upon the case,
That not to any certain trade or place,
Nor any man we should our selves apply;
For why should he that is at liberty
Make himself bond? since then we are free borne,
Let us all s^ruile base subjection scorn;
And as we be sons of the world so wide,
Let us our fathers heritage divide,
And challenge to our selves our portions dew
Of all the patrimony, which a few
Now hold in hugger mugger in their hand,
And all the rest do rob of good and land.
For now a few have all and all have naught,
Yet all be brethren ylike dearly bought:
There is no right in this partition,
Ne was it so by institution
Ordained first, ne by the law of Nature,
But that she gave like blessing to each creture
As well of worldly liuelode as of life,
That there might be no difference nor strife,
Nor ought called mine or thine^ thrice happy then
Was the condition of mortal men.
That was the golden age of Saturn old,
But this might better be the world of gold:
For without gold now nothing will be got.
Therefore (if please you) this shall be our plot,
We will not be of any occupation,
Let such vile vassalls borne to base vocation
Drudge in the world, and for their living droyle
Which have no wit to live withouten toil.
But we will walk about the world at pleasure
Like two free men, and make our ease a treasure.
Free men some beggars call, but they be free,
And they which call them so more beggars be:
For they do swinke and swea^e to feed the other,
Who live like Lords of that which they do gather,
And yet do never thank them for the same,
But as their due by Nature do it clame.
Such will we fashion both our selves to be,
Lords of the world, and so will wander free
Where so us lists, vncontrol'd of any
Hard is our hap, if we (emongst so many)
Light not on some that may our state amend;
Sildome but some good comes ere the end.
Well seemd the Ape to like this ordinance:
Yet well considering of the circumstaunce,
As pausing in great doubt a while he staid,
And afterward with grave aduizement said^
I cannot my lief brother like but well
The purpose of the complot which ye tell:
For well I wot (compared to all the rest
Of each degree) that Beggars life is best:
And they that think themselves the best of all,
Oft-times to begging are content to fall.
But this I wot withal that we shall run
Into great danger like to be undone.
Thus wildly to wander in the worlds eye,
Without pasport or good warrantie,
For fear least we like rogues should be reputed,
And for ear marked beasts abroad be bruted:
Therefore I read, that we our counsels call,
How to prevent this mischief ere it fall,
And how we may with most security,
Beg amongst those that beggars do defy.
Right well dear Gossip ye aduized have,
(Said then the Fox) but I this doubt will save:
For ere we farther pass, I will devise
A pasport for us both in fittest wize,
And by the names of Soldiers us protect;
That now is thought a civil begging sect.
Be you the Soldier, for you likest are
For manly semblance, and small skill in war:
I will but wait on you, and as occasion
Falls out, my self fit for the same will fashion.
The Pasport ended, both they forward went,
The Ape clad Souldierlike, fit for the intent,
In a blew iacket with a cross of redd
And many slits, as if that he had shedd
Much blood through many wounds therein received,
Which had the use of his right arm bereaved;
Upon his head an old Scotch cap he wore,
With a plume feather all to pieces tore:
His breeches were made after the new cut,
Al Portugese, loose like an empty gut;
And his hose broken high above the heeling,
And his shoes beaten out with traueling.
But neither sword nor dagger he did bear,
Seems that no foes reuengement he did fear;
In stead of them a handsome bat he held,
On which he leaned, as one far in elde.
Shame light on him, that through so false illusion,
Does turn the name of Soldiers to abusion,
And that, which is the noblest mystery,
Brings to reproach and common infamy.
Long they thus travailed, yet never met
Adventure, which might them a working set:
Yet many ways they sought, and many tryed^
Yet for their purposes none fit espied.
At last they chaunst to meet upon the way
A simple husbandman in garments gray;
Yet though his vesture were but mean and bace,
A good yeoman he was of honest place,
And more for thrift did care than for gay clothing:
Gay without good, is good hearts greatest loathing.
The Fox him spying, bad the Ape him dight
To play his part, for lo he was in sight,
That (if he er'd not) should them ente^taine,
And yield them timely profit for their pain.
Eftsoons the Ape himself began up to rear,
And on his shoulders high his bat to bear,
As if good service he were fit to do;
But little thrift for him he did it too:
And stoutly forward he his steps did strain,
That like a handsome swai^e it him became:
When as they nigh approached, that good man
Seeing them wander loosly, first began
T'enquire of custom, what and whence they were?
To whom the Ap^, I am a Souldiere,
That late in wars have spent my dearest blood,
And in long service lost both limbs and good,
And now constrain^d that trade to ouergi^e,
I driven am to seek some means to live:
Which might it you in pity please t'afford.
I would be ready both in deed and word,
To do you faithful service all my days.
This iron world (that same he weeping says)
Bring down the stowtest hearts to lowest state:
For misery does brauest minds abate,
And make them seek for that they wont to scorn,
Of fortune and of hope at once forlorn.
The honest man, that heard him thus complain,
Was grieved, as he had felt part of his pain;
And well disposd^ him some relief to show,
Asked if in husbandry he ought did know,
To plough, to plant, to reap, to rake, to sow,
To hedge, to ditch, to thrash, to thetch, to mow;
Or to what labor else he was prepar'd^
For husbands life is labourous and hard.
Whenas the Ape him hard so much to talk
Of labor that did from his liking balke,
He would have slipped the collar handsomely,
And to him said; good Sir, full glad am I,
To take what pains may any living wight:
But my late maimed limbs lack wonted might
To do their kindly services, as needs:
Scarce this right hand the mouth with diet feeds,
So that it may no painful work endure,
Ne to strong labor can it self enure.
But if that any other place you have,
Which asks small pains, but thrif^^nes to save,
Or care to ouerlooke, or trust to gather,
Ye may me trust as your own ghostly father.
With that the husbandman began him auize
That it for him were fittest exercise
Cattle to keep, or grounds to ouersee;
And asked him, if he could willing be
To keep his sheep, or to attend his swyne,
Or watch his mares, or take his charge of kyne?
Gladly (said he) what ever such like pain
Ye put on me, I will the same sus^aine:
But gladliest I of your fleecie sheep
(Might it you please) would take on me the keep.
For ere that unto arms I me betook,
Unto my fathers sheep I used to look,
That yet the skill thereof I have not lost:
Thereto right well this Curdog by my cost
(Meaning the Fox) will serve, my sheep to gather,
And drive to follow after their Belwether.
The Husbandman was meanly well content,
Trial to make of his endeuourment,
And home him leading, lent to him the charge
Of all his flock, with liberty full large,
Giving account of th'annuall increace
Both of their lambs, and of their woolley fleece.
Thus is this Ape become a shepherd swain
And the false Fox his dog (God give them pain)
For ere the year have half his course outrun,
And do return from whence he first begun,
They shall him make an ill account of thrift.
Now whenas Time flying with wings swift,
Expired had the term, that these two iauels
Should render up a reckning of their travels
Unto their master, which it of them sought,
Exceedingly they troubled were in thought,
Ne wist what answer unto him to frame,
Ne how to escape great punishment, or shame,
For their false treason and vile theeuerie.
For not a lamb of all their flocks supply
Had they to show: but ever as they bred,
They slew them, and upon their fleshes fed:
For that disguised Dog lou^d blood to spill,
And drew the wicked Shepherd to his will.
So twixt them both they not a lambkin left,
And when lambs failed, the old sheep lives they re^t;
That how t'acquite themselves unto their Lord,
They were in doubt, and flatly set abord.
The Fox then counseled th'Ape, for to require
Respite till morrow, t'answere his desire:
For times delay new hope of help still breeds.
The goodman granted, doubting naught their (...)
And bad, next day that all should ready be.
But they more subtle meaning had than he:
For the next morrowes meed they closely meant,
For fear of afterclaps for to prevent.
And that same evening, when all shrouded were
In careless sleep, they without care or fear,
Cruelly fell upon their flock in fold,
And of them slew at pleasure what they would:
Of which whenas they feasted had their fill,
For a full complement of all their ill,
They stole away, and took their hasty flight,
Carried in clouds of all-concealing night.
So was the husbandman left to his loss,
And they unto their fortunes change to toss.
After which sort they wandered long while,
Abusing many through their cloaked guile;
That at the last they began to be descry^d
Of every one, and all their sleights espied.
So as their begging now them failed quyte^
For none would give, but all men would them wit:
Yet would they take no pains to get their living,
But seek some other way to gain by giving,
Much like to begging but much better named;
For many beg, which are thereof ashamed.
And now the Fox had gotten him a gown,
And th'Ape a cassocke sidelong hanging down;
For they their occupation meant to change,
And now in other state abroad to range:
For since their soldiers pas no better spedd,
They forged another, as for Clerks booke-redd.
Who passing forth, as their adventures ^ell,
Through many haps, which needs not here to tell;
At length chaunst with a formal Priest to me^te,
Whom they in civil manner first did greet,
And after asked an alms for Gods dear love.
The man straight way his choler up did move,
And with reproachful terms began them revile,
For following that trade so base and vile;
And asked what license, or what Pas they had?
Ah (said the Ape as sighing wondrous sad)
Its an hard ca^e, when men of good dese^uing
Must either driven be perforce ^o steruing,
Or asked for their pas by every squib,
That list at will them to revile or snib:
And yet (God wot) small odds I often see
Twixt them that ask, and them that asked be.
Natheles because you shall not us misdeeme,
But that we are as honest as we seem,
Ye shall our pasport at your pleasure see,
And then ye will (I hope) well moved be.
Which when the Priest beheld, he vew'd it nere,
As if therein some text he studying were,
But little ^ls (God wot) could thereof skill:
For read he could not evidence, nor will,
Ne tell a written word, ne write a letter
Ne make one title worse, ne make one b^tter:
Of such deep learning little had he need,
Ne yet of Latin, ne of Greek, that breed
Doubts among Divines, and difference of texts,
From whence arise diversity of sects,
And hateful heresies, of God abhorred:
But this good Sir did follow the plain word,
Ne meddled with their controversies vain,
All his care was, his service well to saine,
And to read Homelies upon holidayes:
When that was done, he might attend his plays;
An easy life, and fit high God to please.
He having ouerlookt their pas at ^ase,
Began at the length them to rebuke again,
That no good trade of life did entertain,
But lost their time in wandering loose abroad,
Seeing the world, in which they bootles boad,
Had ways enough for all therein to liue^
Such grace did God unto his creatures give.
Said then the Fox; who has the world not tried.
From the right way full eath may wander wide.
We are but Nouices, new come abroad,
We have not yet the tract of any troad,
Nor on us taken any state of life,
But ready are of any to make preife.
Therefore might please you, which the world have proved,
Us to advise, which forth but lately moved,
Of some good course, that we might undertake;
Ye shall for ever us your bondmen make.
The Priest began wexe half proud to be so praide,
And thereby willing to afford them aid;
It seems (said he) right well that ye be Clerks,
Both by your wi^^ie words, and by your werks.
Is not that name enough to make a living
To him that has a whit of Natures giving?
How many honest men see ye arize
Daily thereby, and grow to goodly prize?
To Deanes, to Archdeacons, to Commissaries,
To Lords, to Principalls, to Prebendaries;
All jolly Prelates, worthy rule to bear,
Who ever them envy: yet spite bites ^eare.
Why should ye doubt then, but that ye likewise
Might unto some of those in time arise?
In the mean time to live in good estate,
Loving that love, and hating those that hate;
Being some honest Curate, or some Vicker
Content with little in condition sicker.
Ah but (said th'Ape) the charge is wondrous great,
To feed men's souls, and has an heavy threat.
To feed men's souls (quoth he) is not in man:
For they must feed themselves, do what we can^
We are but charged to lay the meat before:
Eat they that list, we need to do no more.
But God it is that feeds them with his grace,
The bread of life powered down from heavenly place.
Therefore said he, that with the budding rod
Did rule the Jews, All shall be taught of God.
That same has Jesus Christ now to him raught,
By whom the flock is rightly fed, and taught:
He is the Shepherd, and the Priest is he;
We but his shepherd swains ordained to be.
Therefore herewith do not your self dismay;
Ne is the pains so great, but bear ye may;
For not so great as it was wont of yore,
It Is now a days, ne half so straight and sore:
They whilome used duly every day
Their service and their holy things to say,
At morn and even, besides their Anthemes sweet,
Their penie Masses, and their Complynes meet,
Their Dirges, their Trentals, and their shrifts,
Their memories, their singings, and their gifts.
Now all those needless works are laid away^
Now once a week upon the Sabbath day,
It is enough to do our small devotion,
And then to follow any merry motion.
Ne are we tide to fast, but when we list,
Ne to wear garments base of woollen twist,
But with the finest silks us to array,
That before God we may appear more gay,
Resembling Aarons glory in his place:
For far unfit it is, that person bace
Should with vile clothes approach Gods mai^stie,
Whom no uncleanness may approachen nie:
Or that all men, which any master serve,
Good garments for their service should deserue^
But he that serves the Lord of hoasts most high,
And that in highest place, t'approach him nigh,
And all the peoples prayers to present
Before his throne, as on embassage sent
Both too and fro, should not deserve to wear
A garment better, than of wool or hear.
Beside we may have lying by our sides
Our lovely Lasses, or bright shining Brides^
We be not tide to wilful chastity,
But have the Gospel of free liberty.
By that he ended had his ghostly sermon,
The Fox was well induced to be a Parson;
And of the Priest eftsoons began to enquire,
How to a Bonefice he might aspire.
Marie there (said the Priest) is art indeed.
Much good deep learning one thereout may reed,
For that the groundwork is, and end of all,
How to obtain a Beneficial.
First therefore, when ye have in handsome wise
Your self attyred, as you can devise,
Then to some Noble man your self apply,
Or other great one in the worlds eye,
That has a zealous disposition
To God, and so to his religion:
There must thou fashion eke a godly zeal,
Such as no carpers may contrayre reveal:
For each thing fained, ought more wary be.
There thou must walk in sober grauitee,
And seem as Saintlike as Saint Radegund:
Fast much, pray often, look lowly on the ground,
And unto every one do courtesy meek:
These looks (naught saying) do a benefice seek,
And be thou sure one not to lack or long.
But if thee list unto the Court to throng,
And there to hunt after the hoped pray,
Then must thou thee dispose another way:
For there thou needs must learn, to laugh, to lie,
To face, to forge, to scoff, to company,
To crouche, to please, to be a beetle stock
Of thy great Ma^ters will, to scorn, or mock:
So may thou chance mock out a Benefice,
Unless thou can one coniute by device,
Or cast a figure for a Bishopric:
And if one could, it were but a s^hoole trick.
These be the ways, by which without reward
Livings in Court be gotten, though full hard.
For nothing there is done without a fee:
The Courtier needs must recompensed be
With a Benevolence, or have in gage
The Primitias of your Parsonage:
Scarce can a Bishopric forpas them by,
But that it must be gelt in priuitie.
Do no^ thou therefore seek a living there,
But of more private persons seek elsewhere,
Whereas thou may compound a better penie,
Ne let thy learning questioned be of any.
For some good Gentleman that has the right
Unto his Church for to present a wight,
Will cope with thee in reasonable wise;
That if the living yearly do arise
To forty pound, that then his youngest son
Shall twenty have, and twenty thou have wonne^
Thou have it won, for it is of frank gift,
And he will care for all the rest to shift;
Both that the Bishop may admit of thee,
And that therein thou may maintained be.
This is the way for one that is vnlern'd
Living to get, and not to be discerned.
But they that are great Clerks, have nearer ways,
For learning sake to living them to raise:
Yet many eke of them (God wot) are driven,
T^accept a Benefice in pieces riuen.
How say thou (friend) have I not well discourst
Upon this Common place (though plain, not wourst)?
Better a short tale, than a bad long shriuing.
Needs any more to learn to get a living?
Now sure and by my hallidome (quoth he)
Ye a great master are in your degree:
Great thanks I yield you for your discipline,
And do not doubt, but duly to incline
My wits theretoo, as ye shall shortly hear.
The Priest him wished good speed, and well to fare.
So parted they, as eithers way them led.
But th'Ape and Fox ere long so well them sped,
Through the Priests wholesome counsel lately tought,
And through their own fair handling wisely wroght,
That they a Benefice twixt them obtained;
And crafty Reynold was a Priest ordained;
And th'Ape his Parish Clarke procured to be.
Then made they revel route and goodly glee.
But ere long time had passed, they so ill
Did order their affairs, that the evil will
Of all their Parishners they had constraind;
Who to the Ordinary of them complained,
How fowlie they their offices abusd^,
And them of crimes and heresies accusd';
That Pursiuants he often for them sent:
But they neglected his commandment.
So long persisted obstinate and bold,
Till at the length he published to hold
A Visitation, and them cyted thither:
Then was high time their wits about to geather;
What did they then, but made a composition
With their next neighbor Priest for light condition,
To whom their living they resigned quight
For a few pence, and ran away by night.
So passing through the Country in disguize,
They fled far off, where none might them surprise,
And after that long straied here and there,
Through every field and forest far and nere;
Yet never found occasion for their turn,
But almost steru'd, did much lament and mourn.
At last they chaunst to meet upon the way
The Mule, all decked in goodly rich array,
With bells and bosses, that full lowdly rung,
And costly trappings, that to ground down hung.
Lowly they him saluted in meek wise,
But he through pride and fatnes began despise
Their meanness; scarce vouchsafte them to requite.
Whereat the Fox deep groaning in his sprite,
Said, Ah sir Mule, now blessed be the day,
That I see you so goodly and so gay
In your attyres, and eke your silken hyde
Filled with round flesh, that every bone does hide.
Seems that in fruitful pastures ye do live,
Or fortune does you secret favor give.
Foolish Fox (said the Mule) thy wretched need
Praises the thing that does thy sorrow breed.
For well I ween, thou can not but envy
My wealth, compared to thine own miserie^
That art so lean and meagre waxen late,
That scarce thy legs uphold thy feeble gate.
Ay me (said then the Fox) whom evil hap
Unworthy in such wretchedness does wrap,
And makes the scorn of other beasts to be:
But read (fair Sir, of grace) from whence come ye?
Or what of tidings you abroad do hear?
News may perhaps some good vnweeting bear.
From royal Court I lately came (said he)
Where all the bravery that eye may see,
And all the happiness that heart desire,
Is to be found; he nothing can admire,
That has not seen that heavens portracture:
But tidings there is none I you assure,
Save that which common is, and known to all,
That Courtiers as the tide do rise and fall.
But tell us (said the Ape) we do you pray,
Who now in Court does bear the greatest sway.
That if such fortune do to us befall,
We may seek favor of the best of all.
Marie (said he) the highest now in grace,
Be the wild beasts, that swiftest are in chase;
For in their speedy course and nimble flight
The Lion now does take the most delight:
But chiefly, joys on foot them to behold,
Enchaste with chain and ci^culet of gold:
So wild a beast so tame ytaught to be,
And buxome to his bands is joy to see.
So well his golden Circlet him beseems:
But his late chain his Liege unmeet esteems;
For so brave beasts she loves best to see,
In the wild forest raunging fresh and free.
Therefore if fortune thee in Court to live,
In case thou ever there wilt hope to thrive,
To some of these thou must thy self apply:
Else as a thistle-downe in the air does fly,
So vainly shall thou too and fro be tossed,
And loose thy labor and thy fruitles cost.
And yet full few, which follow them I see,
For virtues bare regard advanced be,
But either for some gainful benefit,
Or that they may for their own turns be fit.
Nath'les perhaps ye things may handle so,
That ye may better thrive than thousands more.
But (said the Ape) how shall we first come in,
That after we may favor seek to win?
How else (said he) but with a good bold face,
And with big words, and with a stately pace,
That men may think of you in general,
That to be in you, which is not all:
For not by that which is, the world now deemeth,
(As it was wont) but by that same that seems.
Ne do I doubt, but that ye well can fashion
Your selves theretoo, according to occasion:
So fare ye well, good Courtiers may ye be;
So proudly neighing from them parted he.
Then began this crafty couple to deuize,
How for the Court themselves they might aguize:
For thither they themselves meant to address,
In hope to find there happier success,
So well they shifted, that the Ape anon
Himself had clothed like a Gentleman,
And the sly Fox, as like to be his groom,
That to the Court in seemly sort they come.
Where the fond Ape himself vprearing hy
Upon his tiptoes, stalketh stately by,
As if he were some great Magnifico,
And boldly does amongst the boldest go.
And his man Reynold with fine counterfesaunce
Supports his credit and his countenance.
Then began the Courtiers gaze on e^erie side,
And stare on him, with big looks basen wide,
Wondering what mister wight he was, and whence:
For he was clad in strange accoustrements,
Fashioned with queint devises never seen
In Court before, yet there all fashions been:
Yet he them in new fanglenesse did pas:
But his behavior altogether was
Alla Turchesca, much the more admyr'd,
And his looks lofty, as if he aspyr'd
To dignity, and sdeign'd the low degree;
That all which did such strangeness in him see,
By secret means began of his state enquire,
And privily his servant thereto hire:
Who thoroughly armed against such couerture,
Reported unto all, that he was sure
A noble Gentleman of high regard,
Which through the world had with long travel fared,
And seen the manners of all beasts on ground;
Now here arrived, to see if like he found.
Thus did the Ape at first him credit gain,
Which afterward he wisely did maintain
With gallant show, and daily more augment
Through his fine feats and Courtly complement;
For he could play, and dance, and vaute, and spring,
And all that else pertaines to reueling,
Only through kindly aptnes of his joints.
Besides he could do many other points,
The which in Court him served to good stead:
For he among Ladies could their fortunes read
Out of their hands, and merry leasings tell,
And iuggle finely, that became him well:
But he so light was at legier demaine,
That what he touched, came not to light again;
Yet would he laugh it out, and proudly look,
And tell them, that they greatly him mistook.
So would he scoff them out with mockery,
For he therein had great felicity:
And with sharp quips joyed others to deface,
Thinking that their disgracing did him grace:
So whilst that other like vain wits he pleased,
And made to laugh, his heart was greatly eased.
But the right gentle mind would bite his lip,
To hear the Iauell so good men to nip:
For though the vulgar yield an open ear.
And common Courtiers love to gybe and fleare
At every thing, which they hear spoken ill,
And the best speeches with ill meaning spill;
Yet the brave Courtier, in whose beauteous thought
Regard of honor harbors more than ought,
Does loath such base condition, to backbite
Anies good name for envy or despite:
He stands on terms of honorable mind,
Ne will be carried with the common wind
Of Courts inconstant mutabilitie,
Ne after every tattling fable fly;
But hears, and sees the follies of the rest,
And thereof gathers for himself the best:
He will not creep, nor crouche with fained face,
But walks upright with comely steadfast pace,
And unto all does yield due courtesy;
But not with kissed hand below the knee,
As that same Apish crew is wont to do:
For he disdaines himself t'embase theretoo^
He hates ^owle leasings, and vile flattery,
Two filthy blots in noble Gentry;
And lothefull idleness he does de^est,
The canker worm of every gentle breast;
The which to banish with fair exerci^e
Of knightly feats, he daily does d^uise:
Now menaging the mouths of stubborn steedes,
Now practicing the proof of warlike deeds,
Now his bright arms assaying, now his spear,
Now the nigh aimed ring away to bear;
At other times he casts to sew the chase
Of swift wild beasts, or run on foot a race,
T'enlarge his breath (large breath in arms most needful
Or else by wrestling to wex strong and heedfull,
Or his stiff arms to stretch with Eughen bow,
And manly legs, still passing too and fro,
Without a gowned beast him fast beside;
A vain ensample of the Persian pride,
Who after he had won the Assyrian foe,
Did ever after scorn on foot to go.
Thus when this Cou^tly Gentleman with toil
Himself has wearied, he does recoyle
Unto his rest, and there with sweet delight
Of Musicks skill reuiues his toyled spright,
Or else with Loves, and Ladies gentle sports,
The joy of youth, himself he recomforts:
Or lastly, when the body list to pause,
His mind unto the Muses he withdrawes;
Sweet Lady Muses, Ladies of delight,
Delights of life, and ornaments of light:
With whom he close confers with wise discourse,
Of Natures works, of heavens continual course,
Of foreign lands, of people different,
Of kingdoms change, of diverse government,
Of dreadful battles of renowned Knights;
With which he kindles his ambitious sprights
To like desire and praise of noble fame,
The only vpshot whereto he does aim:
For all his mind on honor fixed is,
To which he leuels all his purposis,
And in his Princes ^eruice spends his days,
Not so much for to gain, or for to raise
Himself to high degree, as for his grace,
And in his liking to win worthy place;
Through due deserts and comely carriage,
In whatso please employ his personage,
That may be matter meet to gain him praise;
For he is fit to use in all assayes,
Whether for Arms and warlike amenaunce,
Or else for wise and civil governance.
For he is practiced well in policy,
And thereto does his Courting most apply:
To learn the enterdeale of Princes strange,
To mark the intent of Counsels, and the change
Of states, and eke of private men somewhile,
Suppla^ted by fine falsehood and fair guile;
Of all the which he gathers, what is fit
To Enrich the storehouse of his powerful wit,
Which through wise speeches, and grave conference
He daily eekes, and brings to excellence.
Such is the rightful Courtier in his kind:
But unto such the Ape lent not his mind;
Such were for him no fit companions,
Such would descrie his lewd conditions:
But the young lusty gallants he did chose
To follow, meet to whom he might disclose
His witless pleasance, and ill pleasing vain.
A thousand ways he them could entertain,
With all the thriftles games, that may be found
With mumming and with masking all around,
With dice, with cards, with balliards far unfit,
With shuttelcocks. misseeming manly wit,
With courtizans, and costly riotize,
Whereof still somewhat to his share did rize:
Ne, them to pleasure, would he sometimes scorn
A Pandares coa^e (so basely was he borne);
Thereto he could fine loving ver^es frame,
And play the Poet often. But ah, for shame
Let not sweet Poets praise, whose only pride
Is virtue to advance, and vice deride,
Be with the work of losels wit defamed,
Ne let such verses Poetry be named:
Yet he the name on him would rashly take,
Maugre the sacred Muses, and it make
A servant to the vile affection
Of such, as he depended most upon,
And with the s^grie sweet ther^of allure
Chaste Ladies ears to fantasies impure.
To such delights the noble wits he led
Which him relieved, and their vain humors fed
With fruitles follies, and unsound delights.
But if perhaps into their noble sprights
Desire of honor, or brave thought of arms
Did ever creep, then with his wicked charms
And strong conceits he would it drive away,
Ne suffer it to house there half a day.
And whenso love of letters did inspire
Their gentle wits, and kindly wise desire,
That chieslie does each noble mind adorn,
Then he would scoff at learning, and eke scorn
The Sectaries thereof, as people base
And simple men, which never came in place
Of worlds affairs, but in dark corners mewd,
Muttred of matters, as their books them showed,
Ne other knowledge ever did attain,
But with their gowns their gravity maintain.
From them he would his impudent lewd speech
Against Gods holy Ministers often reach,
And mock Divines and their pro^ession:
What else then did he by progression,
But mock high God himself, whom they profess?
But what cared he for God, or godliness?
All his care was himself how to advance,
And to uphold his courtly countenance
By all the cunning means he could devise;
Were it by honest ways, or otherwise,
He made small choice: yet sure his honesty
Got him small gains, but shameless flattery,
And filthy brocage, and unseemly shifts,
And borowe base, and some good Ladies gifts:
But the best help, which chiefly him sustained,
Was his man Raynolds purchase which he gained.
For he was schooled by kind in all the skill
Of close conueyance, and each practice ill
Of coosinage and cleanly knauerie,
Which often maintained his masters bravery.
Besides he used another slipprie slight,
In taking on himself in common sight,
False personages fit for every sted,
With which he thousands cleanly coosined:
Now like a Merchant, Merchants to deceive,
With whom his credit he did often leave
In gage, for his gay Masters hopeless dett:
Now like a Lawyer, when he land would let,
Or sell fee-simples in his Masters name,
Which he had never, nor ought like the same^
Then would he be a Broker, and draw in
Both wares and money, by exchange to win:
Then would he seem a Farmer, that would sell
Bargains of woods, which he did lately fell,
Or corn, or cattle, or such other ware,
Thereby to coosin men not well aware;
Of all the which there came a secret fee
To th'Ape, that he his countenance might be.
Besides all this, he vsd' often to beguile
Poor suitors, that in Court did haunt some while:
For he would learn their business secretly,
And then inform his Master hastily,
That he by means might cast them to prevent,
And beg the suit, the which the other meant.
Or otherwise false Reynold would abuse
The simple Suter, and wish him to choose
His Master, being one of great regard
In Court, to compass any suit not hard,
In case his pains were recompenst with reason^
So would he work the silly man by treason
To buy his Masters frivolous good will,
That had not power to do him good or ill.
So pitiful a thing is Suitors state.
Most mis^rable man, whom wicked fate
Has brought to Court, to sue for had ywist,
That few have found, and many one has mist^
Full little know thou that have not tried,
What hell it is, in suing long to bide:
To loose good days, that might be better spent^
To wast long nights in pensive discontent;
To speed to day, to be put back to morrow;
To feed on hope, to pine with fear and sorrow;
To have thy Princes grace, yet want her Peers;
To have thy asking, yet wait many years;
To fret thy soul with crosses and with cares;
To eat thy heart through comfortless dispaires;
To fawn, to crowche, to wait, to ride, to run,
To spend, to give, to want, to be undone.
Unhappy wight, borne to desastrous end,
That does his life in so long tendance spend.
Who ever leaves sweet home, where mean estate
In safe assurance, without strife or hate,
Finds all things needful for contentment meeke^
And will to Court for shadows vain to seek,
Or hope to gain, himself will a daw try:
That curse God send unto mine enemy.
For none but such as this bold Ape unblessed,
Can ever thrive in that unlucky quest;
Or such as has a Reynold to his man,
That by his shifts his Master furnish can.
But yet this Fox could not so closely hide
His crafty feats, but that they were descride
At length, by such as sat in justice seat,
Who for the same him fowlie did entreate^
And having worthily him punished,
Out of the Court for ever banished.
And now the Ape wanting his huckster man,
That wont provide his necessaries, began
To grow into great lack, n^ could uphold
His countenance in those his garments old;
Ne new ones could he easily provide,
Though all men him uncased began deride,
Like as a Puppit placed in a play,
Whose part once past all men bid take away:
So that he driven was to great distress,
And shortly brought to hopeless wretchedness.
Then closely as he might he cast to leave
The Court, not asking any pass or leave;
But ran away in his rent rags by night,
Ne ever stayed in place, ne spoke to wight,
Till that the Fox his copesmate he had found,
To whom complaining his vn^appy stound,
At last again with him in travel joined,
And with him fared some better chance to find.
So in the world long time they wandered,
And mickle want and hardness suffered;
That them repented much so foolishly
To come so far to seek for misery,
And leave the sweetness of contented home,
Though eating hipps, and drinking watery foam.
Thus as they them complained too and fro,
Whilst through the forest rechlesse they did go,
Lo where they spide, how in a gloomy glade,
The Lion sleeping lay in secret shade,
His Crown and Scepter lying him beside,
And having do^t for heat his dreadful hide:
Which when they saw, the Ape was sore afraid,
And would have fled with terror all dismayde.
But him the Fox with hardy words did stay,
And bad him put all cowardice away:
For now was time (if ever they would hope)
To aim their counsels to the fairest scope,
And them for ever highly to advance,
In case the good which their own happy chance
Them freely offered, they would wisely take.
Scarce could the Ape yet speak, so did he quake,
Yet as he could, he asked how good might grow,
Where naught but dread and death do seem in show.
Now (said he) whiles the Lion sleeps sound,
May we his Crown and Mace take from the ground,
And eke his skin the terror of the wood,
Wherewith we may our selves (if we think good)
Make Kings of Beasts, and L^rds of forests all,
Subject unto that power imperial.
Ah but (said the Ape) who is so bold a wretch,
That dare his hardy hand to those outstretch:
When as he knows his meede, if he be spide,
To be a thousand deaths, and shame beside?
Fond Ape (said then the Fox) into whose breast
Never crept thought of honor, nor brave gest,
Who will not venture life a King to be,
And rather rule and reign in soueraign see,
Than dwell in dust inglorious and bace,
Where none shall name the number of his place?
One joyous hour in blisfull happiness,
I chose before a life of wretchedness.
Be therefore counseled herein by me,
And shake off this vile hearted cowardree.
If he awake, yet is not death the next,
For we may coulor it with some pretext
Of this, or that, that may excuse the crime:
Else we may fly; thou to a tree may clyme,
And I creep under ground; both from his reach:
Therefore be ruled to do as I do teach.
The Ape, that erst did naught but chill and quake,
Now began some courage unto him to take,
And was content to attempt that enterprise,
Tickled with glory and rash couetise.
But first began question, whither should assay
Those royal ornaments to steal away?
Marie that shall your self (quoth he theretoo)
For ye be fine and nimble it to do;
Of all the beasts which in the forests be,
Is not a fitter for this turn than ye:
Therefore, mine own dear brother take good heart,
And ever think a Kingdom is your part.
Loath was the Ape, though praised, to aduenter,
Yet faintly began into his work to enter,
Afraid of every leaf, that stirred him by,
And every stick, that vndernea^h did ly;
Upon his tiptoes nicely he up went,
For making noise, and still his ear he lent
To every sound, that under heaven blew,
Now went, now step^, now crept, now backward drew,
That it good sport had been him to have eyde:
Yet at the last (so well he him applyde,)
Through his fine handling, and cleanly play,
He all those royal signs had stolen away,
And with the Foxes help them borne aside,
Into a secret corner vnespide.
Whether whenas they came, they fell at words,
Whether of them should be the Lord of Lords:
For th'Ape was stryfull, and ambicious;
And the Fox guilefull, and most covetous,
That neither pleased was, to have the rain
Twixt them divided into even twain,
But either (algates) would be Lords alone:
For Love and Lordship bide no paragone.
I am most worthy (said the Ape) since I
For it did put my life in ieopardie:
Thereto I am in person, and in stature
Most like a man, the Lord of every creature^
So that it seems I was made to reign,
And borne to be a Kingly sovereign.
Nay (said the Fox) Sir Ape you are astray:
For though to steal the Diadem away
Were the work of your nimble hand, yet I
Did first devise the plot by policy;
So that it wholly springs from my wit:
For which also I claim my self more fit
Than you, to rule: for government of st^te
Will without wisdom soon be ruinate.
And where ye claim your self for outward shape
Most like a man, Man is not like an Ape
In his chief parts, that is, in wit and spirit;
But I therein most like to him do merit
For my ^lie wyles and subtle craftiness,
The title of the Kingdom to possess.
Nath'les (my brother) since we passed are
Unto this point, we will appease our jar,
And I with reason meet will rest content,
That ye shall have both crown and government,
Upon condition, that ye ruled be
In all affairs, and counseled by me;
And that ye let none other ever draw
Your mind from me, but keep this as a law:
And hereupon an oath unto me plight.
The Ape was glad to end the strife so light,
And thereto swore: for who would not often sweare^
And often vnsweare a Diadem to bear?
Then freely up those royal spoils he took,
Yet at the Lions skin he ^^ly quooke;
But it dissembled, and upon his head
The Crown, and on his back the skin he did,
And the false Fox him helped to array.
Then when he was all dight he took his way
Into the forest, that he might be seen
Of the wild beasts in his new glory sheene.
There the two first, whom he encountered, were
The Sheep and th'Asse, who stricken both with fear
At sight of him, began fast away to fly,
But unto them the Fox alowd did cry,
And in the Kings name bad them both to stay,
Upon the pain that thereof follow may.
Hardly naythles were they restrained so,
Till that the Fox forth toward them did go,
And there dissuaded them from needless fear,
For that the King did favor to them bear;
And therefore dreadles bad them come to Corte:
For no wild beasts should do them any torte
There or abroad, ne would his majesty
Use them but well, with gracious clemencye,
As whom he knew to him both fast and true^
So he persuaded them, with homage due
Themselves to humble to the Ape prostrate,
Who gently to them bowing in his gate,
Received them wi^h cheerful entertayne.
Thenceforth proceeding with his princely train,
He shortly met the Tygre, and the Bore,
Which with the simple Camel raged sore
In bitter words, seeking to take occasion,
Upon his fleshly corpse to make invasion:
But soon as they this mock-King did espy,
Their troublous strife they stinted by and by,
Thinking indeed that it the Lion was:
He then to prove, whether his power would pas
As current, sent the Fox to them straight way,
Commanding them their cause of s^rife bewray;
And if that wrong on either side there were,
That he should warn the wronger to appear
The morrow next at Court, it ^o defend;
In the mean time upon the King to attend.
The subtle Fox so well his message said,
That the proud beasts him readily obayd:
Whereby the Ape in wondrous stomach woxe,
Strongly encorag'd by the crafty Fox;
That King indeed himself he shortly thought,
And all the Beasts him feared as they ought:
And followed unto his palaice hye,
Where taking Couge, each one by and by
Departed to his home in dreadful awe,
Full of the feared sight, which late they saw.
The Ape thus seized of the Regal throne,
Eftsoon by counsel of the Fox alone,
Began to provide for all things in assurance,
That so his rule might longer have endurance.
First to his Gate he pointed a strong guard,
That none might enter but with issue hard:
Then for the safeguard of his personage,
He did appoint a warlike equipage
Of foreign beasts, not in the forest bred,
But part by land, and part by water fed;
For tyranny is with strange aid supported.
Then unto him all monstrous beasts resorted
Bred of two kinds, as Griffons, Minotaures,
Crocodiles, Dragons, Beauers, and Centaures:
With those himself he strengthened mightelie,
That fear he need no force of enemy.
Then began he rule and tyrannize at will,
Like as the Fox did guide his graceles skill,
And all wild beasts made vassals of his pleasures,
And with their spoils enlarged his private treasures.
No care of justice, nor no rule of reason,
No temperance, nor no regard of season
Did thenceforth ever enter in his mind,
But cruelty, the sign of currish kind,
And sdeignfull pride, and wilful arrogaunce;
Such follows those whom fortune does advance.
But the false Fox most kindly played his part:
For whatsoever mother wit, or art
Could work, he put in proof: no practice sly,
No counterpoint of cunning policy,
No reach, no breach, that might him profit bring,
But he the same did to his purpose wring.
Naught suffered he the Ape to give or grant,
But through his hand must pass the F^aunt.
All offices, all leases by him lept,
And of them all whatso he likte, he kept.
Justice he sold injustice for to buy,
And for to purchase for his progeny.
Ill might it prosper, that ill gotten was,
But so he got it, little did he pas.
He fed his cubs with fat of all the soil,
And with the sweet of others sweating toil,
He crammed them with crumbs of Benefices,
And filled their mouths with meeds of malefices,
He clothed them with all colors save white,
And loded them with lordships and wi^h might,
So much as they were able well to bear,
That with the weight their backs nigh broken were;
He chaffred Chayres in which Churchmen were set,
And breach of laws to privy ferme did let;
No statute so established might be,
Nor ordinance so needful, but that he
Would violate, though not with violence,
Yet under color of the confidence
The which the Ape reposd' in him alone,
And reckned him the kingdoms corner stone.
And ever when he ought would bring to pas,
His long experience the platform was:
And when he ought not pleasing would put by,
The cloak was care of thrift, and husbandry,
For to increase the common treasures store;
But his own treasure he increased more
And lifted up his lofty towers thereby,
That they began to threat the neighbor sky;
The whiles the Princes palaces fell fast
To ruin: (^or what thing can ever last?)
And whilst the other Peers, for poverty
Were forced their ancient houses to let lie,
And their old Castles to the ground to fall,
Which their forefathers famous over all
Had founded for the Kingdoms ornament,
And for their memories long moniment.
But he no count made of Nobility,
Nor the wild beasts whom arms did glorify,
The Realms chief strength and girlo^d of the crown.
All these through fained crimes he thrust adowne,
Or made them dwell in darkness of disgrace:
For none, but whom he list might come in place.
Of men of arms he had but small regard,
But kept them low, and streigned very hard.
For men of learning little he esteemed;
His wisdom he above their learning deemed.
As for the rascal Commons least he cared;
For not so common was his bounty shared;
Let God (said he) if please, care for the many,
I for my self must care before else any:
So did he go^d to no^e, to mani^ ill,
So did he all the kingdom rob and pill,
Yet none durst speak, ne none durst of him plain;
So great he was in grace, and rich through gain.
Ne would he any let to have access
Unto the Prince, but by his own address:
For all that else did come, were sure ^o fail,
Yet would he further none but for avail.
For on a time the Sheep, to whom of yore
The Fox had promised of friendship store,
What time the Ape the kingdom first did gain,
Came to the Court, her case there to complain,
How that the Wolf her mortal enemy
Had sithence slain her Lamb most cruelly;
And therefore craved to come unto the King,
To let him know the order of the thing.
Soft Gooddie Sheep (then said the Fox) not so:
Unto the King so rash ye may not go,
He is with greater matter busied,
Than a Lamb, or the Lambs own mothers head.
Ne certes may I take it well in part,
That ye my cousin Wolf so fowly thwart,
And seek with slander his good name to blot:
For there was cause, else do it he would not.
Therefore surcease good Dame, and hence depart.
So went the Sheep away with heavy heart.
So many more, so every one was used,
That to give largely to the box refused.
Now when high Jove, in whose almighty hand
The care of Kings, and power of Empires stand,
Sitting one day within his turret hye,
From whence he vewes with his blacklidded eye,
Whatso the heaven in his wide vawte contains,
And all that in the deepest earth remains,
And troubled kingdom of wild beasts beheld,
Whom not their kindly Sovereign did welde,
But an usurping Ape with guile suborned,
Had all subuerst, he sdeignfully it scorned
In his great heart, and hardly did refrain,
But that with thunder bolts he had him slain,
And driven down to hell, his dewest meed:
But him auizing, he that dreadful deed
Forbore, and rather chose with scornful shame
Him to avenge, and blot his brutish name
Unto the world, that never after any
Should of his race be void of infamy:
And his false counselor, the cause of all,
To damn to death, or dole perpetual,
From whence he never should be quit, nor stal'd.
Forthwith he Mercury unto him called,
And bad him fly with never resting speed
Unto the forest, where wild beasts do breed,
And there enquiring privily, to learn,
What did of late chance to the Lion stearne,
That he ruled not the Empire, as he ought;
And whence were all those plaints unto him brought
Of wrongs and spoils, by saluage beasts committed;
Which done, he bad the Lion be remitted
Into his seat, and those same treachours vile
Be punished for their presumptuous guile.
The Son of Maia soon as he received
That word, straight with his azure wings he cleau'd
The liquid clouds, and lucid firmament;
Ne staid, till that he came with steep descent
Unto the place, where his prescript did show.
There stouping like an arrowe from a bow,
He soft arrived on the grassie plain,
And fairly paced forth with easy pain,
Till that unto the Palace nigh he came.
Then began he to himself new shape to frame,
And that fair face, and that Ambrosiall hew,
Which wonts to deck the Gods immortal crew,
And beautefie the shinie firmament,
He do, unfit for that rude rabblement.
So standing by the gates in strange disguize,
He began enquire of some in secret wize,
Both of the King, and of his government,
And of the Fox, and his false blandishment:
And evermore he heard each one complain
Of foul abuses both in realm and rain.
Which yet to prove more true, he meant to see,
And an ey-witnes of each thing to be.
Tho on his head his dreadful hat he dight,
Which makes him invisible in sight,
And mocketh the eyes of all the lookers on,
Making them think it but a vision.
Through power of that, he runs through enemies swerds;
Through power of that, he passes through the herds
Of ravenous wild beasts, and does beguile
Their greedy mouths of the expected spoil;
Through power of that, his cunning theeueries
He wonts to work, that none the same espies;
And through the power of that, he puts on,
What shape he list in apparition.
That on his head he wore, and in his hand
He took Caduceus his snakie wand,
With which the damned ghosts he governs,
And furies rules, and Tartare tempereth.
With that he causes sleep to seize the eyes,
And fear the hearts of all his enemies;
And when him list, an universal night
Throughout the world he makes on every wigh^;
As when his Sire with Alcumena lay.
Thus dight, into the Court he took his way,
Both through the guard, which never him descride,
And through the watchmen, who him never spide:
Thenceforth he past into each secret part,
Whereas he saw, that sorely grieved his heart;
Each place abounding with foul injuries,
And filled with treasure rackt with robberies:
Each place defilde with blood of guiltles beasts,
Which had been slain, to serve the Apes beheasts;
Gluttony, malice, pride, and couetize,
And lawlesnes reigning with riotize;
Besides the infinite exto^tions,
Done through the Foxes great oppressions,
That the complaints thereof could not be told.
Which when he did with lothfull eyes behold,
He would no more endure, but came his way,
And cast to seek the Lion, where he may,
That he might work the auengement for this shame,
On those two caytiues, which had bred him blame.
And seeking all the forest busily^
At last he found, where sleeping he did ly:
The wicked weed, which there the Fox did lay,
From underneath his head he took away,
And then him waking, forced up to rize.
The Lion looking up began him auize,
As one late in a trance, what had of long
Become of him: for fantasy is strong.
Arise (said Mercury) thou sluggish beast,
That here lie senseles, like the corpse deceast,
The whilste thy kingdom from thy head is rent,
And thy throne royal with dishonor blent:
Arise, and do thy self redeem from shame,
And be aueng'd on those that breed thy blame.
Thereat enraged, soon he began vpstart,
Grinding his teeth^ and grating his great ^art,
And rouzing up himself, for his rough hide
He began to reach; but no where it espide.
Therewith he began full terribly to rore,
And chafte at that indignity right sore.
But when his Crown and scepter both he wanted^
Lord how he fumed, and sweld, and ^ag'd, and panted^
And th^eatned death, and thousand deadly dolours
To them that had purloyn'd his Princely honors.
With that in have, disroabed as he was,
He toward his own Palace forth did pas;
And all the way he roared as he wen^,
That all the forest with astonishment
Thereof did tremble, and the beasts therein
Fled fast away from that so dreadful din.
At last he came unto his mansion,
Where all the gates he found fast locked anon,
And many warders round about them stood:
With that he roared alowd, as he were wood,
That all the Palace quaked at the stound,
As if it quite were riuen from the ground,
And all within were dead and hartles le^t;
And th'Ape himself, as one whose wits were re^t,
Fled here and there, and every corner sought,
To hide himself from his own feared thought.
But the false Fox when he the Lion heard,
Fled closely forth, streightway of death a^eard,
And to the Lion came, ^ull lowly creeping,
With fained face, and watrie eyne half weeping,
T'excuse his former treason and abusion.
And turning all unto the Apes confusion:
Nath'les the royal Beast forbore believing,
But bad him stay at ease till further preeuing.
Then when he saw no entrance to him granted,
Roaring yet louder that all hearts it daunted,
Upon those gates with force he fiercely flewe,
And rending them in pieces, felly slew
Those warders strange, and all that else he met.
But th'Ape still flying, he no where might get:
From rowme to rowme, from beam to beam he fled
All breathles, and for fear now almost ded:
Yet him at last the Lion spide, and caught,
And forth with shame unto his judgment brought.
Then all the beasts he causd' assembled be,
To hear their doom, and sad ensample see:
The Fox, first Author of that treachery,
He did uncase, and then away let fly.
But th'Apes long tail (which then he had) he quight
Cut off, and both ears pared of their hight;
Since which, all Apes but half their ears have left,
And of their tails are utterly bereft.
So Mother Hubberd her discourse did end:
Which pardon me, if I amiss have pend,
For weak was my remembrance it to hold,
And bad her tongue that it so bluntly told.
FINIS.
Ruins of Rome: by Bellay.
1
YE heavenly spirits, whose ashie cinders lie
Under deep ruins, with huge walls oppressed,
But not your praise, the which shall never die
Through your fair verses, ne in ashes rest;
If so be shrilling voice of wight alive
May reach from hence to depth of darkest hell,
Then let those deep Abysses open riue,
That ye may understand my shreiking yell.
Thrice having seen under the heavens veale
Your toombs devoted compass over all,
Thrice unto you with loud voice I appeal,
And for your antique fury here do call,
The whiles that I with sacred horror sing
Your glory, fairest of all earthly thing.
2
Great Babylon her haughty walls will praise,
And sharped steeples high shot up in air;
Greece will the old Ephesian buildings blaze;
And Nylus nurslings their Pyramides fair;
The same yet vaunting Greece will tell the story
Of Jove's great Image in Olympus placed,
Mansolus work will be the Carians glory.
And Crete will boast the Labyrinth, now raced;
The antique Rhodian will likewise set forth
The great Colosse, erect to Memory;
And what else in the world is of like worth,
Some greater learned wit will magnify.
But I will sing above all moniments
Seven Roman Hills, the worlds 7. wonderments.
3
Thou ^tranger, which for Rome in Rome here seek,
And naught of Rome in Rome perceiu'st at all,
These fame old walls, old arches, which thou see,
Old Palaces is that, which Rome men call.
Behold what wreake, what ruin, and what wast,
And how that she, which with her mighty power
Tamed all the world, has tamed hersel^e at last,
The pray o^ time, which all things does deuowre.
Rome now of Rome is the only funeral,
And only Rome of Rome has victory;
Ne ought save Tyber hastening to his fall
Remains of all^ O worlds inconstancy.
That which is firm does flit and fall away,
And that is flitting, does abide and stay.
4
She, whose high top above the stars did sore,
One foot on Thetis, the other on the Morning,
One hand on Scythia, the other on the More,
Both heaven and earth in roundnesse compassing,
Jove fearing, least if she should greater grow,
The old Giants should once again vprise,
Her whelmed with hills, these 7. hills, which be now
Tombs of her greatness, which did threate the skies:
Upon her head he heapt Mount Saturnal,
Upon her belly th'antique Palatine,
Upon her stomach laid Mount Quirinal,
On her left hand the noisome Esquiline,
And Caelian on the right; but both her feet
Mount Viminal and Auentine do meet.
5
Who li^ts to see, what ever nature, art,
And heaven could do, O Rome, thee let him see^
In case thy greatness he can guess in heart,
By that which but the picture is of thee.
Rome is no more: but if the shade of Rome
May of the body yield a seeming sight,
It Is like a corse drawn forth out of the tomb
By Magic skill out of eternal night:
The corpse of Rome in ashes is entombed,
And her great spirit reioyned to the spirit
Of this great mass, is in the same enwombed;
But her brave writings, which her famous merit
In spite of time, out of the dust does rear,
Do make her Idol through the world appear.
6
Such as the Berecynthian Goddess bright
In her swift charret with high turrets crownde,
Proud that so many Gods she brought to light;
Such was this City in her good days fownd:
This City, more than that great Phrygian mother
Renowm'd for fruit of famous progeny,
Whose greatness by the greatness of none other,
But by her self her equal match could see:
Rome only might to Rome compared be,
And only Rome could make great Rome to tremble:
So did the Gods by heavenly doom decree,
That other earthly power should not resemble
Her that did match the whole ^arths pu^^^unce,
And did her courage to the heavens adu^unce.
7
Ye sacred ruins, and ye tragic sights,
Which only do the name of Rome retain,
Old moniments, which of so famous sprights
The honor yet in ashes do maintain:
Triumphant Arcks, spyres neighbors to the sky,
That you to see does th'heauen it self appall,
Alas, by little ye to nothing fly,
The peoples fable, and the spoil of all:
And though your frames do for a time make war
Against time, yet time in time shall ruinate
Your works and names, and your last relics mar.
My sad desires, rest therefore moderate:
For if that time make end of things so sure,
It als will end the pain, which I endure.
8
Through arms and vassals Rome the world subdued,
That one would ween, that one sole Cities strength
Both land and sea in roundnes had suruew'd,
To be the measure of her breadth and length:
This peoples virtue yet so fruitful was
Of virtuous nephewes^ that posterity
Striving in power their grandfathers to pass,
The lowest earth, ioin'd to the heaven hie;
To the end that having all parts in their power,
Naught from the Roman Empire might be quight,
And that though time does Co^monwealths deuowre,
Yet no time should so low embase their hight,
That her head eathed in her foundations deep,
Should not her name and endless honor keep.
9
Ye cruel stars, and eke ye Gods unkind,
Heaven envious, and bitter stepdame Nature,
Be it by fortune, or by course of kind
That ye do weld the affairs of earthly creature;
Why have your hands long sithence traueiled
To frame this world, that does endure so long?
Or why were not these Roman palaces
Made of some matter no less firm and strong?
I say not, as the common voice does say,
That all things which beneath the Moon have being
Are temporal, and subject to decay:
But I say rather, though not all agreeing
With some, that ween the contrary in thought;
That all this whole shall one day come to naught.
10
As that brave son of Aeson, which by charms
Atcheiu'd the golden Fleece in Colchid land,
Out of the earth engendered men of arms
Of Dragons teeth, sown in the sacred sand;
So this brave Town, that in her youthlie days
An Hydra was of warriors glorious,
Did fill with her renowned nourslings praise
The fiery suns both one and other house:
But they at last, there being then not living
An Hercules, so rank seed to repress;
Emongst themselves with cruel fury striving,
Mowed down themselves with slaughter merciless;
Renewing in themselves that rage unkind,
Which whilom did those earthborn brethren blind.
11
Mars shaming to have gi^^n so great head
To his offspring, that mortal puissaunce
Puffed up with pride of Roman hardiehead,
Seemed above heavens power it self to advance;
Cooling again hi^ former kindled heat;
With which h^ had those Roman spirits filled,
Did blow new fire, and with enflamed breath,
Into the Gothicke cold hot rage instil'd^
Then began that Na^ion, the earths new Giant brood,
To dart abroad the thunder bolts of war,
And beating down these walls with furious mood
Into her mothers bosom, all did mar;
To the end that none, all were it ^oue his sire
Should boast himself of the Roman Empire.
12
Like as whilome the children of the earth
Heapt hills on hills, to scale the starrie sky,
And fight against the Gods of hea^^^ly borrh,
Whiles Io^e at them his thunderbolts let fl^e:
All suddenly with lightning overthrown,
The furious squadrons down to ground did fall,
That the earth under her childrens weight did groan,
And th'heauens in glory triu^pht ou^r all:
So did that haughty front which h^aped was
On these seven Roman hills, it self vpreare
Over the world, and lift her lofty face
Against the heaven, that began her force to fear.
But now these scor^ed fields bemone her fall,
And Gods ^ecure fear not her force at all.
13
Nor the swift fury of the flames aspiring,
Nor the deep wounds of victours raging blade,
Nor ruthlesse spoil of soldiers blood-desiring,
The which so of^ thee ( Rome) their conquest made;
Ne stroke on stroke of fortune variable,
Ne rust of age hating continuance,
Nor wrath of Gods, nor spite of men unstable,
Nor thou opposd' against thine own puissance;
Nor th'horrible uproar of winds high blowing,
Nor swelling streams of that God makie paced,
Which has so often with his overflowing
Thee drenched, have thy pride so much abaced;
But that this nothing, which they have thee left,
Makes the world wonder, what they from thee reft.
14
As men in Summerfearles pass the soord,
Which is in Winter lord of all the plain,
And with his tumbling streams does bear aboard
The ploughmans hope, and shepherds labor vaine^
And as the coward beasts use to despise
The noble Lion after his lives end,
Whetting their teeth, and with vain foolhardise
Daring the foe, that cannot him defend:
And as at Troy most dastards o^ the Greeks
Did brave about the corpse of Hector cold;
So those which whilome wo^t with pallid che^kes
The Roman triumphs glory to behold,
Now on these ashie tombs show boldness vain,
And conquered dare the Conqueror disdain.
15
Ye pallid spirits, and ye ashie ghoasts,
Which ioying in the brightness of your day,
Brought forth those signs of your presumptuous boasts
Which now their dusty relics do bewray;
Tell me ye spirits (since the darksome river
Of Styx, not passable to souls returning,
Enclosing you in thrice three wards for ever,
Do not restrain your images still mourning)
Tell me then (for perhaps some one of you
Yet here above him secretly does hide)
Do ye not feel your torments to accrewe,
When ye sometimes behold the ruined pride
Of these old Roman works built with your hands,
To become naught else, but heaped sands?
16
Like as ye see the wrathful Sea from far,
In a great mountain heap't with hideous noise,
Eftsoons of thousand billows shouldred narre,
Against a Rock to break with dreadful poyse:
Like as ye see fell Boreas with sharp blast,
Tossing huge tempests through the troubled sky,
Eftsoons having his wide wings spent in wast,
To stop his weary cariere suddenly:
And as ye see huge flames spread diversely,
Gathered in one up to the heavens to spyre,
Eftsoons consumed to fall down feebily:
So whilom did this Monarchy aspyre
As waves, as wind, as fire spread over all,
Till it by fatal doom adowne did fall.
17
So long as Jove's great Bird did make his flight,
Bearing the fire with which heaven does us fray,
Heaven had not fear of that presumptuous might,
With which the Giaunts did the Gods assay.
But all so soon, as scortching Sun had brent
His wings, which wont the earth to ouerspredd,
The earth out of her massy womb forth sent
That antique horror, which made heaven adredd.
Then was the Germane Raven in disguise
That Roman Eagle seen to cleave asunder,
And toward heaven freshly to arise
Out of these mountains, now consumed to powder.
In which the foul that serves to bear the lightning,
Is now no more seen flying, nor alighting.
18
These heaps of stones, these old walls which ye see,
Were first enclosures but of saluage soil;
And these brave Palaces which maystred be
Of time, were shepherds cottages somewhile.
Then took the shepherds Kingly ornament
And the stout hynde armed his right hand with steel:
Eftsoons their rule of yearly Presidents
Grew great, and six months greater a great deele;
Which made perpetual, rose to so great might,
That thence The Imperial Eagle rooting took,
Till th'heauen it self opposing against her might,
Her power to Peter's successor betook;
Who shepheardlike, (as fates the same foreseeing)
Does show, that all things turn to their first being.
19
All that is perfect, which th'heauen beautefies;
All that is imperfect, borne below the Moon;
All that does feed our spirits and our eyes;
And all that does consume our pleasures soon;
All the mishap, the which our days outweares,
All the good hap of th'oldest times before,
Rome in the time of her great ancesters,
Like a Pandora, locked long in store.
But destiny this huge Chaos turmoyling,
In which all good and evil was enclosed,
Their heavenly virtues from these woes assoyling,
Carried to heaven, from sinful bondage losed:
But their great sins, the causers of their pain,
Under these antique ruins yet remain.
20
No otherwise than raynie cloud, first fed
With earthly vapors gathered in the air,
Eftsoons in compass arch't, to steep his head,
Does plonge himself in Tethys bosom fair;
And mounting up again, from whence he came,
With his great belly spreds the dimmed world,
Till at the last dissoluing his moist frame,
In rain, or snow, or hail he forth^ is horld;
This City, which was first but shepherds shade,
Vprising by degrees, grew to such height,
That Queen of land and sea her self she made.
At last not able to bear so great weight,
Her power dispersed, through all the world did vade;
To show that all in the end to naught shall fade.
21
The same which Pyrrhus, and the puissaunce
Of Afrike could not tame, that same brave City,
Which with stout courage armed against mischau^ce,
Sustein'd the shocke of common enmity;
Long as her ship tossed with so many freakes,
Had all the world in arms against her bent,
Was never seen, that any fortunes wreakes
Could break her course begun with brave intent.
But when the object of her virtue failed,
Her power it self against it self did arm;
As he that having long in tempest sailed,
Feign would ariue, but cannot for the storm,
If too great wind against the port him drive,
Does in the port it self his vessel riue.
22
When that brave honor of the Latin name,
Which mear'd her rule with Africa, and Byze,
With Thames inhabitants of noble fame,
And they which see the dawning day arize;
Her nourslings did with mutinous uproar
Harten against her self, her conquered spoil,
Which she had won from all the world before,
Of all the world was spoiled within a while.
So when the compast course of the universe
In six and thirty thousand years is run,
The bands of the elements shall back reuerse
To their first discord, and be quite undone:
The seeds, of which all things at first were bred,
Shall in great Chaos womb again be hid.
23
O wary wisdom of the man, that would
That Carthage towers from spoil should be forborne,
To the end that his victorious people should
With cancring laisure not be ouerworne;
He well foresaw, how that the Roman courage,
Impatient of pleasures faint desires,
Through idleness would turn to civil rage,
And be her self the matter of her fires.
For in a people given all to ease,
Ambition is engendered easily;
As in a vicious body, gross disease
Soon grows through humors superfluity.
That came to pass, when swollen with ple^ties pride,
Nor prince, nor peer, nor kin they would abide.
24
If the blind fury, which wars breeds often,
Wonts not t'enrage the hearts of equal beasts,
Whether they fare on foot, or fly aloft,
Or armed be with claws, or scaly creasts;
What fell Erynnis with hot burning tongs,
Did grype your hearts, with noisome rage imbew'd,
That each to other working cruel wrongs,
Your blades in your own bowels you embrew'd?
Was this (ye Romans) your hard destiny?
Or some old sin, whose unappeased guilt
Powered vengeance forth on you eternally?
Or brothers blood, the which at first was spilt
Upon your walls, that God might not endure,
Upon the same to set foundation sure?
25
O that I had the Thracian Poets harp,
For to awake out of the infernal shade
Those antique Caesar's, sleeping long in dark,
The which this ancient City whilome made:
Or that I had Amphions instrument,
To quicken with his vital notes accord,
The stony joints of these old walls now rent,
By which the Ausonian light might be restored:
Or that at least I could with pencill fine,
Fashion the pourtraicts of these Palacis,
By pattern of great Virgils spirit divine;
I would assay with that which in me is,
To build with level of my lofty style,
That which no hands can evermore compyle.
26
Who list the Roman greatness forth to figure,
Him needs not to seek for usage right
Of line, or lead, or rule, or squaire, to measure
Her length, her breadth, her deepnes, or her hight,
But him behooues to view in compass round
All that the Ocean graspes in his long arms;
Be it where the yearly star does scortch the ground,
Or where cold Boreas blows his bitter storms.
Rome was the whole world, and all the world was Rome,
And if things named their names do equalize,
When land and sea ye name, then name ye Rome;
And naming Rome ye land and sea comprize:
For th'auncient Plot of Rome displayed plain,
The map of all the wide world does contain.
27
Thou that at Rome astonished do behold
The antique pride, which menaced the sky,
These haughty heaps, these palaces of old,
These walls, these arcks, these baths, these temples hie;
Judge by these ample ruins view, the rest
The which injurious time has quite outworne,
Since of all workmen held in reckning best,
Yet these old fragments are for paternes borne:
Then also mark, how Rome from day to day,
Repayring her decayed fashion,
Renewes herself with buildings rich and gay;
That one would judge, that the Roman Demon
Does yet himself with fatal hand enforce,
Again on foot to rear her pouldred corse.
28
He that has seen a great Oak dry and dead,
Yet clad with relics of some Trophies old,
Lifting to heaven her aged hoarie head,
Whose foot in ground has left but feeble hold;
But half disbowel'd lies above the ground,
Showing her wreathed roots, and naked arms,
And on her trunk all rotten and unsound
Only supports herself for meat of worms;
And though she owe her fall to the first wind,
Yet of the devout people is adored,
And many young plants spring out of her rind;
Who such an Oak has seen, let him record
That such this Cities honor was of yore,
And among all Cities flourished much more.
29
All that which Egypt whilome did devise,
All that which Greece their temples to embraue,
After th'Ionicke, Atticke, Doricke guise,
Or Corinth skilled in curious works to grave;
All that Lysippus practike art could form,
Apelles wit, or Phidias his skill,
Was wont this ancient City to adorn,
And the heaven it self with her wide wonders fill;
All that which Athens ever brought forth wise,
All that which Afrike ever brought forth strange,
All that which Asie ever had of prise,
Was here to see. O marvelous great change:
Rome living, was the worlds sole ornament,
And dead, is now the worlds sole moniment.
30
Like as the seeded field green grass first shows,
Then from green grass into a stalk does spring,
And from a stalk into an ear forth-growes,
Which ear the fruitful grain does shortly bring;
And as in season due the husband mowes
The wauing locks of those fair yeallow hears,
Which bound in sheaues, and laid in comely rows,
Upon the naked fields in stalks he reares:
So grew the Roman Empire by degree,
Till that Barbarian hands it quite did spill,
And left of it but these old marks to see,
Of which all passers by do somewhat pill:
As they which gleane, the relics use to gather,
Which th'husba^dma^ behind him chanst to scater.
31
That same is now naught but a champian wide,
Where all this worlds pride once was situate.
No blame to thee, whosoever do abide
By Nyle, or Gange, or Tygre, or Euphrate,
Ne Afrike th^reof guilty is, nor Spain,
Nor the bold people by the Thamis brincks,
Nor the brave warlicke brood of Alemaine,
Nor the borne Soldier which Rhine running drinks:
Thou only cause, o Civil fury, art
Which sowing in the Aemathian fields thy spite,
Did arm thy hand against thy proper heart;
To the end that when thou wast in greatest hight
To greatness grown, through long prosperity,
Thou then adowne might fall more horribly.
32
Hope ye my yerses that posterity
Of age ensuing shall you ever read?
Hope ye that ever immortality
So mean Harpes work may challenge for her meed?
If under heaven any endurance were,
These moniments, which not in paper writ,
But in Porphyre and Marble do appear,
Might well have hoped to have obtained it.
Nath'les my Lute, whom Phoebus deignd to give,
Cease not to sound these old antiquities:
For if that time do let thy glory live,
Well may thou boast, how ever base thou be,
That thou art first, which of thy Nation song
The Old honor of the people gowned long.
L'Envoy.
Bellay, first garland of free Poesy
That France brought forth, though fruitful of brave wits,
Well worthy thou of immortality,
That long have traueld by thy learned writs,
Old Rome out of her ashes to revive,
And give a second life to dead decays:
Needs must he all eternity survive,
That can to other give eternal days.
Thy days therefore are endless, and thy praise
Excelling all, that ever went before;
And after thee, gins Bartas hie to raise
His heavenly Muse, The Almighty to adore.
Live happy spirits, the honor of your name,
And fill the world with never dying fame.
FINIS.
MVIOPOTMOS, Or The Fate of the Butterfly.

By ED. SP.

Dedicated to the most fair and virtuous Lady: the Lady Carey.

LONDON. Imprinted for William Ponsonbie, dwelling in Paul's Churchyard at the
sign of the Bishops head.

1590.

To the right worthy and virtuous Lady; the La: Carey.
MOst brave and bountiful La: for so excellent favors as I have received at
your sweet hands, to offer these few leaves as in recompense, should be as to
offer flowers to the Gods for their divine benefits. Therefore I have
determined to give my self wholly to you, as quite abandoned from my self, and
absolutely vowed to your services: which in all right is ever held for full
recompense of debt or damage to have the person yielded. My person I wot well
how little worth it is. But the faithful mind and humble zeal which I bear
unto your La: may perhaps be more of price, as may please you to account and
use the poor service thereof; which takes glory to advance your excellent
parts and noble virtues, and to spend it self in honoring you: not so much
for your great bounty to my self, which yet may not be vnminded; nor for name
or kindreds sake by you vouchsafed, being also regardable; as for that
honorable name, which ye have by your brave deserts purchased to your self, and
spread in the mouths of al me^: with which I have also presumed to grace my
verses, and under your name to commend to the world this small Poem, the
which beseeching your La: to take in vvorth, and of all things therein
according to your wonted graciousnes to make a mild construction, I humbly
pray for your happiness.

Your La: ever humbly; E. S.

Muiopotmos: or The Fate of the Butterfly.
I Sing of deadly dolorous debate,
Stirred up through wrathful Nemesis despite,
Betwixt two mighty ones of great estate,
Drawn into arms, and proof of mortal fight,
Through proud ambition, and hartswelling hate,
Whilst neither could the others greater might
And sdeignfull scorn endure; that from small jar
Their wraths at length broke into open war.
The root whereof and tragical effect,
Vouchsafe, O thou the mournfulst Muse of nine.
That wontst the tragic stage for to direct,
In funeral complaints and waylfull tyne,
Reveal to me, and all the means detect,
Through which sad Clarion did at last declyne
To lowest wretchedness; And is there then
Such rancour in the hearts of mighty men?
Of all the race of siluer-winged Flies
Which do possess the Empire of the air,
Betwixt the centred earth, and azure skies,
Was none more favorable, nor more fair,
Whilst heaven did favor his felicities,
Then Clarion, the eldest son and hair
Of Muscaroll, and in his fathers sight
Of all alive did seem the fairest wight.
With fruitful hope his aged breast he fed
Of future good, which his young toward years,
Full of brave courage and bold hardyhed,
Above th'ensample of his equal pears,
Did largely promise, and to him forered
(Whilst often his heart did melt in tender tears)
That he in time would sure prove such an one,
As should be worthy of his fathers throne.
The fresh young fly, in whom the kindly fire
Of lustful yonght began to kindle fast,
Did much disdain to subject his desire
To loathsome sloth, or hours in ease to wast,
But joyed to range abroad in fresh attire;
Through the wide compass of the ayrie coast,
And with unwearied wings each part t'inquire
Of the wide rule of his renowned sire.
For he so swift and nimble was of flight,
That from this lower tract he dared to stie
Up to the clouds, and thence with pineons light,
To mount aloft unto the Crystal sky,
To view the workmanship of heavens hight:
Whence down descending he along would fly
Upon the streaming rivers, sport to find;
And often would dare to tempt the troublous wind.
So on a Summers day, when season mild
With gentle calm the world had quieted,
And high in heaven Hyperions fiery child
Ascending, did his beams abroad dispred,
Whiles all the heavens on lower creatures smilde;
Young Clarion with vauntfull lusty head,
After his guize did cast abroad to fare;
And theretoo began his furnitures prepare.
His breastplate first, that was of substance pure,
Before his noble heart he firmly bound,
That might his life from iron death assure,
And ward his gentle corpse from cruel wound:
For it by art was framed, to endure
The bit of balefull steel and bitter stownd,
No less than that, which Vulcane made to shield
Achilles life from fate of Troyan field.
And then about his shoulders broad he threw
An hairie hide of some wild beast, whom he
In saluage forest by adventure slew,
And rest the spoil his ornament to be:
Which spredding all his back with dreadful view,
Made all that him so horrible did see,
Think him Alcides with the Lions skin,
When the Naemean Conquest he did win.
Upon his head his glistering Burganet,
The which was wrought by wondrous device,
And curiously engraven, he did set:
The metal was of rare and passing price;
Not Bilbo steel, nor brass from Corinth fet,
Nor costly Oricalche from strange Phoenice;
But such as could both Phoebus arrows ward,
And th'hayling darts of heaven beating hard.
Therein two deadly weapons fixed he bore,
Strongly outlaunced toward either side,
Like two sharp spears, his enemies to gore:
Like as a warlike Brigandine, applyde
To fight, lays forth her threatfull pikes before,
The engines which in them sad death do hyde^
So did this fly outstretch his fearful horns,
Yet so as him their terror more adornes.
Lastly his shinie wings as silver bright,
Painted with thousand colors, passing far
All Painters skill, he did about him dight:
Not half so many sundry colors arre
In Iris bow, ne heaven does shine so bright,
Distinguished with many a twinkling star,
Nor Iunoes Bird in her ey-spotted train
So many goodly colors does contain.
Ne (may it be withouten peril spoken)
The Archer God, the son of Cytheree,
That joys on wretched lovers to be wroken,
And heaped spoils of bleeding hearts to see,
Bears in his wings so many a changefull token.
Ah my liege Lord, forgive it unto me,
If ought against thine honor I have told;
Yet sure those wings were fairer manifold.
Full many a Lady fair, in Court full often
Beholding them, him secretly enuide,
And wished that two such fannes, so silken soft,
And golden fair, her Love would her provide;
Or that when them the gorgeous Fly had doft,
Some one that would with grace be gratifide,
From him would steal them privily away,
And bring to her so precious a pray.
Report is that dame Venus on a day,
In spring when flowers do clothe the fruitful ground,
Walking abroad with all her Nymphs to play,
Bad her fair damzels flocking her arownd,
To gather flowers, her forhead to array:
Emongst the rest a gentle Nymph was found,
Hight Astery, excelling all the crewe
In courteous usage, and unstained hew.
Who being nimbler ioynted than the rest,
And more industrious, gathered more store
Of the fields honor, than the others best;
Which they in secret hearts envying sore,
Told Venus, when her as the worthiest
She praisd', that Cupide (as they heard before)
Did lend her secret aid, in gathering
Into her lap the children of the spring.
Whereof the Goddess gathering jealous fear,
Not yet unmindful, how not long ago
Her son to Psyche secret love did bear,
And long it close concealed, till mickle woe
Thereof arose, and many a rufull tear;
Reason with sudden rage did ouergoe,
And giving hasty credit to th'accuser,
Was led away of them that did abuse her.
Eftsoons that Damzel by her heavenly might,
She turned into a winged Butterfly,
In the wide air to make her wandering flight;
And all those flowers, with which so plenteouslie
Her lap she filled had, that bred her spite,
She placed in her wings, for memory
Of her pretended crime, though crime none were:
Since which that fly them in her wings does bear.
Thus the fresh Clarion being ready dight,
Unto his journey did himself address,
And with good speed began to take his flight:
Over the fields in his frank lustiness,
And all the champion he soared light,
And all the country wide he did possess,
Feeding upon their pleasures bounteouslie,
That none gainsaid, nor none did him envy.
The woods, the rivers, and the meadows green,
With his aire-cutting wings he measured wide,
Ne did he leave the mountains bare unseen,
Nor the rank grassie fennes delights untried.
But none of these, how ever sweet they been,
Mo^e please his fancy, nor him cause to abide:
His choicefull sense with every change does flit.
No common things may please a wavering wit.
To the gay gardins his unstaid desire
Him wholly carried, to refresh his sprights:
There lavish Nature in her best attire,
Powers forth sweet odors, and alluring sights;
And Art with her contending, does aspire
T'excell the natural, with made delights:
And all that fair or pleasant may be ^ound,
In riotous excess does there abound.
There he arriving, round about does fly,
From bed to bed, from one to other border,
And takes survey with curious busy eye,
Of every flower and herb there set in order;
Now this, now that he tastes tenderly,
Yet none of them he rudely does disorder,
Ne with his feet their silken leaves deface;
But pastures on the pleasures of each place.
And evermore with most variety,
And change of sweetness (for all change is sweet)
He casts his glutton sense to satisfy,
Now sucking of the sap of herb most meet,
Or of the deaw, which yet on them does lie,
Now in the same bathing his tender feet:
And then he pearcheth on some branch thereby,
To weather him, and his moist wings to dry.
And then again he turns to his play,
To spoil the pleasures of that Paradise:
The wholesome Saulge, and Lauender still gray,
Rank smelling Rue, and Cummin good for eyes,
The Roses reigning in the pride of May,
Sharp Isope, good for green wounds remedies,
Fair Marigoldes, and Bees alluring Thime,
Sweet Marioram, and Daysies decking prime.
Cool Violets, and Orpine growing still,
Embathed Balm, and cheerful Galingale,
Fresh Costmarie, and breathfull Camomill,
Poppie, and drink-quickning Setuale,
Veyne-healing Veruen, and hed-purging Dill,
Sound Sauorie, and Bazill hartie-hale,
Fat Colworts, and comforting Perseline,
Cold Lettuce, and refreshing Rosmarine.
And whatso else of virtue good or ill
Grew in this Gardin, fetched from far away,
Of every one he takes, and tastes at will,
And on their pleasures greedily does pray.
Then when he has both played, and fed his fill,
In the warm Sun he does himself embay,
And there him rests in riotous suffisaunce
Of all his gladfulnes, and kingly ioyaunce.
What more felicity can fall to creature,
Than to enjoy delight with liberty,
And to be Lord of all the works of Nature,
To rain in the air from earth to highest sky,
To feed on flowers, and weeds of glorious feature,
To take what ever thing does please the eye?
Who rests not pleased with such happiness,
Well worthy he to taste of wretchedness.
But what on earth can long abide in state?
Or who can him assure of happy day;
S^th morning fair may bring foul evening late,
And least mishap the most bliss alter may?
For thousand perils lie in close awaite
About us daily, to work our decay;
That none, except a God, or God him guide,
May them avoid, or remedy provide.
And whatso heavens in their secret doom
Ordained have, how can frail fleshly wight
Forecast, but it must needs to issue come?
The sea, the air, the fire, the day, the night,
And th'armies of their creatures all and some
Do serve to them, and with importune might
War against us the vassals of their will.
Who then can save, what they dispose to spill?
Not thou, O Clarion, though fairest thou
Of all thy kind, unhappy happy Fly,
Whose cruel fate is wouen even now
Of Jove's own hand, to work thy misery:
Ne may thee help the many hearty vow,
Which thy old Sire with sacred piety
Has powered forth for thee, and th'altars sprent:
Naught may thee save from heavens auengement.
It fortuned (as heavens had behight)
That in this gardin, where young Clarion
Was wont to solace him, a wicked wight
The foe of fair things, the author of confusion,
The shame of Nature, the bondslaue of spite,
Had lately built his hateful mansion,
And lurking closely, in a wait now lay.
How he might any in his trap betray.
But when he spide the joyous Butterfly
In this fair plot displacing too and fro,
Fearles of foes and hidden ieopardie,
Lord how he began for to bestirre him tho,
And to his wicked work each part apply:
His heart did earne against his hated foe,
And bowels so with ranckling poison swelde,
That scarce the skin the strong contagion held.
The cause why he this Fly so maliced,
Was (as in stories it is written found)
For that his mother which him bore and bred,
The most fine fingred workwoman on ground,
Arachne, by his means was vanquished
Of Pallas, and in her own skill confound,
When she with her for excellence contended,
That wrought her shame, and sorrow never ended.
For the Tritonian Goddess having hard
Her blazed fame, which all the world had filled,
Came down to prove the truth, and due reward
For her prais-worthie workmanship to yield
But the presumptuous Damzel rashly dared
The Goddess self to challenge to the field,
And to compare with her in curious skill
Of works with loome, with needle, and with quill.
Minerua did the challenge not refuse,
But deigned with her the paragon to make:
So to their work they sit, and each does choose
What story she will ^or her tapet take.
Arachne figured how Jove did abuse
Europa like a Bull^ and on his back
Her through the sea did bear; so lively seen,
That it true Sea, and true Bull ye would ween.
She seemed still back unto the land to look,
And her play-fellowes aid to call, and fear
The dashing of the waves, that up she took
Her dainty feet, and garments gathered near:
But (Lord) how she in every member shook,
When as the land she saw no more appear,
But a wild wilderness of waters de^pe:
Then began she greatly to lament and weep.
Before the Bull she pictured winged Love,
With his young brother Sport, light fluttering
Upon the waves, as each had been a Dove;
The one his bow and shafts, the other Sp^ing
A burning Teade about his head did move,
As in their Syres new love both triumphing:
And many Nymphs about them flocking round,
And many Tritons, which their horns did sound.
And round about, her work she did empale
With a fair border wrought of sundry flowers,
Enwo^en with an Yuie winding trayle:
A goodly work, full fit for Kingly bowres,
Such as Dame Pallas, such as Enu^e pale,
That al good things with venomous tooth deuowres,
Could not accuse. Then began the Goddess bright
Her self likewise unto her work to dight.
She made the story of the old debate,
Which she with Neptune did for Athens try:
Twelve Gods do sit around in royal state,
And Jove in midst with awful Majesty,
To judge the strife between them stirred late:
Each of the Gods by his like visnomie
Eathe to be known; but Jove above them all,
By his great looks and power Imperial.
Before them stands the God of Seas in place,
Clayming that seacoast City as his right,
And strikes the rocks with his three-forked mace;
Whenceforth issues a warlike steed in sight,
The sign by which he chalengeth the place,
That all the Gods, which saw his wondrous might
Did surely deem the victory his due:
But seldom seen, foreiu^gement proves true.
Then to her self she gives her Aegide shield,
And steelhed spear, and morion on her hedd,
Such as she often is seen in warlicke field:
Then sets she forth, how with her weapon dredd
She smote the ground, the which straight forth did yield
A fruitful Olyue tree, with berries spredd,
That all the Gods admired; then all the story
She compast with a wreathe of Olyues hoarie.
Emongst those leaves she made a Butterfly,
With excellent device and wondrous slight,
Fluttring among the Olives wantonly,
That seemed to live, so like it was in sight:
The velvet nap which on his wings does lie,
The silken down with which his back is dight,
His broad outstretched horns, his hayrie thies,
His glorious colors, and his glistering eyes.
Which when Arachne saw, as ouerlaid,
And mastered with workmanship so rare,
She stood astonished long, ne ought gainesaid,
And with fast fixed eyes on her did stare,
And by her silence, sign of one dismayed,
The victory did yield her as her share:
Yet did she inly fret, and felly burn,
And all her blood to poisonous rancor turn.
That shortly from the shape of womanhed
Such as she was, when Pallas she attempted.
She grew to hideous shape of dryrihed,
Pined with grief of folly late repented:
Eftsoons her white straight legs were altered
To crooked crawling shankes, of marrowe empted,
And her fair face to foul and loathsome hew,
And her fine corpse to a bag of venim grew.
This cursed creature, mindful of that old
Enfested grudge, the which his mother felt,
So soon as Clarion he did behold,
His heart with vengefull malice inly swelt;
And weauing straight a net with many a fold
About the cave, in which he lurking dwelt,
With fine small cords about it stretched wide,
So finely sponne, that scarce they could be spide.
Not any damzell, which her vaunteth most
In skillful knitting of soft silken twyne;
Nor any weauer, which his work does boast
In dieper, in damask, or in line;
Nor any skilled in workmanship embost;
Nor any skilled in loupes of fi^gring fine,
Might in their diverse cunning ever dare,
With this so curious networke to compare.
Ne do I think, that that same subtle gin,
The which the Lemnian God framde craftily,
Mars sleeping with his wife to compass in,
That all the Gods with common mockery
Might laugh at them, and scorn their shameful sin,
Was like to this. This same he did apply,
For to entrap the careless Clarion,
That ranged each where without suspicion.
Suspicion of friend, nor fear of foe,
That hazarded his health, had he at all,
But walked at will, and wandered too and fro,
In the pride of his freedom principal:
Little wist he his fatal future woe,
But was secure, the liker he to fall.
He likest is to fall into mischaunce,
That is regardles of his governance.
Yet still Aragnoll (so his foe was hight)
Lay lurking covertly him to surpri^e,
And all his gins that him entangle might,
Dressed in good order as he could devise.
At length the foolish Fly without foresight,
As he that did all danger quite despise,
Toward thoss parts came flying carele^lie,
Where hidden was his hateful enemy.
Who seeing him, with secret joy therefore
Did tickle in wardly in every vain,
And his false heart fraught with all treasons store,
Was filled with hope, his purpose to obtain:
Himself he close vpgathered more and more
Into his den, that his deceiptfull train
By his there being might not be bewraid,
Ne any noise, ne any motion made.
Like as a wily Fox, that having spide,
Where on a sunnie bank the Lambs do play,
Full closely creeping by the hinder side,
Lies in ambushment of his hoped pray,
Ne stirs limb, till seeing ready tide,
He rusheth forth, and snatcheth quite away
One of the little yonglings unawares:
So to his work Aragnoll him prepares.
Who now shall give unto my heavy eyes
A well of tears, that all may ouerflow?
Or where shall I find lamentable cries,
And mournful ^unes enough my grief to show?
Help O thou Tragic Muse, me to devise
Notes sad enough, to express this bitter throw:
For lo, the drerie stownd is now arrived,
That of all happiness has us deprived.
The luckles Clarion, whether cruel Fate,
Or wicked Fortune faul^^es him misled,
Or some ungracious blast out of the gate
Of Aeoles rain perforce him drove on head,
Was (O sad hap and hour unfortunate)
With violent swift flight forth carried
Into the cursed cobweb, which his foe
Had framed for his final ouer^hroe.
There the fond Fly entangled, ^trugled long,
Himself to free thereout; but all in vain.
For striving more, the more in laces strong
Himself he tide, and wrapped his wings twain
In lymie snares the subtle loupes among;
That in the end he breathelesse did remain,
And all his yougthly forces idly spent,
Him to the mercy of th'auenger lent.
Which when the greisly tyrant did epsy,
Like a grimme Lion rushing with fierce might
Out of his den, he seized greedelie
On the resistles pray, and with fell spite,
Under the left wing stroke his weapon sly
Into his heart, that his deep groaning spright
In bloody streams forth fled into the air,
His body left the spectacle of care.
FINIS.
Visions of the worlds vanity.
1
ONe day, whiles that my daily cares did sleep,
My spirit, shaking off her earthly prison,
Began to ent^r into meditation deep
Of things exceeding reach of common reason;
Such as this age, in which all good is geason,
And all that humble is and mean debaced,
Has brought forth in her last declining season,
Grief of good minds, to see goodness disgraced.
On which when as my thought was throghly placed,
Unto my eyes strange shows presented were,
Picturing that, which I in mind embraced,
That yet those sights empassion me full nere.
Such as they were (fair Lady) take in worth,
That when time serves, may bring things better forth.
2
In Summers day, when Phoebus fairly shone,
I saw a Bull as white as driven snow,
With gilden horns embowed like the Moon,
In a fresh flowring meadow lying low:
Up to his ears the verdant grass did grow,
And the gay flowers did offer to be eaten;
But he with fatnes so did ouerflowe,
That he all wallowed in the weeds down beaten,
Ne cared with them his dainty lips to sweeten:
Till that a Brize, a scorned little creature,
Through his fair hide his angry sting did threaten,
And vexed so sore, that all his goodly feature,
And all his plenteous pasture naught him pleased:
So by the small the great is often diseased.
3
Beside the fruitful shore of muddie Nile,
Upon a sunnie bank outstretched lay
In monstrous length, a mighty Crocodile,
That crammed with guiltles blood, and greedy pray
Of wretched people travailing that way,
Thought all things less than his disdainful pride.
I saw a little Bird, called Tedula,
The least of thousands which on earth abide,
That forced this hideous beast to open wide
The greisly gates of his devouring hell,
And let him feed, as Nature does provide,
Upon his jaws, that with black venime swell.
Why then should greatest things the least disdain,
Since that so small so mighty can constrain?
4
The kingly Bird, that bears Jove's thunderclap,
One day did scorn the simple Scarabee,
Proud of his highest service, and good hap,
That made all other Fowls his thralls to be:
The silly Fly, that no redress did see,
Spide where the Eagle built his towering nest,
And kindling fire within the hollow tree,
Burnt up his young ones, and himself distressed;
Ne suffered him in any place to rest,
But drove in Jove's own lap his eggs to lay;
Where gathering also filth him to infest,
Forced with the filth his eggs to fling away:
For which when as the Foul was wroth, said Jove,
Lo how the least the greatest may reprove.
5
Toward the sea turning my troubled eye,
I saw the fish (if fish I may it cleepe)
That makes the sea before his face to fly,
And with his flaggie finnes does seem to sweep
The fomie waves out of the dreadful deep,
The huge Leuiathan, dame Natures wonder,
Making his sport, that many makes to weep:
A sword-fish small him from the rest did sunder,
That in his throat him pricking softly under,
His wide Abyss him forced forth to spewe,
That all the sea did roar like heavens thunder,
And all the waves were stained with filthy hew.
Hereby I learned have, not to despise,
What ever thing seems small in common eyes.
6
An hideous Dragon, dreadful to behold,
Whose back was armed against the dint of spear,
With shields of brass, that shone like burnisht gold,
And forkhed sting, that death in it did bea^e,
Strove with a Spider his unequal pear:
And bad defiance to his enemy.
The subtle vermin creeping closely near,
Did in his drink shed poison privily;
Which through his entrails spredding diversely,
Made him to swell, that nigh his bowels brust,
And him enforst to yield the victory,
That did so much in his own greatness trust.
O how great vainness is it then to scorn
The weak, that has the strong so often fo^lorne.
7
High on a hill a goodly Cedar grew,
Of wondrous length, and straight proportion,
That far abroad her dainty odours threw;
Among all the daughters of proud Libanon,
Her match in beauty was not any one.
Shortly within her inmost pith there bred
A little wicked worm, perceived of none,
That on her sap and vital moisture fed:
Thenceforth her garland so much honored
Began to die, (O great ruth for the same)
And her fair locks fell from her lofty head,
That shortly balde, and bared she became.
I, which this sight beheld, was much dismayed,
To see so goodly thing so soon decayed.
8
Soon after this I saw an Elephant,
Adorned with bells and bosses gorgeously,
That on his back did bear (as batteilant)
A gilden tower, which shone exceedingly;
That he himself through foolish vanity,
Both for his rich attire, and goodly form,
Was puffed up with passing surquedrie,
And shortly began all other beasts to scorn.
Till that a little Ant, a silly worm,
Into his nosthrils creeping, so him pained,
That casting down his towers, he did deforme
Both borrowed pride, and native b^au^ie stained.
Let therefore naught that great is, therein glory,
Since so small thing his happiness may vary.
9
Looking far forth into the Ocean wide,
A goodly ship with banners bravely dight,
And flag in her top-gallant I espide,
Through the maine sea making her merry flight:
Fair blew the wind into her bosom right;
And the heavens looked lovely all the while,
That she did seem to dance, as in delight,
And at her own felicity did smile.
All suddenly there cloue unto her keele
A little fish, that men call Remora,
Which stopped her course, and held her by the heel,
That wind nor tide could move her thence away.
Strange thing me seems, that so small a thing
Should able be so great an one to wring.
10
A mighty Lion, Lord of all the wood,
Having his hunger thoroughly satisfide,
With pray of beasts, and spoil of living blood,
Safe in his dreadles den him thought to hide:
His sternesse was his praise, his strength his pride,
And all his glory in his cruel claws.
I saw a wasp, that fiercely him defide,
And bad him battle even to his jaws;
Sore he him stong, that it the blood forth draws,
And his proud heart is filled with fretting ire:
In vain he threats his teeth, his tail, his paws,
And from his bloody eyes does sparkle fire;
That dead himself he wishes for despite.
So weakest may anoy the most of might.
11
What time the Roman Empire bore the rain
Of all the world, and florisht most in might,
The nations began their sovereignty disdain,
And cast to quitt them from their bondage quight:
So when all shrouded were in silent night,
The Galls were, by corrupting of a maid,
Possessed nigh of the Capitol through slight,
Had not a Goose the treachery bewrayde.
If then a Goose great Rome from ruin stayde,
And Jove himself, the patron of the place,
Preserud from being to his foes betrayde,
Why do vain men mean things so much deface,
And in their might repose their most assurance,
Since naught on earth can challenge long endurance?
12
When these sad sights were ouerpast and gone,
My spright was greatly moved in her rest,
With inward ruth and dear affection,
To see so great things by so small distressed:
Thenceforth I began in my engrieued breast
To scorn all difference of great and small,
Since that the greatest often are oppressed,
And unawares do into danger fall.
And ye, that read these ruins tragical
Learn by their loss to love the low degree,
And if that fortune chance you up to call
To honors seat, forget not what you be:
For he that of himself is most secure,
Shall find his state most fickle and unsure.
FINIS.
The Visions of Bellay.
1
IT was the time, when rest soft sliding down
From heavens hight into men's heavy eyes,
In the forgetfulness of sleep does drown
The careful thoughts of mortal miseries:
Then did a Ghost before mine eyes appear,
On that great rivers banck, that runs by Rome,
Which calling me by name, bad me to rear
My looks to heaven whence all good gifts do come,
And crying loud, lo now behold (quoth he)
What under this great temple placed is:
Lo all is naught but flying vanitee.
So I that know this worlds inconstancies.
Since only God surmounts all times decay,
In God alone my confidence do stay.
2
On high hills top I saw a stately frame,
An hundred cubits high by just assize,
With hundredth pillours fronting fair the same,
All wrought with Diamond after Dorick wize:
Nor brick, nor marble was the wall in view,
But shining Crystal, which from top to base
Out of her womb a thousand rayons threw,
One hundred steps of Afrike golds enchase:
Gold was the parget, and the seeling bright
Did shine all scaly with great plates of gold;
The floor of Iasp and Emeraude was dight.
O worlds vainesse. Whiles thus I did behold,
An earthquake shook the hill from lowest seat,
And overthrew this frame with ruin great.
3
Then did a sharped spyre of Diamond bright,
Ten feet each way in square, appear to me,
Justly proportioned up unto his hight,
So far as Archer might his leuel see:
The top thereof a pot did seem to bear,
Made of the metal, which we most do honor,
And in this golden vessel couched wear
The ashes of a mighty Emperor:
Upon four corners of the base were pight,
To bear the frame, four great Lions of gold;
A worthy tomb for such a worthy wight.
Alas this world does naught but grieuance hold.
I saw a tempest from the heaven descend,
Which this brave monument with flash did rend.
4
I saw raysde up on yuorie pillowes tall,
Whose bases were of richest mettalls warke,
The chapters Alablaster, the ^ryses crystal,
The double front of a triumphall Arc:
On each side purtraid was a Victory,
Clad like a Nymph, that wings of silver wears,
And in triumphant chair was set on hie,
The ancient glory of the Roman Pears.
No work it seemed of earthly craftsmans wit,
But rather wrought by his own industry,
That thunder-dar^es for Jove his sire does fit.
Let me no more see fair thing under sky,
Since that mine eyes have seen so fair a sight
With sudden fall to dust consumed quight.
5
Then was the fair Dodonian tree far seen,
Upon seven hills to spread his gladsome gleame,
And conquerours bedecked with his green,
Along the bancks of the Ausonian stream:
There many an ancient Trophee was addressed.
And many a spoil, and many a goodly show,
Which that brave races greatness did attest,
That whilome from the Troyan blood did flow.
Ranisht I was so rare a thing to view,
When lo a barbarous troop of clownish fone
The honor of these noble boughs down threw,
Under the wedge I heard the tronck to groan;
And since I saw the root in great disdain
A twinne of forked trees send forth again.
6
I saw a Wolf under a rockie cave
Noursing two whelps; I saw her little ones
In wanton dalliance the ^eate to crave,
While she her neck wreathed from the^ for the nones:
I saw her raunge abroad to seek her food,
And roming through the field with greedy rage
T'embrew her teeth and claws with luke warm blood
Of the small herds, her thirst for to assuage.
I saw a thousand huntsmen, which descended
Down from the mountains bordring Lombardie,
That with an hundred spears her flank wide rended.
I saw her on the plain outstretched lie,
Throwing out thousand throbs in her own soil:
Soon on a tree vphang'd I saw her spoil.
7
I saw the Bird that can the Sun endure,
With feeble wings assay to mount on hight.
By more and more she began her wings to assure,
Following the e^sample of her mothers sight:
I saw her rise, and with a larger flight
To pierce the clouds, and with wide pinneons
To measure the most haughty mountains hight,
Until she raught the Gods own mansions:
There was she lost, when sudden I beheld,
Where tumbling through the air in fiery fold;
All flaming down she on the plain was field,
And soon her body turned to ashes cold.
I saw the foul that does the ligh^dispise,
Out of her dust like to a worm arise.
8
I saw a river swift, whose fomy billows
Did wash the ground work of an old great walls
I saw it covered all with griesly shadows,
That with black horror did the air appall:
Thereout a strange beast with seven heads arose,
The ^ownes and castles under her breast did coure,
And seemed both milder beasts and fiercer foes
Alike with equal rauine to devour.
Much was I mazde, to see this monsters kind
In hundred forms to change his fearful hew,
When as at length I saw the wrathful wind,
Which blows cold storms, burst out of Scithian mew
That sperst these clouds, and in so short as thought,
This dreadful shape was vanished to naught.
9
Then all astoined with this mighty ghoast,
An hideous body big and strong I saw,
With side long bea^d, and locks down hanging loa^t,
Stern f^ce, and front full of Saturnlike awe^
Who loaning on the belly of a pot.
Pourd foorth^ water, whose out gushing flood
Ran bathing all the creakie shore aflot,
Whereon the Troyan prince spilt Turnus blood;
And at his feet a bitch wol^e suck did yield
To two young babes: hi^ left the Palm tree stout,
His right hand did the peaceful Olive wield,
And head with Laurel garnisht was about.
Sudden both Palm and Olive fell away,
And fair green Laurel branch did quite decay.
10
Hard by a rivers side a virgin fair,
Folding her arms to heaven with thousand throbs,
And outraging her cheeks and golden hair,
To falling rivers sound thus tu^'d her sobs.
Where is (quoth she) this whilom honored face?
Where the great glory and the ancient praise,
In which all worlds felicity had place,
When Gods and men my honor up did raise?
Suffisd it not that civil wars me made
The whole worlds spoil, but that this Hydra new,
Of hundred Hercules to be assaide,
With seven heads, budding monstrous crimes anew,
So many Neroes and Caligulaes
Out of these crooked shores must daily raise.
11
Upon an hill a bright flame I did see,
Wauing aloft with triple point to sky,
Which like incense of precious Cedar tree,
With balmie odours filled th'ayr^ far and ^ie.
A Bird all while, well feath^red on each wing,
Hereout up to the throne of Gods did ^lie,
And all the way most pleasant notes did sing,
Whilst in the smoke she unto heaven did stie.
Of this fair fire the scattered rays forth threw
On eueri^ side a thousand shining beams:
When sudden dropping of a silver dew
(O grievous chance) began quench those precious flames;
That it which erst so pleasant sent did yield,
Of nothing now but noyous sulphur smeld.
12
I saw a spring out of a rock forth rail,
As clear as Crystal against the Sunnie beams,
The bottom yeallow, like the golden grayle
That bright Pactolus washes with his streams;
It seemed that Art and Nature had assembled
All pleasure there, for which man's heart could long;
And there a noise alluring sleep soft trembled,
Of many accords more sweet than Mermaids song:
The seats and benches shone as yuori^,
And hundred Nymphs sat side by side about;
When from nigh hills with hideous outcrie,
A troop of Satyrs in the place did rout,
Which with their villeine feet the stream did ray,
Threw down the seats, and drove the Nymphs away.
13
Much richer then that vessel seemed to be,
Which did to that sad Florentine appear,
Casting mine eyes far off, I chaunst to see,
Upon the Latin Coast herself to rear:
But suddenly arose a tempest great,
Bearing close envy to these riches rare,
Which began assail this ship with dreadful threat,
This ship, to which none other might compare.
And finally the storm impetuous
Sunk up these riches, second unto none,
Within the gulf of greedy Nereus.
I saw both ship and mariners each one,
And all that treasure drowned in the maine:
But I the ship saw after raisd^ again.
14
Long having deeply gron'd these visions sad^
I saw a City like unto that same,
Which saw the messenger of tidings glad;
But that on sand was built the goodly frame:
It seemed her top the firmament did raise,
And no less rich than fair, right worthy sure
(If ought here worthy) of immortal days,
Or if ought under heaven might firm endure.
Much wondered I to see so fair a wall^
When from the Northern coast a storm arose,
Which breathing fury from his inward gall
On all, which did against his course oppose,
Into a cloud of dust sperst in the air
The weak foundations of this City fair.
15
At length, even at the time, when Morpheus
Most truly does unto our eyes appear,
Weary to see the heavens still wavering thus,
I saw Typhaeus sister coming near;
Whose head full bravely with a morion hidd,
Did seem to match the Gods in Majesty.
She by a rivers bancke that swift down slidd,
Over all the world did raise a Trophee hie;
An hundred vanquished Kings under her lay,
With arms bound at their backs in shameful wize;
Whilst I thus mazed was with great affray,
I saw the heavens in war against her rize:
Then down she stricken fell with clap of thonder,
That with great noise I wakte in sudden wonder.
FINIS.
The Visions of Petrarch formerly translated.
1
BEing one day at my window all alone,
So many strange things happened me to see,
As much it grieueth m^ to think thereon.
At my right hand a Hynde appeared to me,
So fair as mote the greatest God delight;
Two eager dogs did her pursue in chase,
Of which the one was black, the other white:
With deadly force so in their cruel race
They pincht the haunches of that gentle beast,
That at the last, and in short time I spide,
Under a Rock where she alas oppressed,
Fell to the ground, and there untimely did.
Cruel death vanquishing so noble beauty,
Often makes me wayle so hard a destenie.
2
After at sea a tall ship did appear,
Made all of Heben and white Yuorie,
The sails of gold, of silk the tackle were,
Mild was the wind, calm seemed the sea to be,
The sky each where did show full bright and faire^
With rich treasures this gay ship fraighted was:
But sudden storm did so turmoyle the air,
And tumbled up the sea, that she (alas)
Struck on a rock, that under water lay,
And perished past all recovery.
O how great ruth and sorrowful assay,
Does vex my spirit with perplexity,
Thus in a monent to see lost and drowned,
So great riches, as like cannot be found.
3
The heavenly branches did I see arise
Out of the fresh and lusty Laurel tree,
Amidst the young green wood: of Paradise
Some noble plant I thought my self to see:
Such store of birds therein yshrowded were,
Chaunting in shade their sundry melody,
That with their sweetness I was rauish't nere.
While on this Laurel fixed was mine eye,
The sky began every where to ouercast,
And darkened was the welkin all about,
When sudden flash of heavens fire out brast,
And rent this royal tree quite by the root,
Which makes me much and ever to complain:
For no such shadow shall be had again.
4
Within this wood, out of a rock did rise
A spring of water, mildly rumbling down,
Whereto approached not in any wise
The homely shepherd, nor the ruder clown;
But many Muses, and the Nymphs withal,
That sweetly in accord did tune their voice
To the soft sounding of the waters fall,
That my glad heart thereat did much rejoice.
But while herein I took my chief delight,
I saw (alas) the gaping earth devour
The spring, the place, and all clean out of sight.
Which yet aggreeues my heart even to this hour,
And wounds my soul with rufull memory,
To se^ such pleasures gone so suddenly.
5
I saw a Phoenix in the wood alone,
With purple wings, and crest of golden hew;
Strange bird he was, whereby I thought anon,
That of some heavenly wight I had the vewe;
Until he came unto the broken tree,
And to the spring, that late devoured was.
What say I more? each thing at last we see
Does pass away: the Phoenix there alas
Spying the tree destroid, the water dride,
Himself smote with his beak, as in disdain,
And so forth with in great despite he did:
That yet my heart burns in exceeding pain,
For ruth and pity of so haples plight.
O let mine eyes no more see such a sight.
6
At last so fair a Lady did I spy,
That thinking yet on her I burn and quake;
On herbs and flowers she walked pensiuely,
Mild, but yet love she proudly did forsake:
White seemed her robes, yet wouen so they were,
As snow and gold together had been wrought.
Above the wast a dark cloud shrouded her,
A stinging Serpent by the heel her caught;
Wherewith she languisht as the gathered flower,
And well assured she mounted up to joy.
Alas, on earth so nothing does endure,
But bitter grief and sorrowful annoy:
Which make this life wre^ched and miserable,
Tossed with storms of fortune variable.
When I beheld this tickle trustles state
Of vain worlds glory, ^litting too and fro,
And mortal men tossed by troublous fate
In restles seas of wretchedness and woe,
I wish I might this weary life forgo,
And shortly turn unto my happy rest,
Where my free spirit might not any more
Be vexed with sights, that do her peace molest.
And ye fair Lady, in whose bounteous bre^t
All heavenly grace and virtue shrined is,
When ye these rythmes do read, and view the rest,
Loath this base world, and think of heavens blis:
And though ye be the fairest of Gods creatures,
Yet think, that death shall spoil your goodly features.
FINIS.

