AN ANSWER TO MASTER JOHN DE ALBINES, NOTABLE DISCOVRSE AGAINST heresies (as
his friends call his book) compiled by THOMAS SPARK pastor of Blechley in the
County of Buck.

And I heard a voice from heaven saying, Come out of her my people that ye be
not partakers of her sins, and that ye receive not of her plagues. Revelat.
18. verse. 4.

Put your selves in array against Babylon round about, all ye that bend the
bow, shoot at her, spare no arrows, for she has sinned against the Lord.
Ierem. 50. verse. 14.

ACADEMIA. OXONIENSIS.
SAPIENTIAE: ET FELICITATIS framed printer's device of the coat of arms or
blazon of the University of Oxford, McKerrow 285

Printed at Oxforde by JOSEPH BARNES, Printer to the University. 1591.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE ARTHVRE LORD GRAY OF WILTON, Knight of the most
honorable order of the Garter, his especial good Lord and Patron, Thomas
Spark Wishes all good perseverance in Christian courage and constancy in the
profession and furtherance of Gods sincere truth, with all other ornaments of
true nobility, to Gods glory, our comfort, and his own heart, good
contentation now and ever.
ALthough (Right Honorable) when I had first perused this treatise of John de
Albines, I found it through out a most bitter inuectiue and a malicious
declamation, written only of purpose to deface and disgrace amongst the
simple, both our religion, and the ministers, and professors thereof: yet
finding withal as I did, and as any indifferent man that reads it shall, that
neither for matter nor manner of writing, there is any new thing of any
importance in it, which has not been, before ever this discourse of his saw
the light, often and that far more substantially urged by some other of that
side, and therefore which has not also heretofore been as often fully and
effectually answered by some or other of ours: I not only judged this to be the
reason, when it having now been amongst us in english these 16. or 17. years,
none hitherto had vouchsafed it any further particular answer, but also
(though urged as your Honor knows to frame unto it a special and direct
answer) I could yet hardly be brought to think it necessary (so basely I
esteemed of it) to aford it any other answer, then either a few marginal
notes that when I first red it I bestowed upon it, or from point to point, as
it were in a table to have showed the reader, where and by whom he might read
the same thing long ago, and often objected on the one side, and answered by
the other, which might have been in one sheet of paper very well dispatched.
Howbeit in the end calling to mind what your Lordship told me, concerning the
opinion that our poor seduced cuntrimen seem secretly to have amongst
themselves of it, as you learned by one of their own speeches had thereof unto
your self in acquainting you first with the book, and marking how not only
by publishing it in english, but also by entitling it both in the forhead, and
over every leaf a notable discourse against heresies, they themselves have
plainly showed that they have it in no base account, and finding it also since
to be the judgment of a certain learned man of ancient and long experience
even of our own side, now this last year published in print, that the having
of this very book so long in secret amongst them unanswered, has been one
great cause of the apostasy of so many young me^ as of late years in this our
cuntry have revolted from the truth to popery: at the last I resolved with my
self, (though I know that when I had done what I could herein, that I should
be found to have said little or nothing not said and written as well before by
some one or other of our side) that yet your Lordships request made unto me to
answer it, as fully and directly as I could, when you first showed me the
book and how you came by it, was and is such, as that (both of duty to your
self particularly for sundry causes, and to the church of Christ generally,
for that by this means many may see together an answer to that, which
otherwise in great part either they might chance never to hit of in any other
writer of ours, or else be driven to search more, and those further then it was
likely they would or could) I was bound to satisfy in as good sort as any way
conveniently I could. Having therefore encouradgement by these reasons to take
it in hand, and having now by Gods grace finished it in manner as you see, I
present the same unto your Honor as an undoubted token of my dutiful
affection toward you, beseeching you not only to take the pains as your
leisure serves you to peruse it over your self, but also desyring you to be
unto it such a patron, as that it coming abroad thus by your provocation, it
may have your best protection and countenance, to pass up and down openly
and boldly, both in the veiw of friends and foes unto it. There was prefixed
before Jhon de Albines book, which your honor delivered me, a long preface to
the reader, made as it should seem, by the publisher thereof in english, and
there was annexed unto it in the later end an offer of a catholic (as he is
there termed) to a learned protestant, consisting of two and twenty demands
and six signs of false prophets, heretics, and schismatiques: the preface I
have answered, and the answer thereunto I have placed next unto my answer
unto Albines book it self: somewhat also I have annexed (that answer of mine
to his book finished) in the latter end, to show the vanity and
childishness of those things, which the author has uttered in the application
of those six signs to us: but to that which he has written concerning those
two and twenty demands I have said nothing. And indeed, because otherwise the
book was grown far greater then I imagined at the first it would, I have
not at all inserted that offer nor any part thereof. The reason of my not
meddling at all with those two and twenty demands, and not troubling this my
book at all with any part of that offer, is, that Doctor Fulke long ago has
answered those demaundes, and that also now of late Master Crowley has at
large answered, both them and that which is added concerning those signs.
Doctor Fulkes answer thereunto may be had under the title of an answer of
a Christian protestant, to the proud Challenge of a popish Catholic, and it
is prefixed commonly before his book written in confutation of Allens of
Purgatory. Indeed concerning the six signs he says nothing, not because
of any greater matter in them then in the rest, but because at the first they
were not published with the other: The demands though he have answered
shortly according to his manner, yet so sharply and effectually he has
done it, that, if the Chalenger were a man of his word, he continued not
long after a popish Catholic. Master Crowleys answer to the whole offer
word for word, as it was annexed to John de Albines book, is extant under
the title of a deliberate answer to a rash offer etc. and it was printed by
John Charlewoode in London 1588. They both have with their answer set down
the words of the offerer. The travels of these two men have eased both me and
this book of mine of meddling any further then I have said with that
Chalenger: and the rather because since he had his first answer, we never
yet heard that he had either skill or will to reply. I might well enough,
considering the largeness and sufficiency of Master Crowleys answer
thereunto, have omitted that which I further have said to answer his six
signs not touched by Doctor Fulke, but that what I have written thereabout
was written before I saw Master Crowleys answer, and that I thought it not
amiss to let it stand, that so betwixt us three the whole thus might be
tvvyse answered. Though it were Master Crowley (who as I noted before) in the
first leaf of his book making answer to this offer, that gave that
judgment that John de Albines book had been the cause of so much apostasy of
late here amongst us, yet he, as he there shows, would not bestow time in
aunswering of it, because supposing by the title it was written by a Frenchman,
and therefore either in french or latin, he thought that either Beza or some
other french protestant had done it already sufficiently. This when I read
first, it caused me to be the slacker both in finishing and publishing this
answer of mine. Yet in the end forasmuch as this was now amongst us in
English, and therefore in his opinion had hurt so much and so many English
persons, and I could never learn of any certainty, that in any other language
it had been directly answered by any: I thought it needful and the best way
(whether any such answer in any other tongue had been made unto it elsewhere
or not) to prevent as much as may be any further such danger amongst us by
it, to accompany such poison with his fit counterpoyson, that is, such an
English popish discourse with an English christian answer. And the rather
because howsoever by the title there is show that the author was a Frenchman,
yet indeed I can hardly be persuaded that he was so. For his publisher in
English taking leisure as he has to trouble his reader with a long tedious and
frivolous preface, has not therein so much as secretly once insinuated unto
us, in what language the author wrote it, yea he has not once mentioned any
translation of it, either by himself or any other, the consideration whereof
together with sundry phrases and matters contained in the book, makes me
rather think that some of our own fugitives, English Jesuits, or seminary
priests indeed have made it, then any such Archdeacon of Tolosa in France, as
is pretended. But howsoever it be in this respect, it is not much material,
and therefore I have not been herein curious, for these my reasons
notwithstanding in all this my answer unto him, I frame my speech as to the
author whose name it bears. And howsoever I may doubt of his person and
country, of this I am certain whosoever he were, French or English, the son
of that bondwoman, Ismael, was never cunninger in persecuting the son of the
freewoman, Isaac, with scoffs and mocks, then the author thereof was by the
same means, to do what might be done, to vex and grieve us. Whosoever he was,
the right popish vain and spirit of writing he had. For in so short a piece of
work (I am persuaded by that you have viewed him over together with this
answer of mine) your Lordship will be of opinion, that never any of that
faction went beyond him, in shameful begging always the things most in
question, in subtle slipping from the matters vndertake^ to prove, into other
more easy for him and not in question, in false quoting and abusing the
testimonies which he alleadges, or in barrennes of matter or method, in such
copy of swelling, bragging, and triumphing words. Sure I am for my own part,
though I know these be the common ornaments of popish writers, that I never
read any whose book co^sisted so wholly of these as this of his. But to leave
him as he is, whosoever he was, and to return unto your Lordship, once again
I dedicate and offer this my poor labor, unto your honorable view and
protection, which I do not because the truth of god, which I have therein
taught and defended, stands need of the patronage of man. For god the author
thereof can and will defend and protect that, though all the great me^ in the
world should band themselves against it, but for diverse and sundry other
reasons justly me moving thereunto. One is (which I have touched already) that
of right the dedication hereof appertains to you, because I had never taken
it in hand, but by your Lordships motion and persuasion. An other is, that you
since my coming to the place where I am, for these eleven years last past,
have always been, and yet are, a most loving and fatherly patron to my
ministry, me, and mine: by which right, though that former reason had not
been, your honor may worthily challenge, not only in this, but also in all
other, such poor fruits of mine, growing from me thus nourished and cherished
under your Lordshippes patronage, greater interest then this which I offer you
now herein: But if neither of these two reasons had been, yet you being the
man you are, that is by the grace and goodness of God as far as you are
known, (which is very far) amongst the godly and truly religious, a man by
birth honorable, for martial prowess more, and for gifts of sound
learning, religion, and virtue most of of all to be honored and esteemed, even
that would have drawn me, though otherwise I had been a meare stranger unto
you, by this means to have sought to have testified my duetifull and hearty
good affection toward you. For piety joined with Christian nobility has
been the ancient cause, why the godly learned in ancient times have dedicated
their works to such, as they have judged truly qualified therewith, doubtless
thereby both the better to encourage them, to whom they dedicated their labors
to proceed and go on in the good course they had begun, and thereby to
provoke others to imi^ate their good example, that the like honorable opinion
may by such also be conceived of them, and likewise when occasion should serve
to their comfort testified publickely of them in the church of God. What else
moved Ambrose to dedicate his books of faith and the spirit to Gratian the
Emperor? What else caused Lactantius to dedicate his divine institu^^ons to
Constantine, or what else enduced the holy ^uangelist S. Luke, to dedicate his
history of the ^ctes of the Apostles to noble Theophilus? It was ^oubtlesse
great honor unto these men in their ^imes in the churches of Christ, that thus
Am^rose, Lactantius, and Luke testified their good liking of them. Wherefore
though I be no body in comparison of those, and therefore hereby unable to
honor you as those did them, yet being but as I ^m, give me leave (my good
Lord) as far as the credit of my poor testimony will stretch, to testify
that way my good will according to their example toward you. And thus
presuming of your favorable acceptance of this my offer, I cease from any
further troubling you at this time, beseeching (as always I pray and will for
you) the Lord of heaven and earth in these busy, dangerous, and sinful
days, so inwardly to encourage and strengthen your noble heart, and the heart
also of your right virtuous Lady and duetifull wife, as that you both, and all
yours, may be so adorned, decked, and beautified with all necessary and
comfortable gifts and graces of knowledge, faith, zeal, and sincerity in
Gods holy religion, and with all true virtues both of body and mind ready
always to be showed in your life and conversation, that you may all go on
and finish your days most constantly and comfortably, in all true Honor and
happiness from generation to generation, to gods glory, the churches needful
example, and to your own eternal salvation. Amen.

Your Honors always at commaundment most ready: THOMAS SPARK.

The preface to the Reader.
PLutarch a noble Philosopher, This preface for the most part of it might a
protestant write against the popis^ church, heresies, and prelates.
and a diligent Historician, writes in the life of Demetrius a king of
Macedonie, that when an old woman came to him, beseeching him to hear her
speak, and he made answer that he had no leisure, the woman looking upon
him, said to him again with a loud voice: why, have you no leisure (...)
rule as a king should? Which words so pierced the kings heart, and so ^^eatly
prevailed in him, that he forthwith gave her audience, and from ^^at day, none
came to him for any matter, but gently, and with all di^^gence he did hear
them, and discuss their causes. Boysterously were ^^^se words spoken of a
subject, and not with that reverence that was ^^eete to be given to a king.
Notwithstanding, as Cicero witnesses in ^^e second of his Tusculanes: Tristis
res est dolor, sine dubio, aspera, ^mara, inimica naturae, ad patiendum
tolerandumque difficilis: ^orowe is a grievous thing, without doubt sharp,
bitter, and an enemy to nature, hard to suffer and forbear. Sorrow (as I
suppose) constrained ^he seely woman to speak as she did, and veras exprimere
voces, and ^o utter the truth. On the other side consider, not only the gentle
nature of this noble Prince, but also his great wisdom, in considering
nothing to be more seemly for a governor, then to hear men's causes
^ndifferently, and to see all wrongs redressed. Nihil (says the same
Plutarch) tam egregium tamque proprium Regis esse videtur, quam iusticiae opus,
Nothing is so excellent and so properly pertaining to him that is a magistrate,
as justice. I have read that the Tribunes, which were officers chosen for the
defense of the Commons of Rome, had their gates or doors never shut, neither
by day, nor by night, in token that thither might be the recourse of all them
that had need of succor. So ought every governor, whether he be spiritual
or temporal, to be a succor, and as it were a castle and a fortress to them
that be under his tuition. Dion Cassius in his ^ookes that he wrote de
principe, amongst other precepts, wills chief^y and above all things, that
whosoever be the head of the people, be a diligent worshipper and follower of
God: next, that he be loving to his subjects, if he will have them to be
faithful to him, and love him as subjects should their Prince. For it is not
of likelihood, said Dion, neither does nature permit, but that he that loves,
should be loved, when we see dogs to fawn, and horses to neye to them, of
whom they be cherished. Again, he would have such rulers to call themselves
shepherdes and feeders of men, rather then otherwise. So Homer calls a king
pastorem populi, a shepherde and a feeder of the people. And Plato in his
Dialogue called Minos, writes, that Minos and Radama^thus, which gave laws to
the men of Crete, were the true shepherdes of men, which was not spoken of so
noble a Philosopher without a just cause: for nothing does more nourish,
maintain and uphold a common wealth then law, which, as Tullie in secundo de
natura deorum says, est recti praeceptio, prauique depulsio, a commander of
that which is good and honest, and an expulser of all that is naught and
dishonest. Now, as a shepherdes care is, to see his sheep fed in wholesome
pastures, and to be kept safe from wolves and al other beasts that would weary
and destroy them: and if any in the flock be infected with any outward
scabbe, or inward malady, to remedy it betime: or if the contagion admit no
help, but is incureable, to have such a one away from the flock, that he hurt
none of them that be whole: Even so must he that will be a shepherd of men,
study for the good ordering and quietness of the multitude, over whom he has
charge, and that al enormities that might disturb a common wealth, whether it
be spiritual or civil be expelled, and that all faults be redressed with due
correction, using lenity and severity, after as hope or despair of amendment
shall appear. Neither has the name of a shepherd lacked his pre-eminence at
any time. That good Abel, ad cuius munera Deus respexit, to whose gifts and
sacrifice God had respect, was a shepherd: Abraham, in whole seed God
promised that all nations should be blessed, was a shepherd: so was Isaac his
son, and Jacob his nephewe, and his sons also. Moses that noble captain,
and deliverer of God his people, was a shepherd in the land of Madian. David,
of whom Here is Stephen named for Paul. Act. 13.
S. Stephen said, that God gave this testimony: Inueni David filium less,
virum secundum cor meum, qui faciet omnes voluntates meas: I have found David
the son of Iesse, a man after mine own heart and mind, which shall do all
my will. There is no mention of Stephen.
Act. 13. This noble king David was a shepherd. These I suppose almighty God
would have to be ensamples to all them that be in authoriritie, for as Paul
says: Quaecunque scripta sunt, ad nostram eruditionem scripta sunt, Al things
that are written, are written for our instruction, that as they fed that
seely innocent cattle, so should all Magistrates that profess his sons name,
learn to govern the people in the obedience of his doctrine, that they might
be innoce^tes manibus, and puro cord nec iurantes in dolo proximo suo,
Innocents of their hands, and of a pure heart, which use no deceit toward
their neighbors, but in all their doings show themselves to be, veras oues
pascuae Christi, the true sheep of the pasture of Jesus Christ, who says:
Bonus pastor animam suam dat pro ouibus suis, A good shepherd gives his life
for his sheep. Few words, but full of pith: And never could more things be
spoken more compendiously. For what will he refuse to do? what labor, what
travail, what pain will he forsake, which for that performance of that he
goes about, will not spare his own life? This being true as it is, thereupon
it follows, that your popish Priests and prelates, who neither have skill nor
will to perform this duty, are no true sheepheards.
If a good shepherd sets so great store by his sheep, if he love them so
tenderly, that he will rather loose his life then to see them in any danger,
what will he not do else for them? How can it be otherwise, but that he will
see his flock fed in wholesome pastures? how can it be thought, that he
will not tarry with them to keep them from wolves, from dogs that fall to
biting of them, and from other like ravenous beasts? Who would imagine him to
be so negligent, that he will not in the evening bring them home to the cote
or fold? Will he not, trow you, if any be strayed, go seek him out, and
bring him again to his fellows? If any be sick, will he not see him helped
with all diligence? See therefore what a great matter our Savior did
comprehend and fold up, as it were, and knit together in a bundell, all that
can be desired in a good herdesman. O that governors whom god has put in
authority, per quem reges regnant, by whom kings do reign, who bad Peter,
if he loved him, to feed his sheep, who has also constitute under him
feeders upon the earth, some spiritual, some temporal, O, I say, that they
would diligently look upon these words: A good shepherd gives his life for
the sheep, and seriously ponder in their mind what a charge is hid in this
short sentence, how many things, princeps pastorum, the prince of shepherds,
as Peter calls him, does require of them whom he has made herdsmen under
him, whose duty is to be good pastors and faithful feeders like to their
master. O that they would call to their mind, that they must at length depart
hence, and come where it shall be said to every one of them: Read rationem
villicationis tuae, Give account of thy bayliwicke, Come forth and show how
thou have fed my flock that I committed to thy hands: Thou Bishop, how have
thou visited thy diocese, what Parsons, what Vicares have thou admitted? Thou
Archdeacon, how often have thou visited and seen every curate to do his duty?
how have thou redressed al enormities and slau^ders within thy jurisdiction?
Thou parson, thou vicar, thou curate, how have thou fed thy flock with good
ensa^ples of charity and virtuous living, with keeping of hospitality to thy
power, by preaching wholesome doctrine, in reverently ministering my Sacraments?
Thou king, how have thou ruled thy Realm? What laws have thou made for the
setting forth of my glory, for the extirpation of heresies, for maintenance of
equity, for punishment of wrong, for provision, that things may be sold at a
competent price, that covetous men make no dearth to their condemnation, when I
give plenty? Thou Lord, how have thou governed under thy prince? Thou man of
worship, how have thou endeavored to have quietness kept, and the princes laws
to be obeyed? Thou Justice, how have thou ministered right indifferently to all
persons? Thou Mayor or head officer in any City or Town, how have thou kept
thy self clear from perjury? How have thou seen good order observed, and all
idleness and dissolute manners to be banished? Finally, thou, whatsoever officer
or Magistrate thou be, how have thou regarded the common wealth, and preferred
it before thy private lucre or commodity? O that these things were considered:
for as sure as God lives, these acco^pts will he call upon straightly. None
shall escape, Cui multum datur (as S. Gregory says) multum ab eo quaeretur, He
that has much given him, shall make a great account thereof, and much shall be
of him required: And at that day percase he shall recke^ himself most
fortunate and happy, that had least in this world, and least to do. And he
peradventure most unfortunate, that has most to do in this world, unless he
order it well, unless he order it righteously, justly, and ordinately.

Now, good Reader, thou have heard, that Christ says: Bonus pastor anima^
sua^ dat pro ouibus suis, And to put thee out of doubt who is this good
shepherde, he says: Ego sum pastor bonus, and cognosco oues meas, and
cognoscunt me meae. I am the good shepherd, which will give my life for my
sheep, by my death to purchase them life, that as I will rise, and die no
more, so shall they after their bodily death arise at the last day, never to
die any more, but to live always with my father and me. I know my sheep, not
al only that they be mine, but I so know them for mine, that I will be their
succor in their tribulations, I will strengthen them in their persecutions, I
will receive them into my joy and glory, I know them, and they know me. This is
then required of their sheep, that they know their shepherde. Three
properties must be in every man or woman that shall have this worthy name to be
called a sheep of Christ. These being as indeed they are the true properties
of christ's sheep, thereupo^ it must needs follow, that he has but few
sheep in the popish flock.
The first property is, that our Savior says, that his sheep do know him.
This knowledge have Christ's sheep of him, that by his godheade he is their
father, by his manhood he is their brother, and by his benefits he is their
loving Lord and master. This and your doctrine of merits, satisfaction, and
other by means besides Christ, to erne your salvation by cannot stand together.
They know it is he, and none other, that has made their peace with God his
father: Ipse enim est pax nostra, for he is our peace (Ad Ephesios secundo) he
has gotten us forgiveness of our sins, he has delivered us out of the
bondage of the devil, he has purchased heaven for us, he is to us Turris
fortitudinis, the tower of our strength. The second property of Christ's
sheep is, to hear their shepherds voice, and to give no ear to the voice of
any stranger. You will ask me peradventure, how you should hear him, This is
more then ever all the sort of you can prove.
which although he be verily and bodily here with us in the Sacrament of the
Altar, yet in his humane form he is ascended up into heaven, and sits on
the right hand of his father? Whereunto I answer, that we must hear his
voice sounding by the mouth of his True: but there by straight is not meant
yours, which along time has been an impudent harlot.
Church, which is the very true spouse of Jesus Christ, Qua^ sanctificauit,
mundans eam lauacro aquae in verbo vitae, whom he has sanctified and purified
with the bath of water in the word of life, vt exhiberet ipse sibi gloriosam
ecclesiam non habentem maculam aut rugam, to make it a glorious Church to
himself without spot or wrinkle (Ad Ephesios. 5.) Thus you take for granted
that your synagogue is this church of of Christ, and that we have departed from
the church of Christ, both which are most false.
If we hear the church, we hear Christ: for as the holy Bishop and Martyr
Irenaeus writes in the forty Chapter of his third book, Vbi ecclesia, ibi
and spiritus, and vbi spiritus dei, illic ecclesia and omnis gratia, spiritus
autem veritas where the Church is, there is the spirit of God, and where the
spirit of God is, there is the Church and al grace, and the spirit is truth.
Wherefore as the same godly father writes in the forty and three Chapter of
his fourth book, we be bound to be obedient to the Prelates of the Church,
his qui successionem habent ab Apostolis, to them that have their succession
from the Apostles. Reliquos vero (says he) qui absistunt a This principal
succession is succession in truth which you are gone from long ago.
principali successione, and quocunque loco colliguntur, suspectos habere quasi
haereticos oportet, As for all other that go away from the Which is in truth
that which your synagogue long ago has done.
principal succession, we ought to suspect them as heretics. These are
Irenaeus words in the place now alleged. And Christ says himself: Qui
vos audit, me audit, He that hears you, hears me. Wherefore, if we will
hear Christ, as his father has commanded us, Ipsum audite, Hear him, Matthew.
17. then must we hear the Church. These things are true of the true and pure
church of Christ, listening to and following the voice of her husband, and not
otherwise, and therefore not of your synagogue.
The Church is our most holy Mother, whom we ought to have in great reverence,
and to commit our selves wholly unto her, to hear her, and like obedient
children, to do what she bids us. What the Church holds in matters of
religion, that must we hold: what the Church prescribes, it is our duty to
follow: what the Church forbids, that are we bound, under pain of
damnation to avoid in any wise. Therefore is it, that we dare not believe your
Romish spirit, because we trying it by the scriptures, find it contrary to the
spirit that was author of them.
S. John in the fourth Chapter of his first Epistle bids us beware, that we
believe not every spirit, but to try the spirits, whether they be of God or
not. Then, how can they be of God, which go from the Church? S. Augustine in
the exposition of this Epistle of S. John, tractatu primo, writes thus: This
you have done, therefore by his rule how can you be in Christ.
Qui ecclesiam relinquit, quomodo est in Christo, qui in membris Christi non
est? Quomodo est in Christo, qui in corpore Christi non est? He that leaves
the Church, how is he in Christ, that is not in the members of Christ? how is
he in Christ, that is not in the body of Christ? By the which S. Augustine
affirms, that the Church, which is the spouse of Christ, is also the
mystical body of Christ, and Christ is the head of the Church. As many
therefore, as be Christ his sheep, they hear their shepherds voice in the
Church. They will not hear the voice of strangers, You should have exemplified
in your own doctors and the^ had you said well.
as of Luther, Oecolampadius, Zuinglius, Calvin, and like heretics, which for
all their gay words, and crying still, Christ and the Ghospel, may have every
one of the^, these verses of Persius in his fifth Satyr worthily spoken to him.
Pelliculam veterem retines, and front politus
Astuta^ vapido seruas sub pectore vulpem.


Thou keep still thine old hyde upon thee, and bearing a fair face, thou
wrappest a wyly fox under thy vaporous breast. even your popes and doctors for
these many years. Act. 20.
These be they, of whom Saint Peter speaks in the second Chapter of his
second Epistle: Magistri mendaces, qui introducunt sectas perditionis, Lying
masters, bringing in sects of perdition, and denying the God that bought them.
Howebeit, since it is so, as Paul says, There will be always ravening wolves,
non parcentes gregi, not sparing the flock, And among our own selves will men
arise, speaking perverse things, And such is our frail nature, that as the
witty Horace says: And therefore the Romish stru^pet holds out her poison
in a golden Cup. Reu. 17.
Decipimur specie recti,

We be soon deceived under the color of truth. It behooves us to follow^ the
counsel of our head and principal master Jesus Christ, which teaches us an
excellent document of heavenly philosophy, saying: And therefore we had need
to take heed of you.
Attendite vobis a falsis Prophetis, take ye heed to your selves, and beware
of false Prophets, which come unto you, in vestimentis ouium, in sheep
clothing, but inwardly they are Lupi rapaces, Ravening wolves: We must, I
say, beware, that we be not deluded, and under color of Euangelical varitie,
be made to receive pernicious and damnable heresies, as alas the more pity,
has miserably chanced to our noble Realm of This is true of England in
respect of Qu. Mary's days, and so the^ truly we might and did say unto you as
you here now falsely say unto us.
England, under color of bringing us to truth, leading us await from the
truth, to the utter decay of all godliness, and setting up of counter^aite
religion. Even this is the state of your Church in deed.
The weed has now overgrowen the corn, evil, hurt^ull, and soulequelling
weeds of heresy have ouergrowen, oppressed, pul^d down to the ground, and
utterly choked the good corn of christian ^eligion, and all ecclesiastical
constitutions. Thus we say and that justly to our people in respect of you.
Al you therefore that have ^een seduced, and taken weeds for wholesome flowers,
beware least with the ^ench of such rotten weeds, ye infect your soul to
everlasting damnati^n. The infallible truth is daily opened unto you, It does
not at all appear by the discourse that there is any falsehood at all in our
Religion.
The falshoode is mightily convinced, as shall plainly appear in the
discourse hear fol^owing. Stand no more in the defense of that, which you may
easily know and see with your eyes, if ye will not be wilfully and obstinately
blind, ^o be nothing but deceit: These titles do rightly fit the popish
Religion.
What do I call it, deceit? nay, I call it a most venomous poison to the
soul, yea, and an hellishe draught of endelesse ^eath. This part your papists
play now in England in being recusants of all sound and good means to reform
them.
Play not the part of a mad man, of whom Horace vvri^eth in the second book
of his Epistles, that he was angry with his friends, ^or that they had caused
him to be healed of his frenzy, and restored to his wits again: Be not
angrye, that you may (if you will) be brought out of the foul miste, into the
clear air, from darkness to ^ight, from an horrible frenzy to godly
wisdom. Follow the wholesome counsel of Saint Paul in the fourth to the
Ephesians, Vt non simus amplius pueri, qui fluctuemus, and circumferamur quouis
vento doctrinae, per versutiam hominum, per astutiam qua nos adoriuntur, vt
imponant nobis, That we be no longer children, and fleet two and fro, carried
hither and thither with every blast of doctrine, by the wiliness and
craftiness of men, wherewith they set upon us to deceive us. There have been
a great many In deed so many such Jesuits and Seminaries you have sent us
such spronge^ up in our Realm of late, which have taught us wrong Lessons:
Emendemus ergo in melius, Let us amend therefore. The third property is, that
the sheep do follow their Shephearde: This property is of so great
importance, that without it the other two cannot avail. It is not Enough to
know Christ to be our refuge, our help and succor: This is true as long as
the church retains the two former properties, which your long ago has lost.
It is not enough with that also to hear Christ speaking to us in his Church,
except we follow Christ and his Church, and show our selves willingly to do
that which the Church commands us: We must fast, when the Church commands
us, and as it bids us: We must pray as the Church instructs us, We must do
those good works that the Church teaches us to do. In obeying the Church, we
obey God: if we be disobedient to the Church, we disobey God. For as
Chrysostom says upon the first Epistle to the Corinthians, vt corpus and
caput vnus est homo, ita vnum est ecclesia and Christus, As the body and the
head is but one man, so is Christ and his Church one thing. Do therefore as
the wise man bids thee, Audi disciplinam patris tui, and ne dimittas legem
matris tuae, Hear the discipline of thy father, and forsake not the law of
thy mother: I mean, thy mother the Holy Church hold you there, for so long you
say nothing for your unholy and filthy Church.
holy church, whom as many as forsake, they forsake God also. For as holy
Cyprian writes de simplicitate praelatorum: Habere non potest Deum patrem, qui
ecclesiam non habet matrem, He cannot have God to be his father, that knows
not the church for his mother. Let this rule be followed for the questions
betwixt us, and your church shall be found in those points to have set a
broch those things that those most ancient Churches never were acquainted
withal.
Ye may see here evidently, that this holy man would have us to be obedient
unto, and diligently to keep, the ordinances of our fathers, and not to
institute every ^^y new fashions, as men most unconstant, and full of new
fangles. The Lacedaemonians are praised, that they suffered no strange ware to
be brought into their city, whereby the citizens might be effeminated and
corrupted in their manners, and for the same cause they extol greatly Licurgus,
which made the same law. Now, if the Lacedaemonians were so serious obseruers of
their old laws and customs, what a shame shall this be to us christian men
(which were not taught of Licurgus, but of Christ himself) daily to alter and
change, not content with those rites and ceremonies that were ord yned of
ancient time out of memory? Irenaeus teaches in his third book against the
heresies of Valentine, and such other, whose words taken out of his fourth
Chapter of the said book, I will briefly rehearse: Si quae de aliqua modica
quaestione disceptatio esset, nonne oporteret in antiquissimas recurrere
ecclesias, in quibus Apostoli conuersati sunt, and ab eis de praesenti
quaestione, sumere quod certum and reliquidum est? If any controversy should
be of any question, were it never so little, must it not be meet to have our
recourse unto the most ancient churches, in the which the Apostles were
conversant, and of the^ to receive the plain certainty thereof? It follows,
Quid autem si neque Apostoli quidem Scripturas reliquisle^t nobis, no^ne
oportebat ordine^ se qui traditionis, qua tradideru^t his quibus co^mitteba^t
ecclesias? But what if the Apostles left If indeed they had left no scriptures
then that had been a good course but now seeing they have, what their
tradition was, is best learned by them. But the better to hide your folly in
citing these words, you subtily translate scriptures nothing written of that
matter.
nothing written of that matter, must we not follow the tradition of the^, to
whose gouerna^ce they committed the churches? Here have you the mind of
Irenaeus, who was near unto Christ his time: for as S. Here again the
question is begged, for you take for granted that your p^elates are lawfully
called and ours not, both which we deny.
Hierome testifies in an Epistle to one Theodora, he was Disciple to Papias,
who was S. John the Evangelists scholar. He would have men to be taught of
Christ, of his Apostles and their successors, and Of the same mind are we,
and therefore Christian men are not to listen to your prelates.
not of every one, which rashly and without lawful authority takes upon him
to be a teacher. Christian men should be obedient to christian ordinances, and
follow that doctrine that is allowed by them that are lawfully called, and
have the censure of doctrine committed to them. Such were the Apostles, called
and put in authority by Christ. Such were they, But such have not been your
Romish teachers these many hundred years. Witness your own writers who show
how unlawfully many of them came by their places.
to whom these again gave the charge over any faithful ^ongregation. Such are
all they which have so from time to time ^eene lawefullie called by them, that
have power to put others in authority, and so succeeded in due order, else,
Quomodo praedicabunt nisi mittantur, How shall they preach, except they be
sent, as ^t is written in the tenth to the Romans, and sent by them which have
authority to send. Did not Saint Paul for that purpose leave Titus in Creete?
Did he not also give Timothy charge to lay hands too quickly on no man? To
these that be thus lawefullie ordained and called to have cure and charge of
souls, ye are bound to give an ear: by these ye must be ruled in matters
of Religion, and as obedient children to their spiritual fathers. And this
bids Saint Hierome, writing to Nepotian: True and necessary as long as the
pastor is such as Paul wild Titus to ordeine: but this helps yours little.
Esto subiectus pontifici tuo, and quasi animae parentem suspice, Be subject
to thy Bishop, and reverence him as thy souls father. The same lesson teaches
Chrysostom in an Homylie, De recipiendo Seueriano, where he begins thus:
Sicuti capiti corpus cohaerere necessarium est, ita ecclesiam sacerdoti, and
principi populum, As it is of necessity, that the body cleave to the head,
so it is likewise of necessity, that the congregation cleave to their Priest
and spiritual ruler, and the people to their Prince. And within a few words
after, he alleges for the confirmation of this matter, the Apostle writing
thus to the Hebrews, in the thirteenth Chapter: This rule is not general
without exception. For Christ has said take heed of false Prophets etc.
Obedite praepositis vestris, obtemperate eis, quia ipsi peruigilant pro vobis,
quasi pro animabus vestris rationem reddituri, Obey them that have the
oversight of you, and do as they would have you, for they watch for your
sakes, as they which shall give accomptes for your souls. This obedience does
our Savior require of all men, saying: Qui vos audit, me audit, He that
hears you, hears me. This obedience to Christ's Church has continued
thoroughout all Christendom time out of mind. And if the authority of the
learned and holy fathers ought to bear sway and prevail, as of right it
ought to do indeed: Arrogantium enim hominum est, maiorum suorum authoritatem
aspernari, and se illis ingenio vel sapientia anteponere: For it is the manner
and property of proud arrogant persons to contemn the authority of their
elders, and to prefer themselves before the^ in wit or learning, If the consent
of all christian Regions should be regarded, prob^bilia (says Aristotle in
the first Chapter of the first book of his Topickes) quae videntur omnibus vel
plurimis, Those things are probable, which all men, or at the least, the most
part do judge to be so. If the long continuance of time must be of importance,
In his enim (as witnesses S. Hilarie upon the hundred and eighteen psalm)
tanquam in coelo verbum dei permanet, in quibus hoc verbum non offenditur, In
them does the word of God abide, among whom that word is not offended. This is
but a vain brag that you have these three, as shall appear I hope
sufficiently in the answer to Albines treatise. For you have not one of them in
such sort, as that thereupon you may conclude as you do.
If these three, I say, The authority of the learned Fathers, The common
consent of Christian Regions, The long continuance of time, may be a sufficient
testimony for the verity, we have the true Gospel, and the true sense of it:
These are but shameless beggings of the things in question, and only your
bare and therefore vain words, for none of them you shall ever prove true.
Our Religion is the very Christian Religion, The order of Ceremonies that the
Catholic Church does use, is the right order, Our fasting and praying is
according to the Scriptures, Our Church is the true and lawful spouse of
Christ, from the which as many as separate them selves, they are no sheep of
Christ's fold, they are reprobate persons, they are the children of Belial,
they are impes of hell. What then? is the president of our next and last
fathers yea though for some hundred or more years such as we may not vary
from? The vanity of this argument see cap. 38. of my answer.
You know what order your fathers kept, how they lived, and how they
believed: You are not ignorant, how you have been brought up, instructed and
tr^^ned in the laws of Christ. Whosoever goes about to infringe or break any
part of that You must prove the order godly and laudable or else your assertion
is false
godly order, of that ancient custom and laudable usage, he is an heretic,
an enemy to God, a murderer to man's soul, a disturber of the common wealth, a
subuerter of all honest discipline, and therefore most unworthy to live among
men.

I This complaint has most just and apparent ground especially amongst men of
your own faction, though it cannot be denied but that every where there is so
lamentable cause thereof, but yet this preiudiceth our religion which condemns
all imoiety, no more then you would have it to do yours.
have heard, read and seen many things, yet can I not read, bear, or see any
world more contaminate and prone to al kind of vices then this our age is. And
howbeit before our days, there have been in all times and ages, men and women
very vicious and monstrous in their living, yet then virtue was virtue, and
vice was vice: But now in our corrupt time, we have lost the true names and
use of all things, and virtue with us is taken for vice, and contrarily, vice
is counted for virtue. They that be studious of modesty, obseruers of
temperancie, and lovers of sobriety, they be now a days called Pinch-pennies,
and such that hunger droppeth out of their noses. This is false amongst us, if
by catholic you understand, as you should, sound and true religion.
If any be virtuous, and followers of the Catholic, which is the true
Religion, they be called Pharisees and papists: The discreet man he is called
an hypocrite, and the small talker a fool and an ignorant person. On the other
side, they that lead their lives in all kind of riote, they be called
handsome men, men of the right making, and such as can tell how to keep honest
men's company. Again, the statelier that one goes, the ^igher that he
looks, and the stouter and malapertlier that he speaks, be more is he
praised among the worldlings for a wise man, who will not ^uffer himself to be
ouertroden and made a laughing stock to every ras^all. With such vain
glorious praises be such proud Thrasoes extolled and magnified of the more
part, and no small number are given to flat^erie, and enhausing of Clawbackes,
that never could that saying of Te^ence be better verified then it is now: Obse
quium amicos, veritas o^odium parit, To hold up men's yea and their nay, in
holding with the bare, and running with the hounde, gets a man friends, but
he that will lay flattery aside, and tell the plain truth, shall get nothing
but hatred. Thus in these days vice is extolled, and virtue contemned: Ill
rule is made ^f, and good rule neglected.

O heart dissembled, which under color to be just and true, can cloak unto
us hypocrisy for devotion, ambition for gentleness, covetousness for
^o^petencie, cruelty for zeal, bold babbling without learning for eloquence,
flourishing Rhetoric without fruit or reason, folly for gravity, wilines
without wit, and fleshly wanton liberty, for liberty of the Gospel. This is
nothing else but the devils drifte, always covering his poison under some taste
of sugar: Fallit enim vitium specie virtutis and vmbra: This inuectiue speech
we may justly use of you and your side.
For the sum and end of all their false doctrine, is nothing else but malice
with murder, to the overthrow of Christ's Religion, and the true ministers
thereof. This is their sheep clothing, for an unhappy reformation: Nam impia
sub dulci melle venena latent, Under sweet honny is deadly venom hid. O
blind ignorance and ignorant blindness! O cruel and damnable mischief coming
from the bottomeles pit of hell! O intolerable furiousnes and heresy more
detestable then it mate any longer be suffered! The great d^spleasure, the
extreme vengaunce, the cruel plagues of God hang over our heads, if this
horrible heresy be not shortly removed from men's minds. O These words justly
we may break out into, in respect of the infinite blasphemies and
abominations held and maintained by your side in this point.
good god, how long will thou suffer this intolerable abomination? It shameth
me, it abhors me to think, that these shameless beasts are not ashamed to
speak of the most blessed Sacraments of Christ's Church: who is able to
express either by tongue or pen their wicked abomination? why have we a
pleasure to forsake the true understanding of Gods most sacred word, and
become followers and bondslaues of the devils counterfaite and deceitful
expositions, and carnal reasons set out by his ministers, who in Religion are
This objection of the diversity of opinions, see answered at large Cap. 4.
so divided, that now they dream one thing, and now another: this day they
like, tomorowe they mislike, and one is against another of them, even in the
highest mystery of Christ his Religion. And no marvel, for the devil is
their chief head, whom they serve, and he is full of lies, variaunce,
division, and discord: and under him their Schoolemasters were, Hus, Luther,
Zuinglius, Oecolampadius, Bucer, Melancthon, and the Archheretike Calvin,
Therein there is no proof that he held any one heresy.
whose heresies are confuted in the Discourse hereafter ensuing. This is untrue.
These with the rest of that rabble did never agree one with another, in their
doings there is no unity, no certainty at all: and therefore such masters, such
scholars come of them. And this division, this inconstancy of doctrine, was a
manifest token, that they were not the children of our true mother the
Catholic Church, nor ministers of Christ, but the children of the devil, and
ministers of Antichrist, yea, very Antichrists. Which that you papists be is
most certain, the contrari^ty of your doctrine with the ancient catholic e
Church considered, which I have noted cap. 17. and 29 of my answer.
For whosoever (says S. Augustine) is gone from the unity of the Catholic
Church, he is become an Antichrist? These Antichrists have borne a great
stroke now too long time in our Realm of England, in whom is no constancy, no
steadfastness of religion and doctrine: These are they that have damnably
deceived you, and have with their damnable preachings intised you from Church
to Church, from an heavenly Church to a malignant Church: from a loving mother,
This is false.
to a flattering harlot: from the condition of grace, to the state of
perdition: These words remaining we justly say to, and of you.
from truth to falshoode, from faithful believing to carnal reasoning, from
saving Christ to deceauing Antichrist. But (good Reader) beware, be not
deceived, and be not ashamed to arise, that have so shamefully fallen, be not
ashamed to come home to your mother the Church, since she is not ashamed to
receive you: Let not folly lose the thing that grace has so preciouslie
offered and purchased: Let not wilfulness and blindness put out so great
light as is now showed unto thee, but embrace most humbly the doctrine of our
mother the catholic church, so shall you sit in the lap of so tender a
mother, which will cherish you into life everlasting: Choose the best, whiles
choice lies in lot.

What were you ashamed of your preface that you put not your name to it?
Indeed it is so fond and frivolous, that you might well enough be ashamed to
father it.

An answer to the preface set before John de Albines book entitled, A
notable discourse against heretics. etc.
BEfore I take in hand to say any thing to John de Albine, or his book, I
must crave of thee (gentle reader) whosoever thou art, these two things, that
thou would first give me leave to answer the long, tedious, and bragging
preface, prefixed before his book by the publisher thereof, and that then also
thou thy self, would vouchsafe before thou go any further, either to the
considering what Albine has objected, or I answered, to take the pains to
read over this my answer to the said preface. And though it seem unto thee
of an extraordinary length, and so somewhat discourages thee, yet the length of
his considered likewise, I pray thee bear with me, and vouchsafe the reading
of it through, before thou proceedest any further. His preface thou see is
long, but indeed so vain and frivolous it is, that though it seems the
author thereof was some bold and impudent Jesuit, or fugitive of our own
country, yet such care he had of his credit, that for fear of loss thereof,
he has not thought good to put his name unto it. The vanity and weakness
thereof, may even sufficiently appear by those marginall notes, that I have
affixed unto it, so that if I troubled thee with no further answer unto it, I
hope it neither could nor should much move thee, or any other to think any
thing the better of their Church and religion, then thou did before: yet
because, neither he, nor any of his faction, for want of a further particular
answer unto it, shall take occasion to persuade themselves, or other, that
there is further weight and matter in it then indeed there is, I will
vouchsafe some more pains about it. First therefore this I would have thee
(Christian Reader) for the commendation of the authors great skill to observe,
that almost al of it, is spent in proving those things which are needles,
because, we teach, grant, and defend the^ to be trueths, as fully and more
fully then he or any of his side. For proof whereof, consider, that whereas
the whole preface, consists in the copy and edition that I had of his in print
to answer, of twenty two leaves, he spendes the first eight pages in proving
that Kings, Princes, and rulers both civil and ecclesiastical, must
carefully administer justice according to their callings, and so be as good
shepherdes to them, of whom they have charge, which who doubts of, or who
ever denied amongst us? yea we teaching as we do, that Emperors, Kings, and
Queens, in their kingdoms, are carefully to look to the keeping of both
tables amongst their people, and that they are next under God the supreme
governors of their people, as well in causes ecclesiastical, in commanding for
the good of the church and religion of Christ, as in causes civil, in
commanding for the common weal and the good estate thereof, and they denying
civil Magistrates any such authority in causes of the church, do not we far
more fully then they teach them, how and when they may be as good shepherds to
their people? Then by occasion of this former needless discourse, having
alleged that John 10. to prove that a good shepherd gives his life for his
sheep, and that Christ is that good shepherd that knows his sheep, and is
known of them, mark how in as many mo pages he infers, that it is
necessary that the sheep know their shepherd, that they hear his voice, and
give no ear to the voice of a stranger, and lastly, that they follow and obey
their shepherd: which are things also (truly taught and understood) which we
most gladly teach and embrace, and for lack of which properties of Christ's
sheep we constantly hold and aduouch that the Romish flock these many
years, has rather been a flock of goats, then of Christ's true sheep. For
if they know, as they should, that the name of the shepherd Christ were the
only name whereby comes salvation Act. 4. and that in him all things are
prepared already. Math. 22. they would not set up to themselves so many names
of persons and things besides him, nor hold that so many things besides those
that are already prepared in him, are left to themselves and others to that
end to prepare, as they do. And if they did so hear his voice, and refuse to
hear the voice of strangers (as Christ's sheep ought) there neither would nor
could be, so many strange doctrines, yea contrary doctrines to the voice of
Christ set down in the Canonical scriptures, received and maintained amongst
them, as ear I have done with Albine I shall show there are. Likewise such
followers and obeiers of the voice of Christ are they, and have they been for
these 4. or 500. years speaking unto them in his word written, by the mouth of
his true church and ancient sound pastors thereof, as that none ever, in a
number of most weighty and material matters, more directly contraried his
voice then they. Whither I have just ground and proof for my thus saying, I
refer thee to that which I have written in confutation of Albines discourse,
cap. 4.17.29. and 36. And yet such is the folly of this nameles preface writer,
that having thus noted these, to be the properties of Christ's true sheep, as
though by and by without any further proof at all, it ought of necessity to
be granted, that he and his side had all these properties, and that we of our
side had never a one of them all, but were notoriously branded with the
contrary marks, he triumphs and insulteth over us, spending all the rest of
his preface in railing upon us, and in persuading his reader to forsake us, and
to join with him and his. So that all the rest of his preface is builded,
upon a most shameful and impudent begging of all these points; that they know
Christ aright, hear his voice and no other, obey him and follow him most
orderly: and also of these (that his begging of that former may seem the more
reasonable) that their doctrine is sound, having countenance of al ancient and
holy fathers, of the consent of al Christian Regions, and prescription of time,
that their prelates are al prelates lawfully called, having right succession,
and every thing that they should have, to credit them withal, and therefore
that they are such, as Christ has commanded, to to be obeyed as himself, and
lastly, that their church is the holy Catholic church, the obedient spouse of
Christ, and mother of all the faithful, and that therefore it is damnation to
depart from her, or to refuse to obey any of her laws and ordinances, and that
with us, all things are quite contrary. All these things his reader must grant
him and suppose to be true, for he has nothing at all to prove any one of
these, besides swelling words of vanity, and lofty arrogant bragging that these
things are so. And therefore al these things, being the things in question
betwixt us, and such, as we all, most constantly and justly have always
denied, (as our writings of these points heretofore, and now this answer of
mine in sundry places thereof, make manifest to any indifferent reader)
thereupon it must needs follow, that whatsoever he has alleged, either out
of scripture or doctor to persuade his reader to obey their church, their
prelates, their ordinances and traditions, is shamefully abused. For compare
the times when, and the persons whereof those things were written, their
doctrine and doings with these, and you shall find, (witness the scriptures
themselves and all sound antiquity) as much difference betwixt their church
prelates, doctrine and ordinances, and them of whom those places are to be
truly understood, as there is betwixt light and darkness, the pure Church
of Christ, and the impure Synagogue of Antichrist. And also, all his
exhortation upon these grounds, to join with them, and all his bitter
inuectiues against us, for refusing so to do, is as a building in the air
without all foundation. And therefore is thus easilye pulde down, and laid
underfoot, as a thing more meet to be trampled upon, as a thing of nothing,
then by any to be at all regarded. And yet as foul a fault as this is in him,
it is common to him with all writers of his side, and most notoriously with
this John de Albine, before whose book, he has set this his preface. It may
be, seeing his author, whom he meant to publish, and of whom he had such an
opinion, that he accounted him a notable discourser against heresies, to have
such a grace and dexterity, in stuffing out his book almost with nothing else,
but with this beggarly begging the maine questions always, that he thought his
preface should not be suitable, and fit to be set before such a learned
discourse, unless it were garnished and bewtified with the same popish grace.
And if this were his reason (then which I am sure he has no better) he is to
be borne withal, for what reason is there to the contrary, but that according
to the rules of decency, the preface and the book whereunto it is a preface
shall be conformable one to the other.

And yet though this be the very method and matter (good Reader) of all this
his long tedious preface, which I thus briefly have laid open before thee,
the poor silly man the author thereof, seems to have conceived such a
liking of his own doings therein, especially toward the latter end thereof,
that gloriously and triumphantly he breaks out into wonderful complaints,
amplifications, and exclamations against us. Alas poor man that he was,
thought he to meet with no reader, but that would grant him all these
things at the first asking? Or thought he that he had so cunningly and
artificially knit those things together, that no man could espy the childish
losenes of them? From his first general far set and yet unnecessary
discourse of the duty of all officers, he so suddenly falls into the next,
of the properties of Christ's sheep, that it was great marvel that the man
^ooke no great harm by it. But having recovered himself (...) litie, speaking
belike before his wits were well come to him, ^ee never can hit after of any
thing to the purpose. For not only all his matter and words, besides a few
naked assertions of his of the truth of certain points of his religion, and
falshoode of ours, skipping in here and there, ^here is nothing, but, the
circumstances of application altered, one of us might far more aptly and truly
have written against them. But as those things sufficiently convince the man
and his preface of gross folly and vanity, so if we consider, but how he
has wilfully sought to abuse his reader, in cyting the ancient father
Irenaeus, and others, to persuade his reader by his authority, to obey their
prelates and traditions, we shall as plainly find in the man palpable
impiety. For page second, he cyteth his fourth book and forty three chapter,
to prove unto us now, that we must obey their Church, now speaking unto us by
their prelates, because then Irenaeus told the heretics a thousand and four
hundred years ago and more (whom indeed the pastors of the Church that then
was, continued soundly in the purity of the Apostolic doctrine) that they
were to obey the pastors of the Church that had succession from the Apostles.
Which any man may see, binds not, nor teaches us to do the like to theirs,
unless they could prove theirs to be such, as there Irenaeus speaks of.
Likewise whatsoever else in this preface of his to like purpose he has
alleged out of Irenaeus, Augustine, Chrysostom, Cypria^, Hierome, or the
scriptures themselves, is abused, for that which they spoke of that pure and
true Church of Christ, and her faithful ministers, that he would draw his
reader to think to be spoken, even of the Church of Rome as it is now, and has
been of late years, and of her prelates, which are in nothing almost, like
either the Church or ministers that they speak of. But this is not all his
fault in alleging this testimony of Irenaeus, thus to confound the prelates
and Church with the true pastors of Christ and his pure Church, a thousand
four hundredth years ago, whereunto theirs are no more like then darkness
is to light, but that also wilfully (the easilier belike to beguyle the simple
reader) he concealeth that, that immemediatly follows the former words.
Which is this: Quis^c^^ ostendimus cum episcopatus successione charisma
veritatis certum, secu^dum placitum patris acceperunt, that is, which (as we
have showed) with the succession of their Bishoppricke, according to the will
and pleasure of God, have received the certain gift of truth, and so he
having skipt over those words, which he thought, as it should seem, in his
conscience, would and might be denied, not to fit their prelates, he goes on
with that that followed these words, saying, Reliquos vero qui absistunt a
principal successione, and quocunque loco colliguntur, suspectos habere tanquam
haereticos oportet, which is in English, but the rest which go from the
principal succession, in what place soever they be gathered together, we
ought to suspect as heretics. Wherein evidently it appears, he left out the
former words (standing in the author in the midst betwixt the former part of
the sentence, and the latter here alleged by him) to make the reader believe
that Irenaeus mind was, to teach men simply to obey such prelates, without
exception, as have ordinary, outward, and local succession down from the
Apostles, and that that kind of succession in place and office, is the
principal succession that he speaks of, which who so has not, ought by and
by to be suspected of heresy. But indeed take al his words together and mark
them, (especially those which craftily he had gelded the sentence of, in his
quoting of them) and it is most clear, that Irenaeus here teaches obedience
only to such Bishops, as succeed the Apostles, in the certain gift of
truth, that by principal succession, he meant nothing else but succession to
the Apostles, in that gift of truth, and that therefore he would have us, to
suspect all those to be heretics, that lack succession unto them in that,
howsoever and wheresoever they succeed them else. Which is the very cause, why
according to this rule we think no better of their popish bishops and priests,
then we do (what succession soever otherwise they brag of) for that, sure we
are, that long ago they are gone from this principal succession in truth. This
he knew every one would perceive, if he had faithfully cyted Irenaeus words as
they lie, and therefore he thought best, to show how he could follow the
example of that old fox Satan, who for his purpose in like manner, mangled
the 91. Psalm, Math. 4. It seems also that these words quocunque loco
colligu^tur; in what place soever they be gathered together, (though he recite
them in latin) he would feign have smothered, for tra^slating the rest he
omits these, doubtless because without any exception, yea even of Rome it self,
thereby Irenaeus would teach, that they ought to be suspected to be heretics,
that will not obey those pastors that succeed the Apostles in the gift of
truth. Which indeed the Bishops of Rome, having had so little care to do this
great while, if this rule of Irenaeus may be followed, they cannot possibly
escape this suspicion. The credit therefore of the^ waying more with the writer
of this preface then his own, he thought it was better thus to leese his own,
by thus shamefully abusing his reader in proving this testimony after the
popish manner, then once to hazard the credit of his holy fathers the popes, by
right, faithful, and honest dealing therewith. Howbeit, this kind of dealing
of his, may give just occasion to all that are wise ever hereafter, to look
better to the fingers of all such fellows, then upon their bare word to trust
them any more in their quoting or citing of the fathers. But lest we should
think that this was but a slip of his by chance, and that he was not his
craftes-master in this kind of dealing, he has plaide us the very like trick
again with this same father pa. 18. and where he alleges the fourth chapter
of the said Irenaeus third book, to justify their traditions not warranted by
the written word. For in the beginning of the said chapter not five lines
before the words cited by him, he speaking of the scriptures written by the
Apostles and Eua^gelists, he says, that they into that rich treasury most
fully have brought all things that belong to truth, so that every one that
will, may from thence take the drink of life. And that which he speaks in the
words alleged by him of following of tradition, it is spoken only by way of
supposition, to show what course had been best for the Church, when any
question should have arisen, if they had not left us scriptures. For his words
are these: if the Apostles had not left us scriptures, must we not have
followed the order of tradition, which they gave to them to whom they committed
churches? In which case (which is not our case now, seeing they have left us
scripture) we grant we should have been, in the deciding of all controversies
that could have arisen, ouerruled by that which they delivered by word of mouth
to such, and therefore that being the case, no better or readier way for the
ending of controversies, should there have been, then to have recourse to the
most ancient Churches wherein they were conversant, and so by their tradition,
to have learned the certainty therein. But thus, by way of supposition,
Irenaeus speaking of their tradition, in the case supposed by him, certain it
is, that by their tradition, he understands that sound form of doctrine, which
they delivered by their preaching, and teaching, which the^ would and should
have been the same (forasmuch as they spoke and wrote by one spirit) that now
they have left us in writing. And therefore eue^ then the Romish Church, should
have been as far to seek, as she is now, for having any warrant from thence,
for those things that she holds, either contrary, or besides the word
written. And that by tradition, he means here no other thing, it is evident,
for in the first chapter of that book he says plainly: Quod tum
praeconiauerunt, postea, per Dei voluntatem nobis tradiderunt in scripturis,
columnam and fundame^tum fidei futurum, that is, that which first they
preached, after by the will of god, they delivered unto us in the scriptures,
to be the pillar and ground of faith. And in the third chapter of that book
(having before spoken of the Apostolic tradition) he after shows what he
meant thereby, namely this, that god the maker of heaven and earth etc, as he
is described in the old testament, the Apostles have taught to be the father
of our Lord Jesus Christ, contrary to the fantastical frantic dream of
Valentinian, so plainly showing, that they that would, even by the scriptures
themselves, might learn what the Apostolic tradition was. Now what is this,
for the authorishing, the vnwrite^ traditions of the Romish church, which are
not only al beside the scriptures, but whereof the most are contrary thereu^to?
But this, gentle reader, is the right trick of all the crew of these Romanists,
thus by the ambiguity of words out of the fathers, to seek to color their
absurd opinions, and so er thou be a ware, to deceive thee, if thou take not
heed. As for example, to persuade a man to like of their beggarly unwritten
traditions, whatsoever any father speaks of tradition, though it be never so
plain in the author himself, that thereby he means nothing less, then such
traditions as theirs, yet that must be confidently brought in, as fit, and most
pregnant, for their purpose. Likewise whatsoever any father has said of any
sacrame^tall change of the outward elements, for that therein their name, use,
and estimation are changed, though the same father in a thousand other places
show, that his judgment is, that there is no change at all there in substance,
yet that must be quoted as a flat place for Popish tra^substantiation. And even
so, if they find in a father speaking of the Eucharist, any mention of a
sacrifice, as though there were no kind of sacrifice, but that which they dream
to be there, that must be urged as a strong place, to prove their blasphemous
sacrifice for the quick and the dead. And this iugling with the fathers, and
cosening of their poor simple readers, use they in all their controversies. But
at this time, thou must pardon this preface writer this fault, because herein,
he does but study to be like him, before whose book he has set this his
preface. For chapter the fifth, he himself most grossly commits this same
fault, in the detection whereof, I have more at large discovered this lewd
dealing of theirs. In the mean time, let us not forget that Irenaeus has
taught us, what that church is, who those pastors be, and what those
traditions are, that we must obey and be ruled by, namely, only that Church
that has the scriptures for the pillar and ground of her faith, lib. 3. cap.
1. those pastors that succeed the Apostles in truth of doctrine, li. 4. cap.
43. and those traditions which have good warrant from the scriptures
themselves, lib. 3. cap. 3. whereof it must needs follow, that all the places
and reasons quoted by him, either out of the scriptures or fathers, to bind us
to yield obedience to their churches ordinances, their prelates commandments,
and to the points warranted only by their traditions, their Church having
another foundation of her faith then the word written, namely always their
popes will as it has, and the comma^deme^ts of their prelates, and traditions,
being not only beside, but also often most grossly contrary to that word of God
written (as I shall show in sundry places, er I have done with Albine) in
Irenaeus judgment, ar but so many abusings and corruptings of their holy and
good meanings. And yet thus, having to no purpose bestowed a great deal of
idle pains, as one that had said enough to prove that the authority of all the
learned fathers, the common consent of all Christian regions, and prescriptio^
of time, were al full and fast of his side, he lustily braggeth p. 22. that if
their be any weight in any, or al these together, that his side has the true
gospel, and the true sense thereof. That their Religion is the very Christian
Religion, their order of ceremonies the right order, and that their fasting and
praying, is according to the scriptures, and that therefore their church is the
lawful and true spouse of Christ, from which, who so seperates himself, is in
state of damnation. This thus only said, thereupo^ by and by, as though there
were no remedy, but that we must needs grant all this to be true, he takes
occasion to triumph, and to frame a bitter inuectiue, against our Religion and
lives: so concluding his wordy preface, with an exhortation to his Reader to
forsake us and our Religion, and to join again with the^ in theirs. All which
because it is nothing, but the vain and malicious words of a foolish
adversary, without proof or shadow of proof (which therefore I am sure the
wise Reader will make no reckoning of,) I might very well let pass with this
only answer, that whatsoever he has here said braggingly, either in the
commendation of his Religion and Church, or to the disgrace of ours, is utterly
false, and that I have plentifully proved it so to be, in sundry places of this
my answer. Howbeit seeing this is not only his brag, but the brag also a number
of times, of John de Albine in the book following, and indeed, is in effect,
the only thing, by taking whereof granted, most subtily they, and all their
fellows, seek to beguile their simple readers, it shall not be amiss, because
here first we meet with it, least otherwise the Reader should be too ready, to
suffer his heart to be sorestald with this false principle, to the prejudice of
the truth, somewhat to say to make both the vanity and falsehood hereof to
appear to every one. First therefore it is worthy the marking, that the man,
though (as he plainly shows, he had here a full purpose, at least in
words, to give as great countenance as he could to his cause) that yet, he
seeks to give it credit, but by the testimony of fathers, consent of
Christian regions, and prescription of time, in the mean time, omitting that
which is to be preferred before all these, namely the testimony of the undoubted
word of God, revealed and set down in the scriptures: wherein he has dealt
but as the nature of his cause requires, which has no countenance from thence,
and as the fashion of other of his companio^s in this case is. For hereupo^ it
is, that there is nothing more common in their discourses then to labor by all
means they can, the disgrace of the written word of god, and to establish the
credit of a word unwritten, which they count to be the traditions or ordinary
practice of the Church of Rome. To this end they bestow so much pains as
they do, at least to make show of proof, that the scriptures are so dark
and obscure, so insufficie^t for the direction of the Church in all matters,
and of so vveake authority of themselves without the authority and testimony
of the Church to countenance them, that without the foresaid unwritten word, no
man could either fully or certainly, be settled and established in the truth. So
that herein this is their drift, that they indeed being without all sound
warrant out of the canonical scriptures, for those things which we count
erroneous in the^, they yet may make their followers believe, that they have as
good ground as need be for them, in that they can prove the^, by the tradition
of the Church, which they call the word of god unwritten, and which they hold
to be not only aequal, unto the other that is written, but also far more full
and certain for the determining the truth of all controversies. And therefore
Soto contra Brentium, Canisius cap. 5. of his Catechism, and Lindan lib. 5.
cap. 10. of his panoplie are not ashamed to confess, (reckening almost all the
points in controversy betwixt them and us) that they have their ground and
warrant from tradition, not written in the scriptures. And hereupon it is, that
there is nothing more common with any of them, then when we press them, with
this, that the opinions for the which we strive with them have no warrant in
the scripture, yea that the scriptures rightly understood are flat against
them therein, to fly to tradition, which is the cause that this fellow him
self was so busy before to abuse Irenaeus, for the countenance of that only
foundation of their Religion. For this cause we may and do say of them, and
that justly, by their own confession, as Tertullian said of the heretics in
his time, they cannot stand, if they be driven once to determine al their
controversies by the scriptures, de Resurrectione Carnis cap. 3. Now as for us
(Christian reader) for all this lewd brag of his, we appeal to these
scriptures of god, and only we allow of them, as of a most perfect
touchstone whereby to try, in all matters of Religion, the pure gold from the
counterfeit, craving no further liking nor allowance in any thing, then by them
we are able soundly to prove, and confirm that which we say and teach. And
the ancient holy fathers, and so the Christian regions in all ancient
prescription of time, which are the things that he here brags of, as it
appears in all sound monuments of antiquity, ever since these scriptures were
written, for the determining of controversies in their times, have always
taken this course to confute and confound all adversaries to the truth. As for
their own authority, or the authority of any other before them, no further
credit they crave, then as they are found to agree with these scriptures,
otherwise the more that have couseted and the longer they held, the worse. This
I have made manifest by ple^tifull testimony of the ancient fathers themselves
cap. 3.5.23. And therefore whiles he sends us thus to the fathers, Christian
regions consent, and prescription of time, he se^ds us but about the bush, for
when we come to the^, they will send us back again to the scriptures. But
whiles they take this course in seeking rather countenance for their cause any
where else, then at, or by the canonical scriptures, in the just judgment of
god, they plainly bewray themselves to every simple man, to have but a bad
cause, that they so shun the light, and refuse the most certain, and most
indifferent trial of it, which questionles is by these scriptures, whose
neither authority nor indifferecy, without blasphemy, may once be called in
question. Indeed I read, that when they were pressed with the authority of
these scriptures, the Marcionites pretended for the defense of their heresy,
their paraclet or co^forters visio^s, and instructions: and that likewise the
Mo^tanists did fly to their prophecy: the Vale^tinians to their dreams of their
Aeons: the Manichees to their fundame^tal Epistle: the Jews to their Talmud:
and the Turks to their Alcaron: and belike lest these should be found unlike
these their predecessors, they will thus fly from the undoubted authority of
god, speaking in the scriptures, to the uncertain and variable authority of
man.

Yet if this were true that he says, that they have the ancient holy fathers,
the common consent of all Christian regions, and pre scriptio^ of time of their
side, it were so^ewhat, and some likelihood it were, that things were with
the^, as he says, I must needs confess, but indeed and truth, they have
neither al nor any of these, in that sort to speak for the^, as he would make
his Reader believe. For first, there is plain contrariety betwixt their
doctrine, and the doctrine of the ancient holy fathers, in a number of most
weighty points, as I have showed at large ca. 17. and 29. likewise in that both
there, and also c. 39. and 40. in that I show, that they hold many things
directly contrary to the ancient general councels, I plentifully prove, that
they are destitute, of the common consent of Christian regions. And as for the
last, though it were gra^nted the^, that they may truly pretend long
continuance of time, yet seeing it is true, that Tertullian de velandis
virginibus has said, Quodcunque aduersus veritate^ sapit, heraesis est, etia^
vetus co^suetudo: that is, whatsoever sauoreth against the truth, is heresy,
though it be an old custom: and seeing also it is certain, that Cyprian ad
Pompeiu^ says, custom must not let truth to prevail, for custo^e without
truth, is but oldnes of error, that could do the^ little good, we being always
able as webe, to prove by the scriptures sou^dly interpreted, and by all sound
antiquity, that they are gone long ago from the truth. But in deed though
popery be too ancient, and so has had so^e co^tinua^ce of time, yet it is but
a yongling, in respect of that which they pretend. And this I have also proved
cap. 17. and in sundry other places of my answer following. Yea that more is,
and which will go nearer then I have proved, that indeed we for our Religion
and Church, have not only prescription of some longtime, but also of all times
and ages eue^ from the beginning. c. 4.9. and 17. And yet this point of
antiquity, and prescriptio^ of time, is a thing that they so co^fide^tly stand
upon, that in the offer annexed to John de Albines book, that proud chale^ger
offreth to reca^t, if we ca^ show where, and when, in what year of the lord,
and under what Emperor, and by who^, popery ca^e in, and by who^ of our side it
was gain said: which though I have, I hope, sufficiently showed in the chapters
last before quoted, yet because the answe ri^gfully to this point, and the
remouig of this objection, will both blu^t the edge of this his brag, and
greatly crack the credit of popery, I will voutsafe so^ewhat more here, to set
down to the co^futatio^ of it.

Hereunto therefore, whereas the foresaid offerer, and others of that side, so
stand upon the antiquity of their Church and Religion, that they would seem we
must needs grant, that they are even as ancient, as they pretend, unless we
can show when, where, and by who^, a sudden change from our Religion to theirs
was made, and that some of our side the^ presently espied it, and withstood it,
unreasonable it is that they demand. For popery being not one, or two
particular heresies, nor such a mass or heap of heresies, whose property is
to burst in all at once of the sudden, showing it self with open and bare
face at the first, but as it is termed, 2 Thessalonians. 2. a mystery of iniquity,
and therefore a false Religion, creeping in cu^ningly by little and little, as it
were, by stealing steps, and that hidden as much as might be, under the show
and color of holiness through hypocrisy 1. Tim. 4. and Reu. 13. v. 11. no
marvel though it were not only very hard, but even impossible, in every
respect to satisfy this demand. And yet for all this, were popery never a
whit the more to be liked. For as we see by experience, that ostentimes there
is far more danger in those diseases, that steal upon a man by little and
little, and therefore are not resisted at the first, then in those that are
apparent and violent when they begin, and therefore then are they more
carefully withstoode and looked unto: even so oftentimes also it falls out in
errors and heresies, that they of al other in the end prove the most
dangerous, whose beginnings have been most close and secret, and whose growing
to their perfection has not been of the sudden, but in long tract of time.
Indeed those diseases that come upon the sudden and are violent, and in their
fulness at the first, men at the first may espy and complain of, but so it is
not, not cannot be always in the other. We see also, that though it be an easy
matter to name the father of a lawfully begotten child, yet no man commonly
can tell who is the father of the base son of a common woman. But to make it
yet more clear, that popery may be naught (as it is) and yet this his demand
be unreasonable, we are to call to mind, that Christ our savior, who knew best
how such most dangerous cankers and diseases, would grow and come up in his
church, has taught us Matthew. 13. that it will not always be known and
espied, no not of his own household servants, when and by whom first the tares
are sown in his field, where he had before only sowed good seed. And there
he shows us, that notwithstanding, that it shall be sufficient to prove them
tares, in that afterward when they are come up, they differ as they do from
the good seed. Though therefore it were so, that we could not tell when, and by
who^, popery was first sowe^ in Gods field, yet in that now it being grown up
therein, as it is, it being compared with gods good seed taken out of the
garner or barn of his holy written word, it differs from it as it does, that
ought to be sufficient proof unto us, that it is but tares, and of the devils
sowing by his deuilish seedsime^, whenever they did it. Doubtless the creeping
of it in, not all at once, but by little and little, and that with such soft and
sly paces, the show of holiness and devotion that it has stolen in under, the
trouble that the holy ancient fathers had in their times otherwise, in
confuting gross heresies that showed themselves such at the first, and the
small suspicion (if they had marked the beginnings hereof, that were in their
times) that they could have had, that ever they would have ^rowen to this that
they are now, have been so many great and ^peciall causes, why the first
beginnings thereof have been no more noted and resisted then they have been.
Again this I must ^eeds further say, that it may yet very well be, that the
beginning and proceeding also thereof, have been both better observed and
withstood by the ancient fathers in the primative church, the^ appears now
unto us in their books and monuments: for in these parts of the world in these
last 4 or 500 years they so reigning and ^yra^nizing as they did, they having
their books in their keeping, their care and diligence being as it was, by all
means possible to maintain their own credit, very likely is it, that as they
met with any thing to that end, they have found the means to suppress and ^ase
it out of their writings. Infinite proofs and examples there ^e (they know well
enough) to enduce any man to think, that love of their own cause, and hatred
of the truth, would easily provoke them in this case to be thus bold with their
labors. For in all stories since their kingdom grew to the full, not only
from time to ^ime, it is noted, that if God raised up any (as he did always
some ^s I have showed cap. 4.) to speak and write against their corruptions,
they took straight such order, that if not both the men and their books, yet
at least their books should be burned and consumed. And they that have had,
when the times were far better, three popes one after an other, so bold and
impudent through an ambitious desire then of primacy, to forge a false and
counterfaite canon of the council of Nice, and to urge it in the open face of
an other great and famous council of Carthage, when notori^ously their forgery
was espied, and therefore they plainly told of it by epistles written unto
the^ by that council of purpose, no marvel, though when they had attained their
full desire of an universal supremacy, they durst do and did whatsoever they
thought good, to let as few monuments of antiquity remain any way to their
discredit, as might be. Hence I am fully persuaded that in great part it
comes that we find so little as we do, to bewray their beginning and
proceeding, and the withstanding thereof in the writings of ancient fathers and
Croniclers. And yet though we found in the^ far less then we do, I say again,
that thence arises no reason to justify the popish church or religion: for is
there any reason that a ship that is drowned by leaking, a man that is dead by
a consumptio^, and a commonweal that is grown from a moderate and well
ordered government, to an absolute tyranny, should be said to be safe, in
health, alive, and in good state, because we cannot tell when, and where, the
ship began first to leake, the man began first to fall into his consumption,
and when the common weal began first to grow out of order? Likely enough also
is it, that the great credit that the ancient bishops of Rome were in, for
their piety and godliness, and the lofty estate of their successors
afterward, so dazeled on the one side, the eyes of the godly in ancient time,
that they were not curious, in resisting the doings of their successors: and
so bridled on the other side, the tongues of the worldly minded of these latter
days, that they durst not write that which they saw: all which reasons laid
together make it evident, that it ought to be no wonder, nor yet any argument,
any whit at all to credit popery, though this offerers demand could not be
satisfied. Howbeit, this only I have written, to show the unreasonableness of
this demand, for indeed, Gods name be praised for it, how unreasonable
soever it be otherwise, we are able sufficiently to answer it. For Paul
has told us, that this mystery of iniquity was vvorking in his days 2. These.
2. verse. 7. And so indeed it was, in that even then, first their were false
Apostles, that labored to corrupt the article of free and full salvation,
through the only means and merytes of Christ Jesus, teaching that it was
necessary to salvation, for them that believed in Christ also to be
circumcysed, as it appears, Acts 15. and Gal. 5. and after that there were
such, as hereupon grew a step further, namely, to urge the necessity of the
observing of humane traditions, as, Touch not, taste not, handle not, so making
a show of humbleness of mind, in worshipping of Angels, and of voluntary
religion, in not sparing their bodies, in observing hereof: against all which,
Saint Paul stands forth in the places before quoted, and also in the second
of the Colossians. This damnable error also was considered of, and confuted
in that famous Apostolic council, Acts. 15. And amongst others, Saint John
also sharply rebukes and condemns the teachers, of this Antichristian
doctrine, calling them very Antichrists, and such as were gone out from them,
that so it might appear, that they were never of them, Epist. 1. Cap. 2. ^ers.
18.19. And therefore as I show Cap. 17. the church of Christ and the teachers
therein universally, for six hundred years after Christ and more, taught
directly against ioining any person or thing with Christ in the office of
justifying and saying: though now there is nothing more usual in the Ro^ish
church that now is, then to teach other merits and ^atisfactions in these
respects to be trusted unto besides Christ's. The next Capital point of
Antichristianity is the now chal^enged supremacy of the Roman prelate, and as
for that, we can show, both the beginning and proceeding thereof from time to
^ime, and who always set themselves against it. The first ^mbitious clyming
that way, we may note in the mother of Ze^edeus children, and her two sons,
who coming unto Christ, ^equire this of him, that the one may sit at his right
hand, and the other at his left in his kingdom, and that was spyed to be a
^owle fault in them by Christ, and therefore by him they are ^hecked and
withstood Matthew. 20. After we read of one Diotrephes, that so loved the
prehemine^ce that he would not receive John, and such as he was, but in his
third epistle verse. 9. he shows he spied him, and that he did utterly dislike
that ar^ogant and ambitious humor of his, yet by these warnings your bishops of
Rome, would not take heed, but for all this, would take to much upon them over
their brethren, but when either they, or others have done so, it appears in
ancient Cronicles, and in the writings of the ancient fathers, that they had
always some that did spy it, and set themselves against it. For when Victor
bishop of Rome, about the year of Christ, two hunderd, somewhat popelike, so
far exceeded his bounds, that he took upon him to excommunicate the bishops
of the East, for that they would not conform themselves to the fashion of the
church of Rome, in the keeping of Easter, not only Polycrates, and sundry
other bishops there vvithstoode him therein, out here in the west, Irenaeus
bishop then of Lions (though he were of Victors mind for the observing of
Easter) yet in his own name, and in the name of his brethren, wrote to
Victor, and in that his letter rebukes him, for his so far proceeding, as you
may read in Eusebius. lib. 5. cap. 22. and 23. And after this in Cyprians time
about the year 255. when Cornelius Bishop of Rome unadvisedly, and contrary to
the good policy of the church, and after him Stephanus, took upon them so to
admit of fugitives out of Afric at Rome, that not only they received them
into their communion, but took upon them to labor their restitution, they
being before for their just demerits excommunicated, and deposed in Afric:
Cyprian wrote unto them both to Cornelius in his first book of Epistles,
Epistle 3. and to Stephanus in his second book, and first Epistle, wherein
earnestly he reproves them for so intermedling in his jurisdiction, and the
jurisdiction of other his colleagues in Afric, showing the^ that they ought
not so to do, for they in Africa had as full Pishoply authority as they at Rome,
and therefore were both able and the fittest, to hear and determine such cases
as fell out amongst themselves. But seeing for all this the Bishops of Rome
still were too busy, in meddling further then they should, after this in the
counsel of Nice cannon 6. their authority and the Patriarchs of Alexandria
are made equal about the year 320. And yet the better to stay and keep the
Bishops of Rome within their due limits after this, in most counsels for 300.
years after something still was done to bridle them. For certain it is that
as it appears did. 99. the third counsel of Carthage held about the year
435. cap. 26. forbad the ambitious and proud tytles of Prince, of Priests,
Highpriests and such like, even to the Bishops of the first see. And Concilio
Mileuitano, about the year 420. and in another of Afric held betwixt these
two, as some write, about the year 428. cap. 92. appeals unto them from the
Bishops and counsels of Afric were forbidden. And the great general council
of Calcedon held about the year 453. when the Bishop of Romes legates had done
what they could to the contrary Act. 15.16. and canon 28. gave the Patriarch of
Constantinople equal privileges with the Bishop of Rome. And long after this,
the first general counsel, being the third (as it is noted in the second tome
of the cou^celles) held at Constantinople in the time of Pope Agatho, about the
year of the Lord 681. renewing a decree before there consented unto, in a
council consisting of 150. Bishops cap. 5. and remembering likewise the
foresaid 28. cannon of the council of Calcedon, whereas some write there were
630. Bishops, cap. 36. ratifieth and enacteth the same. And if we go no further
then to the former five general councels, we shall find them all to have had a
care by their decrees, to keep the bishops of Rome within their due bounds of
their own patriarchall see. For proof whereof, let any man but read the sixth
canon of the Nicene, the second and third of the first of Constantinople, the
eight of the Ephesme, remembering withal the twenty eight of the Calcedon, twice
now immediately before mentioned, and understand that the fifth general council
solemnly confirmed those four former, and their canons and decrees, and he
cannot choose but see this to be most manifest. But amongst all the rest,
notable is that that appears to this end in that great solemn Africane
council, where Zozimus, Boniface, and Celestine, three popes on a rue, by their
Legates under one of their hands alleging a false canon of the council of
Nice, all that was determined in former councels to the contrary
notwithstanding, showed themselves intolerably ambitious of supremacy, thereby
most egerly claiming such a prehemine^ce to be given to their see, that if any
bishop or minister, were deposed in any other province, or Patriarchal see,
that upon his appeal to Rome, the Bishop of Rome might accept thereof, and
therevpo^ either write his letters to the next province to determine the
matter, or else to send his Legate from his side to represent his own person,
to sit in judgment with the bishops there to determine the matter. For there,
as it appears, in the 101 102 103 and 105 chap. of that council, in the first
tome of the councels, this their allegation was not only examined, by all the
copies of the Nicene council that they had there, but also by ancient copies
thereof, which they sent for thither of purpose to Alexandria, Antioch, and
Constantinople, and thereby in the open face of that council, where 217
Bishops were assembled, their forgery was espied, and therefore that allegation
notwithstanding, the bishop of Romes dealing concerning Apiarius (who then gave
the occasion of that stur) was there openly disliked and condemned, and
therefore to prevent the like thereafter, they in their 92 chapter there
determine, that whosoever should so appeal any more from the bishops, and
councils of Afric beyond the seas, should the^ceforth never after of any in
Afric be received into communion. Besides, as it appears there in the 105.
cap. by the common consent of that council, a letter was framed and sent to
Celestine, about the latter end thereof (as it should seem by the stories about
the year four hundred and thirty) wherein first they admonish him to admit no
more such appeals, or fugitives, but to send them back again always to
their own provinces and Metropolitans, and the rather, say they, because such
order was taken by the Nicene council. And after therein they plead the
equity of that ordinance, because the holy ghost is as well in one province, as
in an other, and there the cause is always like best to be handled, where it
does arise, because of the neighnesse of the vvitnesses. Wherefore having
told him, that they find no such thing in the truer copies of the Nicene
council, as Faustinus sent by him alleged, they flatly forbid him the
sending of his agents or legates any more, upon any such occasion amongst them.
It should seem for all this, that so incident to that see, was this
ambitious humor, that in pope Symachus time, about the year five hundred, many
bishops even in these parts, did accuse him to Theodoricus, king of the Goths,
because he took upon him to be (...), that is, one who vvoulde have his
will to be a law, which is now professed, to be the popes prerogative and not
to be controled. Did. 40. Si papa. In Gregory his time, in the reign of
Mauritius the Emperor, the bishop of Constantinople lustely challenged the
title of universal bishop, but then Pelagius bishop of Rome in the year five
hundred eighty three (as it appears in the ninty nine destinction of your law
in Gratian) and Gregory also his successor condemned that, for an unlawful and
Antichristian name in him, or in any other bishop, the bishops of Rome
themselves not excepted, lib. 4. epist. 32.38.39. And whereas (this
notwithstanding) Boniface the next but one to Gregory (though with somewhat a
do) obtained of that murderer and traitor Phocas, (who having cruelly slain
Mauritius, succeeded him in the Empire) this Antichristian title, first to be
called universal bishop, or head of the church, witness Sabellicus, Marianus
Scotus, Martinus Polonus, and others, yet as Platina witnesses in vita Dom,
the church of Raue^na in Italy complained thereof, and until pope Donus time
(which was seventy years after) it could not be brought to tolerate and
like of it. Otho Frisingensis lib. 6. Cap. 35. an ancient historiographer,
speaking of Gregory the seventh commonly called Hildebrand, and his proceedings
against the Emperor Henry, not only to excommunicate him, but also to depose
him, ^ith, Lego and relego Romanorum regum and Imperatorum gesta etc. ^read and
read again the acts of the Roman kings and Emperors, and yet before this, I
find none of them of the Roman ^ishop excommunicated, or deprived of his
kingdom. But (...) we read Sigebert, Abbas Vrspergensis, H. Mutius, and
others, we shall find, that the same Bishop, for this his Antichristi^n
pride, and other faults that he had, was not only wonderfully vvithstoode
and oppugned by that Emperor, but ^y councels also then held at Brixia, Mentz,
and Worms, ^harpely rebuked, condemned, and desposed. And though he having
thus begun to encroch upon the Emperor, many of his successors follovved
him in his very steps, yet we read also in Cronicles that Henry the fifte,
Frederick the first, and Frederick the second Emperors, Philip the fair,
and Carolus Caluus of France, Henry the first and second, Richard the second,
and king John of England, with sundry other Emperors and kings, did notably
and openly resist them therein, and that they had alvvaies many learned fathers
and Bishops to take their parts. But to leave this matter, and to go on to
others: because the author of this preface, and brag that I now am in
aunswering, in his brag makes special mention, as you have heard of their
order of ceremonies, and manner of praying, and fasting, bosting that for
these, they have the holy fathers, the consent of all christian nations, and
prescription of long continuance, yea for the two last the very scriptures:
let us first see if we can find out the original, and vvithall the just
reproof and condemnation of these. First for their ceremonies, none that has
but read Platina, or any other story of the lives of their popes, but he has
red when, how, and by whom they were devised, for there is few of them, for
many hundred years together, that thought, as it should seem by the vvriters
of their lives, that they had worthily sat in that place, unless they had
devised some new rite and ceremony more then was before. But if one go no
further then to Polidor de inventoribus rerum, there shall he find when, and
by whom they had their original, whereby also it shall appear, that for many
of the^ they are of so late devising, they cannot pretend either the testimony
of ancient fathers, or prescriptio^ of any long time, and for very few of them,
whatsoever he bragges, can they truly allege consent of all Christian
regions, for as they have most of them been devised here in these parts of the
world by bishops of Rome, so few of them in comparison have been, (...) yet
be received in the other parts of Christianity, that were under the other
Patriarchs of Constantinople, Alexandria, and Antioch: yea even here in these
parts, all their rites and ceremonies were never yet universally received of
every cuntry alike, no nor yet of every part of any one cuntry. But they being
in number so many, in nature a number of them so childish and foolish, and yet
having been urged as they have, to be used with such opinion and holiness, S.
Paul's reprehension of those that were in his time so busy with the Colossians,
in urging the^ to keep their ordinances, the keeping whereof lay in, touch
not, taste not, handle not, Coloss. 2. is both a bewraying, when such like
ceremonies as these that he brags of first began, and also a just and a full
condemnation of them. Read also S. Augustines 119 epistle ad Ianuarium, and you
shall find there, how earnestly he has enueied against the multiplying, and
bringing in, and so urging of such unnecessary rites and ceremonies: showing
how few the simplicity of the gospel is contented withal. And yet as it is well
known, he lived 1000 years ago, and that since his time there are 1000.
newrites and ceremonies devised in the Romish church, that he never had heard
of, and yet the^ he complained that there were so many, and they so seruilely
were urged, that the Jews state was in that respect far more tolerable, what
would he have said then, if he had lived in these days, and had seen the
curious, infinite, and foolish rites and ceremonies, but of one popish priest
formally doing his mass?

Indeed fasting is a thing, and so is prayer, that has countenance of
scriptures, fathers, Christian regions, and of all ages and times, but so has
not either the popish fasting or praying. For their fasting is tied
superstitiously to set days, and also lies especially in abstinence from one
meat, rather then from an other, their end therein being not only to chastise
the body, that it may be brought the more readily and fervently to obey the
holy direction of the spirit, as the word of God teaches only it should, but
even thereby to satisfy, either for some sin past, or to earne or deserve
somewhat at the hands of God. Such fasting as this was that of the hypocritical
pharisees, whereof Christ warm ^s disciples, Mat. 6.16. and the first fathers,
and teachers hereof, are those spirits of error, that S. Paul speaks of 1.
Tim. 4. and so you ^ay there see both, who first in the church of Christ, found
out and ^ractised your kind of fasting, and who by and by spied it, and
conde^^ed it for hypocritical, and the doctrine of devils. But if you would
^aue us to search further, we tell you, that after Christ and his Apo^tles
times, Eusebius reports in his 5 book and 16 chapter out of A^olonius, that
Montanus the heretic, prescribed laws of fasting, and he is the first that
we read of, that tied fasting by law, to pre^cript days and times, which is
there reckoned up by that Apolonius, ^s one of his heretical devises. This
Montanus was about they ear of the Lord 145. And it appears in Augustines 2.
book and 13. cha. of the manners of the church, and of the Manichees, that it
was the fashion the^ of those heretics, to think upon their fasting days,
that they fasted excelle^tly, though otherwise they had never so dainty^e so
they abstained from flesh and wine, for the which Augustine does deride the^.
And consequently herein Apolonius and Augustine, have showed their dislike of
that popish fasting. If yet ^t should be replied, as it is, by some of their
side, that their fasting is not altogether like the condemned abstinence of
these ancient heretics, and others, for that they abstained from flesh upon
an opinion, that flesh was an impurer creature then fish; how will they the^
excuse Durand. li. 6. ca. de ieiunijs, who gives this as a reason of their
abstinence upon fasting days, rather from flesh, then from fish, because al
flesh was accursed in the days of Noe and not all fish?

Now touching their manner of praying, for all his brag, neither fathers,
consent of all Christian regions, prescription of any long continuance of time,
nor scriptures give it any credit or cou^tena^ce at al. For first, whereas now
they pray al in Latin, a tou^g not understood of most that hear, and use
their prayers, it is a kind of praying flatly condemned, because it is without
edification to such, by Chrysostom and Ambrose, upon the 14. of the first to
the Corinthians. Augustine also de Genesi ad litera^, li. 12. Cap. 8. ioines
with them herein, aduouching that no man is edified by hearing that, which he
understands not. And the descriptions of all the ancient lyturgies in the
Church show, that always they were used in such a tongue, as the people
understood as well as the minister, there is such mention of intercourse of
speech one to the other, as any man may see, that perused the descriptions
thereof: yea writers, both old and new do plainly testify, that the ancient
and long continued use of the church has been, to have her public liturgy in
the known and vulgar tongue of the people. For Orige^ co^tra Celsu^ lib. 8.
writes, that the Grecians name God in greek, and the Romans in the latin
tongue, and every one in their native and mother tongue, pray and sing Psalms
unto God. And Hierom to Eustochuim describing the solemn funeral of Pacta, and
elsewhere to Marcella, testifies, that though to Bethlee^ there was co^course
of very many several nations, yet every one there praised god and prayed unto
him in their own language. Insomuch that eue^ Lyra upon the 14 of the first to
the Corinthians co^fesses, that in the primitive church, al was done in the
vulgar tongue. And no longer ago then Innocent the thirds time, in the Latera^
counsel held in his time 1215. c. 9. order is taken, that where in one country
there be people of diverse la^guages, there the Bishops should provide them
ministers, to celebrate the^ divine service, and to minister the^ the
sacraments, according to the diversities of their rites and la^guages. Yet
further that thou may see, Christian reader, in this point, that the man
blusheth at nothing, understand, that by the confession of their own friend
Eckius in his common places, the South India^s have their liturgy in their
mother tongue: and by the confession of another, one Sigismu^d writing of the
Moscovites, that they likewise have theirs. And Petrus Bellonius, writing of
the Armonians, testifies the like of the^: yea Aeneas Siluius who after was a
Pope, in his history of the Bohemia^s c. 13. plainly shows, that a Pope was
admonished by a voice from heaven, to grant Cyril, that converted Russia and
Moralia, to say divine service amongst the^ in the Shlauon tongue which was
their vulgar tongue. How have they the^, as he bragges, these things
considered, either the ancient holy fathers, consent of al regions, or such
prescription of time, as he prete^ds, for this manner of praying of theirs, in a
tongue not understood of most? And who can read the 14 of the first to the
Corinthians, unless he be disposed wilfully to be blind, but he must needs
there see, that this manner of praying is directly there condemned? Chrysostom,
Ambrose, Haymo, Lyra, and so expositours, both ancient and new, take it,
howsoever our late Rhemists, in their notes, would feign wrest the place from
any such meaning. And in this respect, suppose otherwise their prayers were
faultles, who sees not, that they give God occasion again to renew his old
complaint Esaias. 29. This people draw near unto me with their lips, but
their heart is far from me: of most people, which through their tyranny
only pray thus. But in this point only there is not vanity and falshoode in
his brag; for otherwise if we consider well their manner of praying, we
shall find both gross untruth in his speech, and horrible faults in their
prayers. For how can it be true, that consent of fathers, and the rest that he
bragges of, do countenance that set form of church-seruice, that now they
are in possession of? seeing neither the ancient fathers, nor yet one quarter of
Christendom, was ever acquainted with it? There own authors, and namely
Polydor de inuentoribus rerum lib. 5. cap. 10, do show how it came in, and
was devised piece after piece. In the one thousand two hundred years after
Christ, it was not grown either to that full form or credit that it is at
now. For the form of mass now used, commonly called Saint Gregory's mass,
with much ado got to be first in these western parts received in Pope
Adrians time, 790 years after Christ, witness Durand Nauclere, and Iacobus de
voragine: and yet even then, and long after, Millayn continued the use of a
form of liturgy received from Ambrose. Benedict the 3, that succeeded next
Joan the harlot, about the year 857 first invented and brought in the dirge,
as most authors write, though Gregory the 3 had done so^what about it before.
The first allowance of the sequences in the mass is attributed to Nicolas the
first, that succeeded this Benedict, In Alexander the 2 time, Alliluiah was
first suspe^ded out of the church in ^e^t time, which was above 1000 year
after Christ. Our ordinary here in England, secundum vsum Sarum, began 1076
years after Christ, and that, as our stories show, by occasion of a bloody
quarrel betwixt the Abbot of Glassenbury and his monks. The 7 canonical hours
came in first by Urban the second, in the year one thousand and ninety. But
Gregory the ninth, that monstrous enemy of Frederick the second, first brought
in that blasphemous canticle Salve regina, one thousand two hundred year and
more after Christ. And howsoever these patches, in the end grevve in these
parts to b^^ sowed together, yet the other parts of the world under the
Cyprians time about the year 255. when Corneliu. Bishop of Rome unadvisedly,
and contrary to the good policy of the church, and after him Stephanus, took
upon them so to admit of fugitives out of Afric at Rome, that not only they
received them into their communion, but took upon them to labor their
restitution, they being before for their just demerits excommunicated, and
deposed in Afric: Cyprian wrote unto them both: to Cornelius in his first
book of Epistles, Epistle 3. and to Stephanus in his second book, and first
Epistle, wherein earnestly he reproves them for so intermedling in his
jurisdiction, and the jurisdiction of other his colleagues in Afric, showing
the^ that they ought not so to do, for they in Africa had as full Bishoply
authority as they at Rome, and therefore were both able and the fittest, to
hear and determine such cases as fell out amongst themselves. But seeing for
all this the Bishops of Rome still were too busy, in meddling further then they
should, after this in the counsel of Nice cannon 6. their authority and the
Patriarchs of Alexandria are made equal about the year 320. And yet the
better to stay and keep the Bishops of Rome within their due limits after
this, in most counsels for 300. years after something still was done to bridle
them. For certain it is that as it appears did. 99. the third counsel of
Carthage held about the year 435. cap. 26. forbad the ambitious and proud
tytles of Prince, of Priests, Highpriests and such like, even to the Bishops
of the first see. And Concilio Mileuitano, about the year 420. and in another
of Afric held betwixt these two, as some write, about the year 428. cap. 92.
appeals unto them from the Bishops and counsels of Afric were forbidden. And
the great general council of Calcedon held about the year 453. when the
Bishop of Romes legates had done what they could to the contrary Act. 15.16.
and canon 28. gave the Patriarch of Constantinople equal privileges with the
Bishop of Rome. And long after this, the first general counsel, being the
third (as it is noted in the second tome of the cou^celles) held at
Constantinople in the time of Pope Agatho, about the year of the Lord 681.
renewing a decree before there consented unto, in a council consisting of 150.
Bishops cap. 5. and remembering likewise the foresaid 28. cannon of the
council of Calcedon, whereas some write there were 630. Bishops, cap. 36.
ratifieth and enacteth the same. And if we go no further then to the former
five general councels, we shall find them all to have had a care by their
decrees, to keep the bishops of Rome within their due bounds of their own
patriarchall see. For proof whereof, let any man but read the sixth canon of
the Nicene, the second and third of the first of Constantinople, the eight of
the Ephesine, remembering withal the twenty eight of the Calcedon, twice now
immediately before mentioned, and understand that the fifth general council
solemnly confirmed those four former, and their canons and decrees, and he
cannot choose but see this to be most manifest. But amongst all the rest,
notable is that that appears to this end in that great solemn Africane
council, where Zozimus, Boniface, and Celestine, three popes on a rue, by their
Legates under one of their hands alleging a false canon of the council of
Nice, all that was determined in former councels to the contrary
notwithstanding, showed themselves intolerably ambitious of supremacy, thereby
most egerly claiming such a prehemine^ce to be given to their see, that if any
bishop or minister, were deposed in any other province, or Patriarchal see,
that upon his appeal to Rome, the Bishop of Rome might accept thereof, and
therevpo^ either write his letters to the next province to determine the
matter, or else to send his Legate from his side to represent his own person,
to sit in judgment with the bishops there to determine the matter. For there,
as it appears, in the 101 102 103 and 105 chap. of that council, in the first
tome of the councels, this their allegation was not only examined, by all the
copies of the Nicene council that they had there, but also by ancient copies
thereof, which they sent for thither of purpose to Alexandria, Antioch, and
Constantinople, and thereby in the open face of that council, where 217
Bishops were assembled, their forgery was espied, and therefore that allegation
notwithstanding, the bishop of Romes dealing concerning Apiarius (who then gave
the occasion of that stur) was there openly disliked and condemned, and
therefore to prevent the like thereafter, they in their 92 chapter there
determine, that whosoever should so appeal any more from the bishops, and
councils of Afric beyond the seas, should the^ceforth never after of any in
Afric be received into communion. Besides, as it appears there in the 105.
cap. by the common consent of that council, a letter was framed and sent to
Celestine, about the latter end thereof (as it should seem by the stories about
the year four hundred and thirty) wherein first they admonish him to admit no
more such appeals, or fugitives, but to send them back again always to
their own provinces and Metropolitans, and the rather, say they, because such
order was taken by the Nicene council. And after therein they plead the
equity of that ordinance, because the holy ghost is as well in one province, as
in an other, and there the cause is always like best to be handled, where it
does arise, because of the neighnesse of the vvitnesses. Wherefore having
told him, that they find no such thing in the truer copies of the Nicene
council, as Faustinus sent by him alleged, they flatly forbid him the
sending of his agents or legates any more, upon any such occasion amongst them.
It should seem for all this, that so incident to that see, was this
ambitious humor, that in pope Symachus time, about the year five hundred, many
bishops even in these parts, did accuse him to Theodoricus, king of the Goths,
because he took upon him to be (...), that is, one who vvoulde have his
will to be a law, which is now professed, to be the popes prerogative and not
to be controled. Did. 40. Si papa. In Gregory his time, in the reign of
Mauritius the Emperor, the bishop of Constantinople lustely challenged the
title of universal bishop, but then Pelagius bishop of Rome in the year five
hundred eighty three (as it appears in the ninty nine destinction of your law
in Gratian) and Gregory also his successor condemned that, for an unlawful and
Antichristian name in him, or in any other bishop, the bishops of Rome
themselves not excepted, lib. 4. epist. 32.38.39. And whereas (this
notwithstanding) Boniface the next but one to Gregory (though with somewhat a
do) obtained of that murderer and traitor Phocas, (who having cruelly slain
Mauritius, succeeded him in the Empire) this Antichristian title first to be
called universal bishop, or head of the church, witness Sabellicus, Marianus
Scotus, Martinus Polonus, and others, yet as Platina witnesses in vita Doni,
the church of Raue^na in Italy complained thereof, and until pope Donus time
(which was seventy years after) it could not be brought to tolerate and
like of it. Otho Frisingensis lib. 6. Cap. 35. an ancient historiographer,
speaking of Gregory the seventh commonly called Hild ebrand, and his
proceedings against the Emperor Henry, not only to excommunicate him, but also
to depose him, says, Lego and relego Romanorum regum and Imperatorum gesta
etc. (...) read and read again the acts of the Roman kings and Emperors, and
yet before this, I find none of them of the Roman Bishop excommunicated, or
deprived of his kingdom. But ^f we read Sigebert, Abbas Vrspergensis, H.
Mutius, and others, we shall find, that the same Bishop, for this his
Antichristian pride, and other faults that he had, was not only wonderfully
vvithstoode and oppugned by that Emperor, but by councels also then held at
Brixia, Mentz, and Worms, sharply rebuked, condemned, and desposed. And
though he having thus begun to encroch upon the Emperor, many of his
successors follovved him in his very steps, yet we read also in Cronicles that
Henry the fifte, Frederick the first, and Frederick the second Emperors,
Philip the fair, and Carolus Caluus of France, Henry the first and second,
Richard the second, and king John of England, with sundry other Emperors and
kings, did notably and openly resist them therein, and that they had alvvaies
many learned fathers and Bishops to take their parts. But to leave this
matter, and to go on to others: because the author of this preface, and brag
that I now am in aunswering, in his brag makes special mention, as you have
heard of their order of ceremonies, and manner of praying, and fasting, bosting
that for these, they have the holy fathers, the consent of all christian
nations, and prescription of long continuance, yea for the two last the very
scriptures: let us first see if we can find out the original, and vvithall
the just reproof and condemnation of these. First for their ceremonies, none
that has but read Platina, or any other story of the lives of their popes,
but he has red when, how, and by whom they were devised, for there is few of
them, for many hundred years together, that thought, as it should seem by the
vvriters of their lives, that they had worthily sat in that place, unless they
had devised some new rite and ceremony more then was before. But if one go no
further then to Polidor de inventoribus rerum, there shall he find when, and
by whom they had their original, whereby also it shall appear, that for many
of the^ they are of so late devising, they cannot pretend either the testimony
of ancient fathers, or prescriptio^ of any long time, and for very few of them,
whatsoever he bragges, can they truly allege consent of all Christian
regions, for as they have most of them been devised here in these parts of the
world by bishops of Rome, so few of them in comparison have been, or yet be
received in the other parts of Christianity, that were under the other
Patriarchs of Constantinople, Alexandria, and Antioch: yea even here in these
parts, all their rites and ceremonies were never yet universally received of
every cuntry alike, no nor yet of every part of any one cuntry. But they being
in number so many, in nature a number of them so childish and foolish, and yet
having been urged as they have, to be used with such opinion and holiness, S.
Paul's reprehension of those that were in his time so busy with the Colossians,
in urging the^ to keep their ordinances, the keeping whereof lay in, touch
not, taste not, handle not, Coloss. 2. is both a bewraying, when such like
ceremonies as these that he brags of first began, and also a just and a full
condemnation of them. Read also S. Augustines 119 epistle ad Ianuarium, and you
shall find there, how earnestly he has enueied against the multiplying, and
bringing in, and so urging of such unnecessary rites and ceremonies: showing
how few the simplicity of the gospel is contented withal. And yet as it is well
known, he lived 1000 years ago, and that since his time there are 1000. new
rites and ceremonies devised in the Romish church, that he never had heard of,
and yet the^ he complained that there were so many, and they so seruilely were
urged, that the Jews state was in that respect far more tolerable, what would
he have said then, if he had lived in these days, and had seen the curious,
infinite, and foolish rites and ceremonies, but of one popish priest formally
doing his mass?

Indeed fasting is a thing, and so is prayer, that has countenance of
scriptures, fathers, Christian regions, and of all ages and times, but so has
not either the popish fasting or praying. For their fasting is tied
superstitiously to set days, and also lies especially in abstinence from one
meat, rather then from an other, their end therein being not only to chastise
the body, that it may be brought the more readily and fervently to obey the
holy direction of the spirit, as the word of God teaches only it should, but
even thereby to satisfy, either for some sin past, or to earne or deserve
somewhat at the hands of God. Such fasting as this was that of the hypocritical
pharisees, whereof Christ warn^ his disciples, Mat. 6.16. and the first fathers,
and teachers hereof, are those spirits of error, that S. Paul speaks of 1.
Tim. 4. and so you may there see both, who first in the church of Christ, found
out and practiced your kind of fasting, and who by and by spied it, and
condemned it for hypocritical, and the doctrine of devils. But if you would
have us to search further, we tell you, that after Christ and his Apostles
times, Eusebius reports in his 5 book and 16 chapter out of Apolonius, that
Montanus the heretic, prescribed laws of fasting, and he is the first that
we read of, that tied fasting by law, to prescript days and times, which is
there reckoned up by that Apolonius, as one of his heretical devises. This
Montanus was about the year of the Lord 145. And it appears in Augustines 2.
book and 13. cha. of the manners of the church, and of the Manichees, that it
was the fashion the^ of those heretics, to think upon their fasting days,
that they fasted excelle^tly, though otherwise they had never so daintyre so
they abstained from flesh and wine, for the which Augustine does deride the^.
And consequently herein Apolonius and Augustine, have showed their dislike of
that popish fasting. If yet it should be replied, as it is, by some of their
side, that their fasting is not altogether like the condemned abstinence of
these ancient heretics, and others, for that they abstained from flesh upon
an opinion, that flesh was an impurer creature then fish; how will they the^
excuse Durand. li. 6. ca. de ieiunijs, who gives this as a reason of their
abstinence upon fasting days, rather from flesh, then from fish, because al
flesh was accursed in the days of Noe and not all fish?

Now touching their manner of praying, for all his brag, neither fathers,
consent of all Christian regions, prescription of any long continuance of time,
nor scriptures give it any credit or cou^tena^ce at al. For first, whereas now
they pray al in Latin, a tou^g not understood of most that hear, and use
their prayers, it is a kind of praying flatly condemned, because it is without
edification to such, by Chrysostom and Ambrose, upon the 14. of the first to
the Corinthians. Augustine also de Genesi ad litera^, li. 12. Cap. 8. ioines
with them herein, aduouching that no man is edified by hearing that, which he
understands not. And the descriptions of all the ancient lyturgies in the
Church show, that always they were used in such a tongue, as the people
understood as well as the minister, there is such mention of intercourse of
speech one to the other, as any man may see, that perused the descriptions
thereof: yea writers, both old and new do plainly testify, that the ancient
and long continued use of the church has been, to have her public liturgy in
the known and vulgar tongue of the people. For Orige^ co^tra Celsu^ lib. 8.
writes, that the Grecians name God in greek, and the Romans in the latin
tongue, and every one in their native and mother tongue, pray and sing Psalms
unto God. And Hierom to Eustochium describing the solemn funeral of Pacta, and
elsewhere to Marcella, testifies, that though to Bethlee^ there was co^course
of very many several nations, yet every one there praised god and prayed unto
him in their own language. Insomuch that eue^ Lyra upon the 14 of the first to
the Corinthians co^fesses, that in the primitive church, al was done in the
vulgar tongue. And no longer ago then Innocent the thirds time, in the Latera^
counsel held in his time 1215. c. 9. order is taken, that where in one country
there be people of diverse la^guages, there the Bishops should provide them
ministers, to celebrate the^ divine service, and to minister the^ the
sacraments, according to the diversities of their rites and la^guages. Yet
further that thou may see, Christian reader, in this point, that the man
blusheth at nothing, understand, that by the confession of their own friend
Eckius in his common places, the South India^s have their liturgy in their
mother tongue: and by the confession of another, one Sigismu^d writing of the
Moscovites, that they likewise have theirs. And Petrus Bellonius, writing of
the Armonians, testifies the like of the^: yea Aeneas Siluius who after was a
Pope, in his history of the Bohemia^s c. 13. plainly shows, that a Pope was
admonished by a voice from heaven, to grant Cyril, that converted Russia and
Moralia, to say divine service amongst the^ in the Shlauon tongue which was
their vulgar tongue. How have they the^, as he bragges, these things
considered, either the ancient holy fathers, consent of al regions, or such
prescription of time, as he prete^ds, for this manner of praying of theirs, in a
tongue not understood of most? And who can read the 14 of the first to the
Corinthians, unless he be disposed wilfully to be blind, but he must needs
there see, that this manner of praying is directly there condemned? Chrysostom,
Ambrose, Haymo, Lyra, and so expositours, both ancient and new, take it,
howsoever our late Rhemists, in their notes, would feign wrest the place from
any such meaning. And in this respect, suppose otherwise their prayers were
faultles, who sees not, that they give God occasion again to renew his ^olde
complaint Esaias. 29. This people draw near unto me with their lips, but
their heart is far from me: of most people, which through their tyranny
only pray thus. But in this point only there is not vanity and falshoode in
his brag; for otherwise if we consider well their manner of praying, we
shall find both gross untruth in his speech, and horrible faults in their
prayers. For how can it be true, that consent of fathers, and the rest that he
bragges of, do countenance that set form of church-seruice, that now they
are in possession of? seeing neither the ancient fathers, nor yet one quarter of
Christendom, was ever acquainted with it? There own authors, and namely
Polydor de inuentoribus rerum lib. 5. cap. 10, do show how it came in, and
was devised piece after piece. In the one thousand two hundred years after
Christ, it was not grown either to that full form or credit that it is at
now. For the form of mass now used, commonly called Saint Gregory's mass,
with much ado got to be first in these western parts received in Pope
Adrians time, 790 years after Christ, witness Durand Nauclere, and Iacobus de
voragine: and yet even then, and long after, Millayn continued the use of a
form of liturgy received from Ambrose. Benedict the 3, that succeeded next
Joan the harlot, about the year 857 first invented and brought in the dirge,
as most authors write, though Gregory the 3 had done so^what about it before.
The first allowance of the sequences in the mass is attributed to Nicolas the
first, that succeeded this Benedict. In Alexander the 2 time, Alliluiah was
first suspe^ded out of the church in ^e^t time, which was above 1000 year
after Christ. Our ordinary here in England, secundum vsum Sarum, began 1076
years after Christ, and that, as our stories show, by occasion of a bloody
quarrel betwixt the Abbot of Glassenbury and his monks. The 7 canonical hours
came in first by Urban the second, in the year one thousand and ninety. But
Gregory the ninth, that monstrous enemy of Frederick the second, first brought
in that blasphemous canticle Salve regina, one thousand two hundred year and
more after Christ. And howsoever these patches, in the end grevve in these
parts to be sowed together, yet the other parts of the world under the
other patriarchs, were little or not at all troubled with the^. And howsoever
he shame not to aduouch, that now their manner of praying is according to the
scriptures, Gregory. l. 7. Epist. 63. writes, that, Mos Apostoloru^ fuit, it
was the manner of the Apostles, to consecrate only with the Lords prayer, which
simplicity, who so co^pares, with their stagelike dealing thereabout now, he
can never be persuaded, that two fashio^s so differing, should both have
cou^tena^ce of scriptures. But to make it yet more evident, that of al other
things he might worst have made this brag, of their manner of praying, there
are two great and notorious faults more therein: their praying for the dead to
help the^ out, or to ease the^ in the pains of purgatory, and their praying,
as they do, to Saints and Angels. For in these two points, they are not only
destitute of the testimony of the holy ancient fathers, consent of al
Christian regions, prescription of so long time as he makes show of, and the
scriptures, but rather al these are indeed herein against them. For purgatory
it self, and consequently prayers made to relieve souls there, is but a very
late devise, and never yet received of half of Christendom. For in William
Rufus time, king here of England, there being a council held at Baron, there
the Greek church, in this point plainly discented from the Latin, and never
from that day to this, could be brought herein, to be of their mind, whereby
any man may gather, that it is a point, which the Latin church has devised,
since the greek church broke of communion from her, and that never yet, had
either consent of al christian nations, or such prescriptio^ of time, to
cou^tena^ce it, as he talks of. And as for the scriptures, let the^ be perused
through, and there shall not be found in them that be of the canon, either
example of prayer, or sacrifice for the dead, yea rather plainly he shall
find them, always urging the time of this present life, to be the only
time, to do good in, and to seek the Lord for our comfort ever after. And as
for the other point, concerning their prayers to Saints departed and Angels, it
is such a thing, for the which, in all the scripture they can find neither
precept, promise, nor example, to lead them to use it, but to teach them to
abhor it, there they shall, or at least may learn, that invocation, is a
special divine point of service, of such spiritual and high nature, as that
God challenges it only to himself, and that therefore never any holy man,
mentioned in the scriptures durst ever use it to any other. Indeed a man shall
easily find that ere Epiphanius time, Satan had taught the heretics called
Caians, to worship Angels with invocation of them, and that likewise ere his
time in Afric there were, that offered to Mary the virgin, and that in
inuocating her, and other saints were very busy, and pretended great piety and
devotion; but withal he shall find, that he bitterly condemns all that did so
for heretics, under the name either of Caians, Antidicomarianites, o^
Collyridians, Here Is. 38, 78. etc. and that in as bitter manner as may be, using
the same speeches and reasons against them, that we do now usually in these
days against these. Now where, they would shift of the absurdity, and
blasphemy of robbing God, and his son Christ, of their due honor herein, in
saying first, that their praying to the souls of Saints departed, may as well
stand with their honor, as the requiring of our brethren alive to pray for us,
and then in affirming, that they beg nothing at their hands, but still they
conclude their prayers unto them, with this clause, by the merits of our Lord
Jesus Christ, they cannot so escape or excuse themselves. For neither do they
only desire the Saints departed, to pray to God for them, as we do our
brethren here whiles they live, neither do they always remember so to conclude
their prayers unto them. For in their office, which they call the service of
the blessed Marie, there be three prayers made unto her, wherein, no less
then eternal life is begged directly at her hands, and yet there this clause
is quite forgotten. The like may be observed, in many other prayers of theirs
to them, as for example, in their prayer to S. Osmund confessor, in one to S.
Anne, and in an other to S. Katherin. And if it were so, that they so shut up
al their prayers unto them, what were that else, then to make Christ mediator
betwixt us and them? For can we in any words, more plainly acknowledge Christ's
effectual mediation betwixt us and his father, then by requiring all things
that we beg of his father per dominnm nostrum Iesum Christum, by our Lord
Jesus Christ? Then what is this else, but for their pleasures to put him from
his old office, of being mediator betwixt God and man, to make him now
mediator betwixt men and women alive, and the souls of other men and women
dead? They say in their manner of praying, they never cause the Saints any more
to incroch of his office of mediation, then we do when we desire one another
being alive, to pray to god for us, what say they then to that prayer of theirs
in the name of Thomas Becket: Tu per Thomae sanguine^, que^ pro te effudit, fac
nos, Christ, scandere quo Thomas ascendit. That is, O thou Christ, by the
blood of Thomas, which for thee he shed, make us ascend thither, whither
Thomas is gone. They know this is, or was, in their portuisse. But if this be
not plain enough, both to make it appear that they pray otherwise to the
Saints departed, then we do to the^ alive: and that in their praying to the^,
most blasphemously contrary to all holy ancient fathers judgment, consent of
al Christian nations, prescriptio^ of al ages, and the holy scriptures
themselves, mark (Christian Reader) these further presidents. In the mass of
the annuntiation they sing thus to Mary, Salve virgo virginum, mediatrix
hominum, all hail virgin of virgins, the mediatrix of men: and in the mass of
the conception thus, Tu spes certamiserorum, vere matter orphanorum, tu lenamen
oppressorum, medicamen infirmorum, omnibus es omnia. That is (speaking to the
same Mary) Thou art the certain hope of the miserable, truly the mother of
orphans, the help of the oppressed, the medicine for the sick, to all thou
art all things. Infinite such examples there be, whereby it is most clear,
that nothing can be begged of God himself which they beg not of the saints,
and that no title ca^ be given to god but they have given it to one Saint or
other. Besides all this, we must consider that the children of God being alive
are commanded to pray one for another, and that by speech, letter, or
messenger, they know how to acquaint one another with their mind: whereas in
praying to their souls after their death, we have neither comma^deme^t so to
do, neither can we indeed persuade our selves, that whatsoever we say unto
the^, they hear and see our minds, unless we think now after once they be in
heaven, they are invested in the very nature of God himself, and so are become
as well as he, searchers and scers of the hearts and raines: which once to
imagine because it is extreme blasphemy, therefore their is infinite
difference, even for these reasons betwixt desiring a Christian brother alive
to pray for us, and the desiring of his soul departed but once to do so much
for us. Again if that were but all they do in praying to the Saints departed,
then howsoever (because of our frailty that sticks by us whiles we live) it
were necessary one of us to require that at the hands of another, that so the
better we may perform the duty one to another, yet their is not the like
reason, why we should so call upon them that are departed, though they could
hear us, for they being where they have laid aside all frailty and
forgetfulness of their duties: it being supposed to be their duties to pray
for their brethren and sisters in Christ alive, we may be sure they will do it
without our remembering of them thus. But now no more of these two points here,
for ca. thirty seven, I have spoken again somewhat largely thereof, where I
have showed both when and how these corruptions came in, and who resisted them
also.

Wherefore to go on with co^futation of the objection which I have undertaken
to answer, concerning that point, when and by whom the Romish religion came
in, and who spyed it and confuted it: besides the points already touched,
amongst many other wherein we differ from them, these are three principal, for
the which I account both them and their religion Antichristian, their doctrine
of tra^substantiation, of images, and vowed single life, and yet in these they
brag of fathers, consent of Christian regions, and prescription of time, as
in the former. To answer therefore both that demand concerning these
points, also and to strip them withal of that visard of antiquity and
vniuersallity, that herein along time they have deceived the simple people
vvithall, understand, well-beloved in the Lord whosoever thou art, first for
transubstantiation, the very archpiller of their Synagoge, that if they be
very busy to seek out who first gave inkling of such a matter, they shall
find indeed the original thereof not to come from Mark the Evangelist, or
any of his fellowshippe, but from one Mark a notable Magitian, and filthy
heretic of the brood of Valentinian, that lived, as it seems by the
stories, in the reign of Antoninus Pius, about one hundred and fifteen years
after Christ. For Epiphanius in his thirty four heresy notes, and when he
has done plentifully confirms, it out of the first book of Irenaeus and his
ninth chapter against the heresies of Vale^tinia^ and others, that this same
heretic by his encha^tme^t having first caused a cup of white wine to bear
the color of blood, made his followers believe that by his invocation over it,
it was so tra^substantiated into blood, that seeing that he had give^ thanks
over it and long prayed, it might be thought of them that gratia^ quae est
super vniuersa, sanguinem suum instillasse in illud poculum, that is, that
grace that is above all things, had poured his blood into that cup, by which
means, when he had made them in admiration of him, desirous to drink thereof,
he gives it them with great devotion and solemnity of words, and so wonderfully
bewitched many. Indeed this fellow may very well be allowed, for the first
ancient fou^der of this point of doctrine, for there being not any one point of
popery, wherein Antichrist, has more manifestly showed him self contrary to
Christ, then in this, as in truth there is not, because for the establishing
and use of this, he is both spoiled of the true nature of a man, and office of
the only sufficient priest of the new testament, to offer himself once for all
for the redemption of his church, who can be fitter then this ancient
enchau^ter Marcus, to be the first author and patron hereof? especially seeing
Irenaeus speaking of him in the eight chapter of the foresaid book (as it
should seem, secretly directed by the spirit of prophesy) says, thas he was
vere praecursor Antichristi, that is, truly Antichrists forerunner. Yet how
notably soever this Marcus caused many simple persons in his time, to believe
his transubsta^tiation of wine, into the blood of Grace, yet he was so baited,
detected, and confounded for his lewd and cosening dealing therein, and in
other points by Irenaeus, Epiphanius, and others, that howsoever in the mean
time, Antichrist his successor, was busy under Leo the 9. in a council at
Vercellis, and after in the council of Lateran under Nicholas the 2. about the
year of the lord 1060. in bringing Berengarius to recantatio^, to revive
again this doctrine of transubstantiation, yet as their own friends confess,
and namely, Tonstall in his book of the sacrament of Christ's body and blood,
it could not, nor was not, decreed for a certain and universal doctrine,
before Innocent the thirds time, in another council at Lateran, about the
year of Christ 1215. before which counsel, the Greek Church had separated
themselves from the Latin, and therefore it being a point of Doctrine, not
received as Catholic, before that division, never since could it be received
in the Greek Church for any Catholic truth. How can it then have countenance
of all Christian Regions and times? Bertram, Berengarius and the Waldenses, in
sundry places by writing and speaking, opposed themselves against it, as
witnesses Bertrams book of the sacrament, the condemnation of Berengarius
opinion about it at Vercellis, and the articles of the Waldenses. Yea a little
before, and in this Pope Innocents time, a certain people about John de
Albines Tolossa called Albigenses, and that in great and mighty multitudes (as
the French Cronicles show) denied real presence of Christ under, or with the
outward elements in this sacrament, in so much, as great wars were raised to
subdue them. But of this matter also I have spoken so much chapter eleventh and
17. that here I need thereof say no more.

Now touching Images or Idols, and the worshipping thereof: I must needs
confess that for their dealing about them, they may very well pretend both
antiquity and universality. For it appears in all stories, and in the
scriptures themselves, that that way, not only all other nations, but also
even the people of the Jews themselves, have been always wonderfully given
to pollute and defile themselves, but withal it appears, that god in his word
written, against no abhominatio^ has cried out, either more often, or more
vehemently, then against this. But amongst Christians, the first that we read
of, that worshipped the image of Jesus, or any other, was Marcellina a filthy
companion of the fantastical heretic Carpocrates, but both in Epiphanius
heresi 27. and in Augustine ad Quod vult deum, we find this, both noted and
condemned amongst other detestable errors of the Carpocratians. This
Carpocrates lived in the beginning of the empire of Antoninus Pius, Anicet then
being Bishop of Rome, about the year of the lord 109. And in Origens time
who died, as Spanhemensis says, in the year of Christ 261. he in his seventh
book to Celsus notes that then the Christians neither suffered images nor
pillars to be worshipped. Likewise in Arnobius, aduersus gentes, who flourished
about the 300. year after Christ, it appears, that the ge^tils objected that,
as a matter of disgrace, against the Christians, that they neither had, nor
worshipped any such. But so far of was it, that the christians the^ thought it
any disgrace unto the^, that Orige^ in the place before quoted says, that the
Jews and Christians hearing the law Exo. 20. not only refuse images of god,
choosing rather to die, then to make or worship any such, adding this as a
reason, that god is invisible and without body. And likewise Clemens
Alexandrinus (who flourished 100. years before Origin) in his exhortation to
the heathen, confesses willingly this their objection to be true, that
Christians had no images that might be discerned by sense, but only by
understanding, because to use that deceitful art, says he, was forbid the^.
Yea and that Christians and their temples might continue still free from them
in Constantines time, in a council held in Spain at Eliberis, can 36. it was
decreed thus, It has pleased us to determine that no pictures should be
suffered in churches, least that which is worshipped or adored should be
painted in walls. Isid. tom. 1. co^ci. And therefore Epiphanius 55. years
after this council, about the year of Christ 390. as it appears in his
Epistle to John of Jerusalem, finding in the entrance of the church at
Anablatha in that John's dioces, the image of a man pictured on a cloth there
ha^ging, pulled it down and tare it asu^der, and writing to the foresaid John
about it (though as he confessed it seemed unto him that it was made for the
picture of Jesus or so^e of the Saints) yet he condemns it as contrary both
to the scriptures and Christian Religion, and therefore persuades him not to
suffer any such thing any more, for it became him to banish such superstition
which was unseemly for the Church of Christ. Yea Lactantius lib. 2 cap. 19. of
his divine institutions says flatly, that their can be no Religion where
there is an image, he lived and flourished in the year 320. And S Augustine who
lived after al these before named, for he died not before the year 430. de
consensu Euangelistarum lib. 1. cap 2. writes that they even deserve to err
which seek Christ and his Apostles, not in books, but in painted walls. Yea
Gregory the great (as they call him) Bishop of Rome (though the^ the painting of
stories for an orname^t of the church was thought tolerable) yet he, lib. 7.
Epist. 109. and lib. 9. Epist. 9. to Serenus, slatly condemns the adoring and
worshipping of images. And whereas by occasion of this tolerating of
historical painting of them, through the superstition and corruption of man's
nature, within short time by little and little the worshipping of the^ grew to be
too much used and liked of many, especially in these Western parts and of the
Bishops of Rome themselves: by the year of Christ 700. the Emperor Leo the
third in a counsel held at Constantinople consisting of 330. Bishops, there
with the consent of that counsel decreed, that they should be quite removed
out of churches and burnt, and severely he punishes those which notwithstanding
would persevere in the worshipping of them. And the same course took his
successor Constantine by another great counsel held their ratifying the
former, and two Emperors more succeeding him, notwithstanding all this while
the Bishops of Rome with stood the^ what they might and decreed as fast for the
retaining and worshipping of the^ as they could, as it appears in Sigebert,
Blo^dus and others. Howbeit though also in the time of Irene and the nonage of
her son Constantine in the east, through the suggestio^ of Therasius Bishop
of Constantinople, they got there a council held at Nicea consisting of three
hundredth and fifty Bishops, where to currie favor again with the Bishops of
Rome (who upon the former occasion, as it appears in Sigebert and others, had
been a shrewd traitorous means to cause these western parts to revolt from
the empire) they decreed according to their humor for the honor of images.
Yet Africa and Asia the greater, could never be brought to receive those canons
there made, yea and that more is, though by that time the Pope had made Charles
the great very much beholding to him in being the means to translate the empire
of the west unto him, so were those canons in this point misliked and
co^tradicted here in these western parts, that a counsel in his time and by his
mea^s, as the Emperor being called at Francford, whereunto came many Bishops
of Italy, France, Germa^y and other cu^tries, yet there eue^ for this point was
that counsel of Nice rejected and condemned as a wicked council, witness both
Regino lib. 2. anno 794. and also one Hinckmare not long after those times
Archbishop of Rhemes writing against another of his name the^ Bishop of Iandune
or Lauedune as some call it, ca. 20. where he for further proof of this to be
true writes that the Bishops their assembled caused a book of purpose to be
written and sent to Rome, co^teining at large a co^futatio^ of all the reasons
used for images at Nicea, which in his young years he saw, and which the
keeper of the Popes library Augustine Steuchus co^fesses to lie there written in
ancient caracters de donatione Constantini lib. 2. cap. 59. nu. 60. And Roger
Houode^ (who lived 400. years ago) in his co^tinuatio^ of Bedeas story in the
year 792. showing how Charles sent the canons of that counsel of Nice hither,
wherein (as he says) it was decreed that images ought to be adored, which the
church of God utterly detesteth, reports that one Albirus here wrote an epistle
against that determination, maruelously grounded upon the scriptures, which he
carried into France (as he says) in the name of our Bishops, by occasion
whereof, the rather it should seem, shortly after Charles thought meet to
call the foresaid counsel at Francford. All these things notwithstanding,
never were images, pillars and crosses more idolatrously decreed to be
worshipped their, nor ever were idols more grossly adored of heretics, or the
very pagans and heathen, then they have been and yet be of superstitious
Papists. For they crouch and kneel unto them, present offerings before them,
they run a pilgrimage unto them, and teach that they are to be worshipped with
that honor, that is due unto them, whose images and monuments they be, though
in an other manner, not for their own sakes, but for theirs whose remembrances
they be. But indeed if in worshipping of them, they did not principally respect
the Images themselves, why should there not be as great devotion, as many
pilgrimages, and as great offerings, presented and yielded to the image of
Christ, Mary, or of any other: as well in one place as in an other? Well,
howsoever they will do wickedly herein, and when they have done, seek to
color the matter, such in truth all the world sees, herein has been their
dealing, that Euthymius in his panoply had never more cause to name the
Armenians, (...), that is, Idolaters to the cross, for their gross and
superstitious worshipping of it, then we have generally to count, and call, the
Romanists flat idolaters for their behavior toward it, and other images also.
Thus then hoping by this, that I have said, concerning this point, that not
only thou may see (goodreader) when, and how, this point of popery first
came in, but how, and by whom, it has been oppugned, but consequently also,
that the Romish church is herein destitute both of scripture, fathers, consent
of Christian regions, and all that she bragges of, let us see if we can show
the like, concerning the other point of forced single life upon the clergy,
which she holds to be so necessary, and holy an ordinance, as that by no means
without deadly sin it may be transgressed.

Even in this, as in the former, if we search the monumentes of antiquity well,
we shall find that they have very ancient heretics, to be their first
fathers and leaders. For the Tacianists commonly called Encratites of their
abstinence from marriage, and certain other things, who began about the year,
one hundred forty two, were great condemners of marriage, as appears in Aug. ad
Quodvult Deum, and in Epiphanius, writing of them, Heresi. 46. After them
spronge up the Manichees, who in like manner were enemies to marriage, but not
so universally as the former, for they permitted it to others, and restrain
only their clergy from it, who^ they calde their elect, as August: witnesses
of them Epist. 74. but indeed as many as would be perfect, and had in any
great reckoning amongst them, they were in any case to abstain from marriage.
And as we find, that these and other heretics, were the forerunners of the
Papists in this point, so we find that Augustine, Epiphanius, and others, that
wrote against them, condemned this for a doctrine of devils in them. But I know
they will reply, that herein we do them wrong in that we resemble them to
these, for these, they say, made this the reason and ground of their doing,
that they held marriage it self, to be an unclean and filthy estate of life,
and therefore not fit for them, that would serve the Lord, to live in. Which,
they say, they do not hold. Indeed, thus it is their fashion, when for any of
their absurd errors, they are pressed with our objections against them, then
somewhat to avoid the extremity of the foil, to set a far better state of
the question, then otherwise, either their common practice or doctrine will
bear: but when they find the chase ended, and themselves by such shifting in
some sort, as they think, to have escaped, then having recovered their breath
again, they fall to their old flat grosnes in the point in their life and
teaching. And even so deal they in this. For their whole and general
practice, makes it most evident, in that they rather tolerate their Priests to
have concubines, to run to the stues, yea and to commit Sodomitry, then to
mary, that indeed they think marriage is more unclean, and defiles their
Priesthood more then all these. And Did. 82. Gratian cites a saying of Pope
Siritius, wherein, in plainer terms he aduouches them that holds, that
ministers of the Gospel may mary, and beget children as the Priests of the
old testament did, to be followers of lusts, and therein teachers of vice.
From which profou^d divinity it came, that the same Siritius would persuade,
that therefore the ministers of the Gospel might not mary, because Saint Paul
said, they that live in the flesh cannot please god, as though to live in the
flesh with Paul, and to live in the state of marriage were all one: which if it
had been so, what meant S. Paul to teach 1. Cor. 7. that he that bestowed his
daughter in marriage did well, that marriage is honorable Heb. 13. and that they
that deny in hypocrisy, the lawfulnes thereof, are such, as have therein given
ear unto doctrines of devils, and thereby show, that their consciences are
burnt, as it were, with an hot iron, and that they are departed from the faith
1. Tim. 4. But they will say perhaps, they are now ashamed of this old
Siritius, and of his doctrine in this point. Doubtless if they be not, there is
just cause why they should, but I have two reasons why I think they are not:
first, because he was Pope of Rome they know; then, because even of late one
Gregory Martin, a great learned man (as they account him) writing against our
English translations Chap. 15. sect. 2. writes of this point even now (as
though that Popes spirit still directed him) flatly, that by marriage their
Priesthood is profaned, and made mere laicall and popular. Wherefore I see
not, but that they are and may worthily still of us herein be said to be, the
right scholars and successors of the former heretics. Howbeit this I must
needs further grant them, that in perusing the writings of ancient fathers
and Cronicles of times, I find eue^ amongst them, that otherwise yet seemed to
be Christians and not heretics, and that of very ancient time, and so from
time to time, that have been favorers and vrgers of single life in ministers.
For I find by that that Clemens Alexandrinus has written of this matter in the
3. and 7. book. Stromat, who flourished within 200. years after Christ, that
the^ some earnestly urged single life, as a life most holy and fit for such.
And I know that in the council of Nice, in Constantines time, it was
attempted, that there should be made a canon, to bind ministers universally
to live single, without the use or company of wives: and that after that
Siritius before spoken of, about the year 390. after him Gregory the first
ann. 600. or thereabout, and after that sundry other Popes, namely and
especially about 1000. years after Christ, and after; were marvelous eger and
busy, by their own authority and decrees of councels summoned by their means,
to establish and ratify this point. Whereupon (as in other cuntreies of these
western parts, to please them withal) herein England many Bishops, as namely
Lancfranke, Du^stane and Anselme, Archbishops of Canterbury, were marvelous
forward in their times to further this device. By mea^s whereof, many decrees
past in smodes and councels, and many great things were attempted and done to
this end. But yet then understand withal (well-beloved) that Clemens in the
places before quoted, confuted and withstoode notably these hypocrites, both by
examples and reasons eue^ now used by us against these their successors: that
one Paphnutius in the counsel of Nice though unmarried himself, did so
effectually withstand that attempt, that it did not there pass: that Siritius
was by a Bishop of Terragon confuted and withstood: and that Gregory the first
upon the finding of 600. childrens heads, after the casting of certain great
ponds near unto the abode of many, enforced to that vow of single life,
revoked his determination (as it appears in an epistle of one Hulricke,
Bishop of Augusta, to Pope Nicolas) upon this reason, that it was better to let
the^ marry, the^ to give occasion of such murder. Further in Hildebrands time,
who after he was Pope was called Gregory the seventh, though we find that he of
all that went before him, was herein most extreme and went furthest, yet
notwithstanding we read in Sigebert, H. Mutius and others, that he and his
decrees in this point were openly and stoutly resisted, not only at Consta^ce
and Mentz in Germany, but also by the Bishops of France, and other cuntreies
both by open preaching and living with their wives, do what he could, and his
successors for a great space. He was the first that bound Bishops and
Archbishops upon their oath to admit none into the ministry, unless first they
would vow a single life: and yet after he had done what he could, and Pascalis
that succeeded him, and Anselme also their chaplein here, to cause that decree
to take place: yet, as our Cronicles show, Gerhardus Archbishop of York, wrote
to that Anselme, that those that came for orders to him would not vow single
life. And howsoever they prevailed in other places before, Polidor says, that
the restraint of their marriages began here first to be attempted ann. 670.
hist. Ang. l. 6. and de inue^toribus reru^ l. 5. and Fabia^ p. 293. writes,
that Bishops and Priests lived here 1000 years together with their wives, no
law being to the contrary. Yea Aue^tinus l 5. historiae Bioru^ says, speaking
of Hildebra^ds time which was 40. years at least after this, that Priests had
wives and begat children as other men. And none of any learning are ignorant,
that al these sturs about this matter notwitstanding, Christian Bishops and
ministers in all other quarters of the world, under the other Patriarchs from
the beginning unto this day, have been, are married and beget children also,
after they are entered into the ministry. This also is as well known of the
learned, that not only particular learned men, and holy fathers, as I noted
before, and others: but also sundry councils, where multitudes of such fathers
have met, have written and decreed to withstand and contrary the going forward
of this Antichristian ordinance. Yea they themselves are not ignorant hereof,
as it appears by sundry things set down both in their text and gloss did.
81.84. and elsewhere in their Canon law. For in the 28. distinction, is noted a
decree of the council of Gangra, which was about 300. years after Christ,
whereby he is by the authority of that council anathematized, that shall for
his marriage put difference betwixt a married ministers ministry, and another,
and therefore abstain from communicating with him, and there also is cited a
canon fathered of the Apostles, whereby he is accursed, that puts away his wife
for Religion sake. And in the sixth general council held at Constantinople,
these things are remembered with other, and therefore there it was decreed,
Tom. Conc. 2. cap. 13. that he shall be deposed, that after that, should go
about to debar Priests, or deacons, either of marriage, or of the use of their
wives, yea after ordination: and there also, further it was enacted, that if
they themselves being ordered, should under pretense of piety put away their
wives, that they shall therefore be excommunicate, and yet this was 680. years
after Christ. Moreover Hierom speaking of his time, says, that then, plurum
sacerdotes habebant matrimonia, that is, most Priests were married, aduersus
Iouinianum, libro. 1. Tertullian himself was a married man, as it appears by
his writing to his wife. To hold that ministers may not mary, Ignatius ad
Philadelphenses says, comes of the devil: And Dionysius Corinthiacus writing
to the Gnosians persuades their Bishop Pinitus, not to impose an unnecessary,
and too heavy a burden of single life, or chastity upon the brethren, as we
read in Eusebius. lib. 4. cap. 22. Lastly, S. Bernard (though he lived about the
year 1120. which was a very corrupt time for this matter,) yet even he, in his
sixty sixth sermon upon the Canticles, thus far concerning this point has
plainly written. Take from the church honorable matrimony, and the bed
undefiled, says he, and thou fillest it with concubine keepers, with
incestuous persons, with such as have unclean issues of seed flowing from
them, with wantons, with Sodomites, and all kind of unclean persons. But when
the bright evidence of these allegations, seem to make them somewhat to bold
down their heads, yet I know they have this shift for their last refuge, that
they deny not, but that such as have been married, or at that present, have
wives, may enter into the ministry, but the^ they must be such, as voluntary
will vow, and perform a single life, and so thence forth abstain: insomuch
that they are so in love with this shift, that they say, and write, as is to be
seen in the Rhemish notes upon the new testament, that Paul's canons, touching
the being of such the husbands of one wife, are so to be understood, and not
so, as that the^, or after once he is minister, he may continue the office of a
husband toward his wife, and confidently they dare and do brag, that we
never read of any other that married, or got children after they entered once
into holy orders. Wherein first the practice of the Greek Church, and all other
Churches, but these in these parts of the world, directly crosses them. Again
let Paul's words in delivering of his canons concerning the qualities that
ministers ought to have, be well considered, and any man shall see, that it is
absurd so to understand him, that he requires that they should be so qualified
only de praeterito for the time past, and not rather especially for the time
present and to come. Seeing they are so confident in this, that none married
ever, or begot children after they were ministers, let them tell me of whom
Peter had his daughter Petronella, of who^ their own Croniclcs speak so much,
had he her not of a lawful wife? And if it be true, that we read, that in the
persecution under Domitian, she was of such flourishing years, that then
Flaccus, a noble Roman county would have had her to wife, the time betwixt that
and Peter's entering upon his Apostleship, being at the least, fifty five years
after Christ, by all likelihoode she was got after he was an Apostle. And
well might it be, for it being evident, that Christ had taught them, that
unless it were for fornication no man should forsake his wife Math. 19. and
therefore that Paul has noted, that the brethren of the Lord and Cephas, did
carry up and down in the execution of their Apostleshippes their wives, being
also converted as well as themselves, and therefore sisters 1. Cor. 7. taking
maintenance for themselves and then as they went, that sometime in that
perigrinatio^ of theirs, in the discharge of their office, this Petronella was
borne. For it being evident by the Gospel of Math. 8. that Peter had a wife,
and by their own stories, that she was a live a little before his death, and
at Rome with him, and that he counted not his Apostleship fornication, and that
neither he would leave his wives company and take other women with him, nor
that she came to Rome rather in the company of other men, the^ of him her own
husband: too too gross and absurd is it with them to think, that he and the
rest of the Apostles that had wives, forsook their wives quite and went up and
down rather after the popish manner accompanied with other women. Their
translating and perverting the order of Paul's words, a woman, a sister, will
not defend their interpretation, for he places his words thus, a sister, a
wife, where in the later place it is absurd, the Greek word being that which
sometime stands generally for a woman, sometime for such a woman as is also a
wife; to take it in the former sense, for then therein there were a needless
tautology, for there is no sister, but she is a woman also. But to leave Peter
with his wife and daughter, what can they say to Socrates, who in his fifth
book and twentieth one Chapter of his story, writes that omnes praesbyteri
illustres, that is, all renouned ministers in the East and Bishops also, if
they will, no law compelling them, may obstaine from their wives, for not a
few of them, whiles they are Bishops, beget children of their lawful wives.
Historiae tripartitae lib. 9. ca. 38. Again the 10. canon of the Ancyran
council testifies of many authe^ticall examples of such as married after holy
orders. Moreover in the days of Julian the apostata we read, that Basilius a
Priest of Ancyra and Eusichius a minister at the least of Cesarea of
Cappadocia, which had lately taken to wife a gentlewoman, and was but then as a
bridegroom, both ended their lives in martyrdom, as writes Zozomene lib. 5.
cap. 10. and Balfamon long after, upon the 10. canon of the counsel of Ancyra,
mentions a decree of Leo the Emperor, whereby it was lawful for the^ within
two years after they were ordered to mary. And who can be persuaded, that we
reading of so many famous Bishops that were married, as namely of Demetrianus
of Antioch, of Spiridion in the council of Nice, and of Gregory Nazianzen and
others, and of infinite children of these Bishops and of others of the
ministry, as we do in all stories: that they got none of these children after
their ministry, or that they left their wives presently upon their entering into
their ministry, especially seeing the stories that tells us they were married and
names us their children, me^tioneth no such thing? Howsoever it were with
these, it evidently appears in his 70. and 127. epistles, that there was one
Synesius an excellent learned man, Bishop of Ptolemais who was not only a
married man, and had children, but that he begot children of his lawful wife,
being and continuing still in the execution of his office. And many more such
examples might be remembered, but these are sufficient to show the impudency of
their confident assertion, that there were never any such: and this which I
have faied, I hope, also is fully sufficient to show not only the vanity of
his brag that made this preface, that all is well with them and countenanced by
fathers, consent of regions etc. but also to answer the demuande or objection
which I took upon me, upon that occasion, to answer in this place,
concerning the beginning and proceeding of popery, and how and by whom it was
resisted. For even, as I have showed, they lack all the countinance they brag
of, for those particular points that I have here spoken of, and have made it
plain, that both their beginning and proceeding has been noted and
withstoode: eue^ so is it an easy matter to deal with them, in all the rest of
the points wherein they and we differ, as ere thou have read this my answer
to Albine through, I hope, I shall make unto thee full demonstration. Wherefore
thou may in the mean time hereby learn, to arm thy self against such
proud brags, as notwithstanding thou have hard the author of this preface
make. For I hope even by this, whatsoever he has said to the contrary, thou
most plainly see, that neither scripture, fathers, consent of regions, nor
continuance of time can prove, that they have, as he brags, the true Gospel,
and the true sense of it, the true Christian Religion, and the true Church and
spouse of Christ, who have in these maine and principal points been controled
and condemned, in all these as I have showed. Whatsoever therefore he infers or
buildes upon this false principle, or whatsoever after, upon the bare supposing
the same to be true, thou shall read John de Albine railingly in his
triumphant and arrogant manner to speak, in disgrace of us, our Church,
ministers or Religion: I hope, I say, thou will esteem of it, as of vain and
foolish words, of proud and yet malicious adversaries. Yet having thus
answered in this sort his preface, somewhat the better to prepare thee to judge
of John de Albine, and my answer unto him: give me leave now to say somewhat
concerning his book and his manner of dealing therein.

Wherefore to proceed, having perused and as thoroughly, as I could, considered
of it (gentle Reader) I protest unto thee upon what occasion soever it has got
such credit amongst men of his own consort, that it has not only of them
been thought worthy to be published in English, but also to be entitled, A
notable discourse against heresies, I have found it, and so shall any
indifferent Reader of this my answer unto it, not able at all to do either
good or harm, but only to such as are very simple, unlearned and silly
ignorant creatures. For the principal questions in hand, either always he
takes for granted, and so never goes about to prove them: or subtlely and
suddenly (seeming to have undertaken the proof of them) he slippeth into
another matter, and therewith goes on lustely, as though he were busy about
the point in controversy, when as indeed he has left that quite, and chosen
to himself some other matter more easy for him to deal in, either not at all
in controversy, or howsoever, to small purpose for the proof of the thing
intended. And yet thus he seems unto himself, and unto his unskillful
Reader, to have won the cause and to carry all before him, when indeed he
has said quite nothing to the purpose, and has busied himself only about
that which was needelesse: which to the end that thou may the better
observe thy self in the rest of his book, I will give thee a taste of, in the
beginning thereof. Understand therefore, that whereas his general and
principal scope is, in his whole discourse, to disgrace our ministry, and the
whole matter thereof, our Religion: that so having once persuaded his Reader,
that we have neither lawful ministers, nor sound Religion, he might
consequently boldly pronounce us to be heretics, and our whole Church
schismatic and heretical. To effect this his purpose, because he soresawe,
that first it were necessary that he should justify their own ministry and
Religion, before he should so call ours into question: first he labors
about that in the first eight Chapters, and then strives about the other in
the rest. But mark now, I beseech thee, how he makes his entry into this so
weighty and necessary a point. Whereas indeed out of the fifth to the Hebrews
we object (as he confesses) that their calling to their Priesthood and
Prelacies cannot be of God, because their very offices themselves were never of
Gods own ordinance, but only of man's own devising: though to answer this
objection, every man might see, and he himself saw (as it appears by his own
words ca. 1.) that it was most necessary for him first to have proved, that
their offices were of Gods institution, and not of man's invention only, like a
cunning Sophister, he slippes from that, promising after in some other place
to prove it, which yet though it stood him in this his discourse never so much
upon, he never so much as once remembers or mentions again. And therefore
thus only supposing and taking this for granted, that their Priesthood and
Prelacies are of God (which he knows we will never grant them) he takes upon
him to prove only their coming thereunto to be lawful, which he proves as
slenderly also. For to prove it, he only says, that they come to them by
the ordinary way, by right succession of Bishops and pastors, continuing in
one Catholic faith, down from Christ to this present time: thus childishly
begging in one piece of one short sentence these four great points (all which
in this case are betwixt us and them in question) namely, that their officers
all of them, come to their rooms by the ordinary way, that they have right
succession, right Bishops and pastors, and sound and Apostolic doctrine.
And yet though he knew well enough, that we constantly deny all these, yet to
prove that they come lawfully to their offices, he only nakedly and barely
affirms them, as though he presumed, that he was and should be such a
Pythagoras, in the conceit of all his Readers, that for him once to say it,
were enough and enough again. For by and by after that thus he had only
said, having used neither proof nor color of proof to back his saying, he
slippeth into another matter, not yet called in question: Whither a visible,
known, and always a demonstrable, personal, and local succession of Bishops
and pastors, be necessary for the perpetual continuance of the Church, and
preservation of the truth therein? And thus he windeth from matter to matter,
leaving always that unproven, which he had most need to have proved,
laboring and sweating continually about the proof of that, which though it
were granted him, yet he might well enough loose his cause. As for example,
having entered into the foresaid matter in manner before said, in 3. or 4. whole
Chapters following, he shows how the truth is continued in the Church by
succession of pastors, how profitable their ministry is, to bring men to, and
to settle them in the truth, that the ancient trode^ way by Christ's sheep,
down from Christ to this day, that the ancient Catholic faith, that the
faith which in Irenaeus and Augustines time was held and taught at Rome, and
had unto their times been continued from Christ by succession of Bishops and
pastors, is the way and faith that a Catholic man must live and die in,
whosoever says to the contrary. In which propositions, no marvel though he
go on roundly, for he has wind and weather with him, and none of us
gainesaies him; yea these things being rightly understood, we constantly
affirm and teach the same But these things being all granted him, what is he
nearer his cause, seeing as yet all the sort of them never could, nor shall be
able to prove, that their pastors succeed Christ, his Apostles, or the ancient
holy Bishops and pastors, that were before Irenaeus and Avgustines time, in
teaching the same doctrine that they taught? But herein is his popish subtlely,
that standing thus upon these points, he would have his Reader grant him all
these: that their succession of Priests and Bishops is that succession of
pastors, so profitable for the continuance of the truth and Church: that
their Romish Religion that now is, is that ancient way that Christ's sheep have
always trod, and so the ancient Catholic Religion which in Irenaeus and
Augustines time, they and the holy pastors and Bishops at Rome and else where
had, soundly succeeding one another from the Apostles, continued in unto that
time; which are things whereof not one, the Pope and all his confederates shall
ever be able indeed to prove: and therefore it seems John de Albine thought
it good policy, seeing these things could be got no otherwise, to try whether
he could get them thus by flat begging of them. And it seems also, that he
presumed, that he should come only to such liberal men's doors, that all
these should be granted and given him, even at the very first asking: for
always after he behaues himself in such sort, as that without all
peradventure he had them all granted him. Only a little in his thirty seventh
Chapter, belike somewhat growing ashamed of his shameless begging all the while
before, he begins to make show, that if men should be so hard hearted, as to
deny him, that their pastors, doctrine and Church are sound and Catholic,
that he is able to prove them so to be, whither such will or no. And yet even
there, when all comes to all (though indeed he brag, that he could and
would, but for being too tedious to his Reader, justify the rest of their
doctrine, by the testimony of a number of doctors, holy confessors and
martyrs) he only by mustering of a sort of dumb doctors upon the stage,
makes his poor Reader believe, that in the places quoted by him, they speak
directly to justify their ceremonies, their Auricular Confession, prayer for
the dead and to the dead, as though these were the principal matters in
controversy betwixt them and us. But doubtless he knew well enough, that no one
of his Readers amongst an hundred, would and could turn the places, and so try
whither the men he name, make there so for him or no. For otherwise, for shame
he would not have quoted them so negligently, falsely and corruptly, as when I
come to that place, I shall show thee he has. These things considered
(Christian Reader) thou must be very simple and have before hand thy mind
wholly forestalled with his false principles, or else he shall win with thee
little credit to his cause, or disgrace to ours. Howbeit, seeing both his whole
drift, and his publishers in his preface, was (as it evidently thereby
appears) under the odious names of heretics and schismatiques, to disgrace
us and the truth that we profess (as though it were not once to be called in
question, whither they and their crew, were the only sound Catholics and
Christians in the world) before I let thee proceed, and come to the view of
his declamation made to that end, and of my answer thereunto: this upon good
and most clear ground I protest unto thee and assure thee, what brags soever
he, or any other of his fellows make, of their popish and Romish Religion, that
now is prosessed amongst them: besides all other things that can or may be
said against it, it is such a Religion, and their Church the vpholder thereof
such a dame, as is the very nurse and baude of monstrous impiety, as is
intolerably injurious to the right of the good estates of all Christian Princes
and their people; and as lastly (howsoever it may seem to carry a show of
holiness) it is not so, but indeed cunningly under the color thereof, aymeth
at no mark more, then to advance the pride, pomp, and gain of her lovers.
The first is evident, in that their doctrine of their Popes supermacy is such,
as that for money he may pardon any sin (as their practice teaches) either
committed, or to be committed: yea their very Hedge-priestes by the authority
of the power of absolution given unto them, upon penance done, how light
soever, if it so seem good unto them, have and do take upon them
marueilously, that way to breed immunity and impunity, by their absoluing whom
and for what they list. Their doctrine also of satisfaction for sin, in that
they allow sprinkling of holy water, going on pilgrimage, doing of this
outward trifling thing, or that, which easily may be done of any carnal man,
to be good satisfactory meane^ to answer God withal for their sins: how can
it be otherwise but the people measuring and judging of sin according
thereunto, must needs think sin, that can be satisfied for so easily and
lightly, to be but a slight matter. Their doctrine also of ear shrist, is
likewise a means to acquaint their single priests, with all the lewd huswiues
in their parishees, and so an acquainting of them, with the tricks and ways
how, and the parties with whom, they may commit filthiness. Yea their forced
single life (as experience notoriously has taught) has infected earth and
air, with monstrous uncleanness of the flesh, both inward and outward,
natural and unnatural, and with infinite murders of poor infantes, the
better still to hide their iniquity. And while they teach that simple
fornication is not so ill in their clergy, as to use a lawful wife, that the
first inward motions to sin or concupiscence not consented unto, be no
sins, that many sins even for their own littlenes are venial, and not
worthy of damnation: they make men secure for these, and so the fitter and
bolder to go on in the rest. Their doctrine and practice of dispe^sations, and
pardons for money, for clergy and people almost for any thing, is, and must
needs be, the root and fountain of wonderful many abominations. Their
doctrine of sanctuaries, privileges, exemptio^s, and immunities of their
clergy and others, are very great occasions of sin and impiety. Lastly, the
ambition, pride, tyranny, pomp, gluttony, wantonness and insatiable covetousness
of their Popes, Cardinals and Prelates, makes al, whom they bewich with their
religion, to think, that they are not to be blamed, if in these things they
imitate then their holy fathers: and marueilously are they encouraged to
continue and spend their days in these, and in all other sins, when as by
their doctrine they are put in hope, if they die (believing blindly as the
church believes, providing of their goods, which they must needs leave behind
them, somewhat liberally, that masses, dirges and trentals may be said and song
for them, and that such other things done as the^ their ghostly father shall
appoint them) that in the end they shall do well enough, how loosely and
lewdly soever otherwise they lived before.

The second point also, is many ways clear and apparent. For first by their
doctrine of their Popes supremacy, where it is in the full force, Emperors,
Kings and Queens, are thereby made and marde at their pleasure: they must not
think scorn of most base service and subjection to them, their subjects
shall be bound to pay them tribute no longer, or to yield them any manner of
other duty, further then they list: yea it shall be lawful for them, to
conspire against their natural Princes, and by any means they can, to devise
to deprive the^ both of their lives and kingdom, if so the Pope command them.
Nay not only upon the Popes commandment and pardon, shall this of them be
counted lawful and meritorious: but if any of his own motion undertake such
a thing, of a devout mind to his holmes and religion, the encouragement and
absolution of every Mass Priest shall be sufficient, to justify the action,
and to cause the party, that has done it, to be canonized a Saint for his
labor. Further for the establishing of this archpiller of popery, their Popes
supremacy, Princes are deprived of the election of their Prelates, and they are
by oath so obliged to the Pope, and so freed from the jurisdiction of their
lawful Prince, that they may and dare beard their Princes: and howsoever they
will take liberty to enjoy great promotions under them, yet in effect they are
no subjects unto them, but rather altogether stand at the devotion of this
foreign Potentate. Secondly, by the pretended right of this their supremacy,
for the better maintenance of the swelling pomp thereof, to the great
weakening of Christian states, they have taken upon the^, and yet do, when they
may be suffered, by their annates, Peeter-pence, Paul-fees, first fruits,
tenths, lones, oppressions, taxations, impositions, and infinite such other
devises, savoring of nothing else, but of insatiable covetousness, to co^uey
away the treasure, riches, and wealth of every country, from out of it to Rome.
And by this their supremacy, they have first weakened, after rent in two, and
lastly brought in effect to nothing, the glorious Roman Empire, that so the
better they might have room to grow up in, and that for their sins in the
justice of God, Christendom might the more easily become a pray to the Turk.
Thirdly, by the devise of their Auricular Confession they have, and may have,
most perfect intelligence of the secrets of all states where they have to do,
then which can any thing in these outward things be more dangerous, to the
safe and good estate of Princes? Fourthly, by the force of single life, they
have caused priuies, and ponds, and such other by corners to swallowe up and
destroy, in every Christian kingdom where they ruled, as many infants, as
might, being grown to be men, have been able, in the field, to defend there
Prince and country against all the enemies thereof: which what a vveakning to
Christian Princes and their kingdoms it has been, who sees not? These
things therefore considered, it is to be marueiled, that any Christian state,
can or will tolerate, either them, or their religion in it.

And as for the last point, that so their religion might fit the title
appointed it by the Spirit of God, that is, that indeed it might prove it
self to be, 2 Thessalonians. 2.
a very mystery of iniquity, even throughout under the show of holiness and
devotion, they alvvaies have hid, nourished, and maintained gross iniquity,
and have aimed at nothing more, then at their own pomp and advantage. For
their doctrines of free will, of man's ableness to keep and over keep the
law of God, of merits and satisfaction for our selves or others alive or dead,
of the mediation of Saints or Angels: and their doctrines, that the Pope cannot
err, that he has such supremacy as they give him, and that the scriptures
have their sense and authority from his allowance thereof, howsoever they paint
these things with the goodly shows of care to provoke and encourage men to
good works, and with devotion to Saint Peter and the mother church: yet who is
so simple or weak sighted, but that through these colors, he may and does
discern God and his son Christ blasphemously robbed of that which is their
right, man to be occasioned to swell with a conceyt of his own ability: and
that the final mark, that all this te^ds unto, is, by the selling of other
folks overplus merits and satisfactions under, and in the names of pardons, to
enrich the Pope and his Priests, and by the rest to set up themselves in the
very seat of Antichrist? They pretend the glory of Christ, and of Peter, and
Paul, in the doctrine of the supremacy: but it is the feeding of their own
pompous and tyra^nous ambition, that in truth they seek in it. In their
swarms of Monkeries and Frieries they pretend wilful poverty, and an utter
forsaking of the world, and yet all the world sees, that to maintain
themselves therein in idleness, belly-cheare, and al kind of worldly and carnal
pleasure, they had houses like Princes, and reue^nues and maintenaunces, like
great Lords of the world. They have pretended, that they would have
Emperors and Kings in no case to give Bishoprics and benefices, to prevent
Simony: whereas their practice has made it clear, that their Popes have taken
that into their own hands, but to make the clergy more to stand at their
devotion, and less at their Princes, and that they and theirs might use that
occupation and trade of Simony, as most proper unto themselves. They pretend
charity and compassion in their pardons and indulgences, devotion and care to
relieve souls by their masses, dirges, and trentals, and an intent to fray me^
from sin by their doctrine of Purgatory: but every man sees, that it is
only money, or money worth, that hereby they fish for. The unity of the church
is pretended, when they seek to establish most their own tyranny: the honor
and glory of the church (they say) they seek, when it is most plain, that it
is only their own glory and honor they care for. In the maintenance of
their doctrine of transubstantiation, they would seem marvelous devout and
religious in urging of the letter, and in captiuing their own senses and
reason thereunto, whereas indeed that course they take, that so their Priests
may grovve to honor and wealth, vvhiles thereby the people are made believe,
that they can make and offer their redeemer, for the salvation of quick and
dead. Devotion to the Saints they pretend in teaching, that they are to be
prayed unto and worshipped, but therein their devotion is like unto Demetrius
his for Diana of Ephesus: for if it were not for the gaynes they get by
offerings unto their shrynes, they would not be so hoate therein. Their
doctrine of penance caries a show of mortification, but it is but thereby to
triumph over the people at their pleasures, and in the end to make a gain by
changing their penance, or by making them to believe, that they will relieve
them by their prayers, pardons, and masses. To conclude, I dare be bold to
say, that there is never a proper point of popery, but the practice and
profession of it would quickly grow very cold, if that the maintenance thereof
made not, either directly to advance their wordly credit with their followers,
or their lucre and commodity. And therefore thou may see even by this
(whatsoever they brag of their Church and Religion) that even for these three
reasons, they, both of every wise state, and consequently also of thy self
(Christian Reader) ought to be shunned and avoided. These things then, that I
have said, well considered and remembered, I will now no longer detain thee
from taking a view of that, which (this notwithstanding) Albine has written,
either in the defense of this his Religion, or to the disgrace of ours:
requesting only this at thy hands, that as thou go, thou would take the
pains without partiality, to read and confer that, which I have written to
answer him withal, Chapter by Chapter with his book. And thus hoping that
thou will do, I commend thee and thy study therein, to the direction and good
protection of God, and my self unto thy hearty prayers unto him, in my behalf.

Thine in the Lord, THOMAS SPARK.

A Notable discourse, plainly and truly discussing, who be the right
ministers of the Catholic Church: written against Calvin and his disciples, by
one Master John de Albine, called de Seres, Archdeacon of Tolossa in France.
Duaci. per Iohannem Bellerum. 1575.
The first Chapter.
CALVIN your Patriarch does lay to our charge a great and an outrageous
boldness, saying (according to his opinion) that we have introduced or taken
in hand the ministry of Jesus Christ, without being called to it by him that
did institute Aaron in the said estate. And because that he himself can
better then I express his complaint or accusation, I think it best to set
forth his own writings, which, according to his disciples opinions, are of
great force and virtue. His words, as you may read, are these. Seeing that the
Papists hear S. Paul say, Jn his book of Jnsti. cap. 18. Art. 58. Hebr. 5.
that no person ought to take upon him, or usurp the name and the honor of
Priesthood, but he that is called to it as Aaron was. And that Jesus Christ
took it not upon himself, but did obey the vocation of his father, either
they ought to show, that God is the Author and institutour of their priesthood,
or else they must confess, that they are not called of God, seeing that of
their own boldenes they have taken it in hand.

These are Caluins words, by the which the reader may gather, that Calvin does
enjoin us to render him an accoumpt of our vocation. And although that it be
so, L Si quis ad si, ad leg. Jul. de nil. publ. etc.
that by the Civil law one ought to try the right of the possession, before he
come to demand it, and the spoil (as we are to him and his fellows, as
touching our Temples and reue^nues in many places) ought to be restored again
before the suite proceed: Yet, releasing this that the law does allow us, we
are content to answer to his demand: adding this request thereto, that both
you that are his disciples, and he, do make ready your papers to answer us
the like as touching yours. But before I proceed in mine answer (under
correction of a man that thinks to have such good eyes) me seems, that his
argument is but very simple, to say, that if we cannot show, that God is the
author of our Priesthood, that we should be constrained to confess, that it
is not of God, Sophistry in taking that as spoken of your manner of calling to
your Priesthood, which he spoke of the Priesthood it self. Numb. 16. 2.
Pa^al. 26.
seeing that without being called, we take it upon us. For, what reason is
there, I pray you, in this? for although it were so, that of our own private
power and authority, without being called, we should take it upon us: it
should not follow by that, that it is not of God. For by that reason one might
say, that God was not the author of the priesthood of Aaron, seeing that
Dathan, Abyron, and Ozias took it upon them of their own boldness; the which
is not true. And as touching this, that he says, that our order of Priesthood
is not of God, we will prove that false in But that place you find not in this
book.
some other place: but at this time, we must treat of our vocation, to answer
him and his accomplices, how and by what virtue we exercise our ministry.

This I deny, that you come to your calling in this sort, for neither is there
right succession amongst your Bishops and Pastors, nor continuance in that
truth which yet you say only and never prove.
We are called to this estate, according to the ordinary way: that is to say,
by the right succession of Bishops and Pastors, and by the continuance of one
Catholic faith, derived from the Apostles to our days, without the
interruption of it universally: That truth indeed has always continued, and
shall by the means of faithful teachers: but neither with you, nor by means
of your teachers, is at all proved by there places. Math. 5. Ephesians. 4.
for in diverse places of the world it has been ever clear and certain,
manifestly shining like the light set on the table, to give light to all those
of the house, and not under the bushel, to be shadowed with darkness. Saint
Paul, Peruse the place and you shall find, that though Paul reckon up there
those ministeries which should fully be sufficient for the Church, yet he once
me^tioneth not your gretest Prelac^es. Howsoever therefore it may be as you hold
they be, necessary and most necessary for the pomp of your Church, that so the
better she might answer her pattern, Apoc 17. yet thereby we may see Christ's
Church shall and may grow to her perfection and yet never be acqua^nted with
them.
after that he had recited by order the Ecclesiastical Hierarchy, I mean, of
the Apostles, Prophets and Eua^gelists, he does declare at the last the cause
why they were instituted, being for the edification of the mistical body of
Christ, the which is the Catholic Church, until (says he) that in the unity
of faith we go to meet him. He takes his similitude of many that come from
diverse ways, and meet all in one way. Indeed he plainly there teaches,
tha^ there shall be always to that end, teachers in he Church, but he
says not, that they shall so succeed one another either in person or place,
a^ you would ^eene thereupon to build. For no such line of continual, local
or personal succession, from his time to this day, can be produced.
And thus he means, that the spiritual edification of the Church, ordained of
Bishops, Pastors and Doctors, shall endure, until that the Gospel be
preached through all nations. By the effect of the which Gospel, both French,
Spanish, English, Greek, Persian, Arabian, Latins, and Barbares, with many
other nations which were too iedi^^ to name, have met together, having of great
antiquity all one kind of Catholic faith, by the Apostles and their
successors for ever. As the some of God, before he suffered, did attain and
arrive to the perfection of his age: even so, his mystical body of the Church
shall continue in this world, until it be perfect in his members, and that the
number of the chosen be accomplished. And even as a material building cannot
be perfectly achieved without We see and hear of many great and goodly
buildings in the end perfited, in building whereof there have been many and
sometimes long intermission.
continuance of workmen and masons: even so the spiritual building of the
Church cannot be achieved, without the succession of Bi^^ops and Pastors,
preaching, or causing the word of God to be preached, which is the very
spiritual building, the which has been ever common and visible in the Church,
according to the prophecy of Esaias. Sap. ^1. say you, well hit: the place is in
Esaias 62.
Sap. 61. ^ho meaning to declare the care that God takes as touching the
pre^eruation of his Church, he did say, as it were representing the state of
Jerusalem. I have established and ordained But few such have been in your
time of succession, these many years.
watchmen upon he walls, the which shall never hold their peace, neither day
^or night. These watchmen are those, that have annou^ced to us our sal^ation:
They are the trumpets of Jesus Christ, which never have left their ^ounding in
the true Church of God, from the Apostles time unto this ^resent day.

AN ANSWER TO MASTER JOHN de Albines discourse against heresies, called and
accounted by his friends, A notable discourse to that purpose; made by Thomas
Spark, Pastor of Blechley in the county of Buck..1591.
Chapter first.
CALVIN we esteem and account of, as of a rare and singular minister of
Christ, and his writings (as they well deserve) we think reverently of; and
you have tried them to be of great force and power, to shake the very grounds
and pillars of your Babilonical building: but our Patriarch we neither account
nor call him, though you in your third word take it, and therefore set it down
for granted that we do. It seems, you think scorn, that he should charge
your Priesthood not to be of God, and so to call you to an account of your
vocation. Indeed I cannot blame you, that it grieueth you, yt that should be
called into question, seeing it is a thing you have bragged on so long, and
have gained by (at the hands of the blind and ignorant) both al ye credit and
wealth you have, especially seeing also, that what words soever you use to
countenance the matter, yet you shall never be able to justify it. Howbeit, as
though not only you were able to answer Calvin to the full in this point: but
also as though there were either some great impiety, or vanity (at the least)
in his words, you recite them twice, admonishing your Reader, that they are his
words. Be it that they be so, what have you said either to argue the least
folly in the^, or to justify your vocation in such sort, as therein he proves
you must, or else it cannot be of God? First you would prove Calvin in these
words to offer you wrong, in that out of the 5 to the Hebr. he gathers, that
unless you can prove God to be the author of your vocation, it cannot be of
God: because the Civil law prescribes, that one should prove his right of
possession, before he demand it, and that he should restore the spoil,
before the suit proceed. But who sees not, that that which he alleges out
of the 5 to the Hebr. does more justify his demand, that either you must
show, that god is the author of your Priesthood, or else confess, that you
are not called of God: then any thing that you have noted out of the Civil
law, can prove, that he offers you any wrong in calling for this at your
hands. Because you are an Archdeacon, it should seem, that you would feign
that men should think (to the end you may be judged the fitter man to execute
your office) that you have some skill in the Civil law, in that you are thus
ready, even at the first to cite it. For to small force else it serves, for
neither is your axiom so general, but that it notwithstanding rightly
understood, a man may lawfully and orderly proceed, and yet first demand
his right to possession, and after timely enough prove his demand thereunto
to be both honest and just: neither does Calvin or any of us claim any right
of possession of your massing Priesthood, that you need bid us first prove
our right thereunto. For we detest it as a thing Antichristian and utterly
unlawful, and we hold that no sound Christian will ever plead for any right
thereunto. And as for the spoil of your temples and reuenneues, that you would
have us to restore before the suite betwixt us proceed: we say again, that
both law and reason tesseth you, that before you should so peremptorily call
for restitution, you should prove the wrong. Which, neither you, nor none of
your side (though to bewray what grieueth you most, namely the parting away
from your fat morsels, unless your bare accusation were straight a conviction)
have yet once proved against us, and therefore the action may proceed well
enough against you, for any thing, that your Civil law can help you. We are in
possession (we grant) of Churches and reuennues, that heretofore you held in
sundry places, but herein we have not wronged you at al, howsoever you count
it a spoiling of you. For first, through the mercy of God to his Church, and of
his justice toward you (your sins being grown ripe) by the light of his word,
he made it appear, that you were wrong withholders of these things, in that
they being founded, and given for the maintenance of a holy Ministry, for ye
sound feeding of peoples souls, you used the^ for the support of an
Antichristian Ministry, to poison the souls of men with his deuilish doctrine
and vsages: and therefore, God secondly stirred up the hearts of Princes, and
Christian magistrates, orderly to dispossess you thereof, and to give them
unto such, as would use the^ better. Yea so far of is it, that either they or
we ca^ justly be said herein to have done you any wrong, or spoiled you, that
we are able to prove, yt you getting, and keeping them in your hands, for the
cause aforesaid, most sacrilegiously spoiled ye true Church of her reue^nues,
converting them to the maintenance of the service of Antichrist, to the most
dangerous robbing of the peoples souls, of the food of life due unto them
therefore, and for this cause you had wrong, that you were let alone with the
possession of them so long as you were.

Now, whereas before you will proceed to answer Caluins demand, as a sharp
Logician, you say, his argument seems unto you very simple, to say, that if
you cannot show, that God is the author of your Priesthood, then you must
confess, that it is not of God, seeing that without being called, you take it
upon you. In reciting thus his words, you wilfully alter them, and frame his
argument otherwise, then he made it. For he said not (you your self being
witness in setting down his words before) seeing that without being called ye
take it upon you, but seeing of their own boldness (says he, speaking of you)
they have taken it in hand (having therein relation to the Priesthood it self)
which if you cannot prove (as you never shall) to be instituted of God, it must
needs follow, not only, that it is not of God, but yt you have taken it in hand
of your own boldness, as he says, and so by most necessary consequent, your
calling cannot be of God. So yt he reasons not, from your running into your
priesthood of your selves without a calling (as by reciting his argument,
altering his words as I have said, you would seem to understand him) to prove
your Priesthood not to be of God: but from the unlawfulness of your Priesthood
it self. For he was not so simple (I warrant you) but he knew as well as you,
that many have, do and will hereafter intrude themselves, upon an office of
Gods own ordinance: and that, notwtsta^ding their lack of lawful calling
thereu^to, the office yet remains holy, lawful and good. And therefore, he
most plainly labors, to prove your popish calling to your Priesthood
unlawful, whatsoever you make of your ordinary calling thereu^to, because the
Priesthood it self is not of God, and therefore such a thing, as you have
taken in hand of your own heads, what ordinary calling soever by man you have
thereu^to. And therefore, as plainly as may be, he tells you, by warrant of
the 5. to the He. that either you must show, that God is the author and
institutour of your Priesthood, or else you must confess, that it is not of
God, but a thing taken in hand, or devised o^ your own, boldness. And this to
have been his purpose and drift, unless your eyes be very bad, and your wits
yet worse, you could not choose but perceive. But this argument (belike) was to
strong for you, and therefore (as in the like case, it is a common trick with
the men of your faction) you thought best to frame you another weak enough,
and so fit for your strength; which whiles you have labored to confute, you
have fought but with your own shadow, and slain a child of your own
begetting. Your examples therefore of Datha^, Abira^ and Ozias, you may take
ho^e again, and keep the^ in store, until you have more need of the^. In the
mean time remember, yt though you have answered your own argument, yet
Caluins stands in his full force still against you. For though it follow not,
you have entruded your selves, therefore the office, whereupon you have
intruded, is not of God, because these, which you named, intruded themselves
upon the lawful Priesthood of Aaron: yet I hope how simple soever (and
worthily) this argument of your own framing seemed unto you, that you will
grant, that there is both strength and force in this, which is Caluins indeed:
your Priesthood it self is but a bare ordinance, and devise of man, and has
not God for the author thereof; therefore whatsoever your calling be
thereunto, it is unlawful, and not of God. If you would not have this
conclusion verified of your calling, it is not enough for you to say, that you
came to your Priesthood according to the ordinary way: nay it is not enough,
to prove it, which yet you go not about; for commonly not only for this, but
for all things else of importance through your book, your bold assertion is
your only proof. For if the office it self be not of God, but a plant,
which the heavenly father has not planted, then howsoever you come unto it,
your calling cannot be of God. A vain thing therefore is it in you, here or
any where else, to spend words and time to show, how you attain your
Priesthood, having not any where first proved, the Priesthood it self to be
of God. That is the thing, that Calvin tells you you must show, or else you
must confess your calling is not of God, seeing it is but to an office, of your
own boldness devised and taken in hand. And yet this being a thing, which (to
justify your calling) it stood you upon most, and in the best manner you could,
to have proved, yea without the proof whereof, all that ever you have said, or
can say of never so ordinary a coming thereunto, is merely vain and
frivolous: yet you say, you will not meddle with it here at this time, but you
put it of to another place, not once finding time and place in this your
discourse to speak a word of it again. Wherein at the first entrance, in the
eyes of the wise, you have given your Priesthood a greater wound, then all that
you have said, concerning the lawfulnes of your vocation thereu^to, can ever
heal up again. For this thing being the most pertinent, and material thing,
that could be (your drift and purpose in this discourse considered) for you to
have labored about, as about the soul of your cause, to give all the rest
life: how could you persuade your self, but that in thus shifting of this,
though so thrust upon you by your own citing of Caluins words, but that every
one would straight judge, yt you did it not, because you had no will to have
proved it, but because you feared, that your skill would not serve you
substa^tially to do it? And therefore in policy you thought it more wisdo^e,
thus to pass it over, as though you could say enough thereof if you list,
then by entering into it, to lay open your weakness to your friends, in so great
a matter, at your first entrance into your book.

Howsoever you have thought it the safest way in this place, to say nothing
hereof, and for saving your credit to make show, as though you would say enough
in some other: in ye mean time, eue^ here, the nature of your popish Priesthood
considered, I confidentlie aduouch, that neither you, nor all you together, can
ever prove indeed, that it is of God. For the Scripture teaches us, that
Christ has an everlasting Priesthood, and that he executed that office here,
and does still there, where he is, for his Church so perfectly, that he has
this prerogative, that he needs no successors to continue his office, as ye
Priests of Aaron had, nor any other either to offer any new, or to iterate
that sacrifice, which he offered himself for the salvation of man, he has
offered one so perfect, and so perfectly once for all: He. 7.23.24. and 10, 10.
etc. which prerogatives ye massing Priesthood robs him of, first, in that
they will be his successors, in the office of Priesthood: and the^, in that
they take upon the^, to offer him again in sacrifice to his father, for the
sins (as they say) both of the quick and dead: and most blasphemously make
themselves, in their offering him again to his father, mediators betwixt him
and his father, praying him (as it appears in there masse-book) that he would
favorably look upon, and receive those hoasts, which they there offer unto
him, for the souls of such and such. Ex missa pro defunctis, ex secretis.
Werefore, I dare be bold to say, that so far of is it, that their Priesthood
is of Gods ordinance, that most certainly it is of Satan's own devising, and
is most injurious to the death and passion of Christ, and therefore
Antichristian. Howbeit, seeing you have left Caluins assertion, that it is not
of God; standing without any refutation, and so are contented (until you better
advise your self, what to say against it, to let it stand still) in the mean
season to render us account, of your coming unto it, upon condition, that we
will make ready our papers, when you have answered us, to answer you, how we
come by our Ministry: I am content to accept of this your condition, and so to
hear first, what you can say, for the justifying of your vocation, and after
when and where you call for it, to yield you an account of ours. But then in the
mean time I must put you in mind, and pray the gentle reader to mark it,
that for any thing you have said yet, Caluins assertion against your office of
Priesthood it self, that it is not of God, stands in full force.

You write, that you are called to this estate according to the ordinary way,
that is (say you) by the right succession of Bishops and pastors, and by ye
co^tinua^ce of one catholic faith, derived from ye Apostles to our days,
without ye interruption of it universally. This you say indeed, but what have
you either here, or else where in this your notable discourse (for so either you
or your friends call it) brought us to prove this? you cite here Mat. 5. Ephesians. 4.
and a place out of Esaias, with is there Cap. 62.6. (though in your book it be
quoted Sap. 61.) but neither any of these, nor al these together do prove your
saying to be true. For taking the places in your own se^ce, ye things thereby
proved are only these, first, yt the true Catholic faith has always so
shined, yt it has given light at al times in one place or other to the^ within
the house, yt is, yt be wtin the true Catholic Church and to such as be near
thereu^to and within the sight thereof: and that Christ will have continually
even until his second coming, and until his Church be grown to her full
perfection, his truth continued in his Church, by faithful Pastors and
Ministers: and to this end serves also (in your opinion) your similitude
taken from a material building, which cannot be perfected without continuance
of workmen until it be done: which yet caryeth with it a dissimilitude, even
in the thing wherein you resemble it unto the Church. For we see by daily
experience, that in material buildings, if they be great, there are often times
great and many interruptions, and ceasings of the workmen, and yet in the end
the building well enough prefected. But be it that these places prove these
things, and that your unapt similitude has no unfitness in it, what is all this
to the purpose, does it hereupon follow, that you come to your offices of
Priests and Bishops as you have said? Because Christ has always and will to
the end preserve and continue the light of his truth, by the faithful
ministry of some in his church (which is a thing which we always have
consta^tly and firmly believed to be true, because he has had, has, and will
ever unto the end have, a holy catholic Church, against which the gates of
hell neither has at any time, does, nor ever shall, universally prevail)
shall it hereupon follow, that therefore your Priests and Bishops are the me^,
whom Christ has always and yet does use to this end? or that amongst the^,
there has always been the right succession in one Catholic faith? Their is
none so simple, but he may easily see, that there is no necessary coherence
betwixt this antecedent and consequent. For Christ might have, and indeed has
had (as I show after in my fourth chapter) by who^ effectually from time to
time, he has both continued his Church and his truth therein, though your
Bishops and Priests have a long time showed themselves his most deadly
Antichristian enemies, in opposing themselves with main and might against both
his Church and truth. The matter you have undertaken to show us is, by what
right you exercise your ministry, or how you were called to that estate: for
that, as a thing more easy, you rather have chosen to do, then to prove your
office of Priesthood it self to be of God, though indeed this be the more
material point, and which you should rather have taken upon you to prove: but
that it seems, like a prudent man, you tendered more your own credit, which
you foresaw, was like to take a foil, if you should have attempted to do
this, which by no color or show of sound reason you could, then the credit of
your cause, wc you could not but foresee, must needs lie in the dust, this
being left unproven, whatsoever you should say concerning the other. But seeing
whatsoever become of your cause, it has pleased you, like a wise man, to slip
from under this burden, which was to heavy for you, and now yt only thing yt we
must expect at your hands at this time, is, to show that your manner of coming
unto them yet is honest, good and lawful: I pray you, in good earnest, consider
and weigh with me a little, what you have said to prove this. Al you say, is
(as I noted before) yt you are called by ye ordinary way thereu^to, that is, as
you expound your self, by the right succession of Bishops and pastors, and by
the continuance of one Catholic faith, derived from the Apostles to our days,
without interruptio^ of it universally: nothing at al you have added, that so
much as sauoreth of any proof of any one point of this your assertion, and
therefore seeing your word, is, nor ought to be of more credit with us, then the
bare partial word of an adversary in his own case, your friends might have
thought themselves even as much beholden to you, if you had as well given over
the taking in hand, to prove their manner of coming to their offices to be of
God, as you have, to prove the offices themselves to be of his ordinance. If
you had me^t or at least could in earnest have proved the thing you undertook,
you should have first made it appear, what is requisite by Gods ordinance in
the lawful outward calling of the ministers of his Church, and then have
showed us, yt your Popes, Cardinals, Bishops and priests have always and do
still so come by their offices: but this was to have dealt too plainly, and in
following of this course, you knew well enough, you should be enforced too too
openly to betray the badnes of your cause. For who is there of any learning and
reading, but he knows, that the ordinary way whereby these your officers have
come now these many 100 years to their rooms, is as far differing from the
ordinary way appointed by Christ for his ministers to come to their places by,
as the east is from the west. You therefore, like a wily and subtle fox,
thought it no good policy, this way to seek to justify your calling or
manner of coming to your prelacies, and yet rather then you would seem to be
able to say no more for your manner of coming thereunto, then for the offices
themselves you were disposed, you thought it good, thus bravely and braggingly
to set a face upon it in these words, as though you could say enough: and that
makes your fault the greater. You have no sooner uttered this your bare and
bold assertion, which were somewhat, if you could thoroughly prove it, but you
are quite slipped and gone into the proof of another matter, which though you
prove, yet your assertion is never the more thereby strengthened and confirmed.
For though we grant you (which always we do most willingly) that the Church
of Christ has always had in her from her first nativity, and shall have unto
the end, successively in all ages in one place or other, such as have showed
the truth faithfully unto others, as have shined as lights in their days set
upon a candlestick, and as have painefully labored and shall still, to gather
together the Saints, to bring them to unity and perfection in Christ: yet
neither does it follow, that these have been so visible, apparent and glorious
in the eyes of al men, and that they have so orderly succeeded one another, and
had their ordination one of another in one and selfsame place, and after one
and selfsame manner, nor that hereupon it should follow, that this having been
in any sort that then by and by it must be granted, yt yours have entered the
ordinary way, that they are right Bishops and Pastors, have had right
succession always one to an other, and have also, which is the greatest thing
of al, had without interruption always the sound catholic faith continued
amongst them. For, in some sort, these might be in all ages and times, and that
effectually to serve to these ends so far forth, as stood with Gods providence,
and was according to the variable disposition thereof, sufficient to continue
his holy catholic Church, according to his good pleasure, and yet not in that
visible, appare^t and glorious manner, that you pretend: and some he might have
to enter into their callings to do this the ordinary way, though your Bishops
and Priests have not so entered, be not right Bishops and Priests, and be such
as are destitute of al right ecclesiastical succession, both in respect of
persons, places, times, and truth. And yet most evident it is to every reader
of any judgment, that al your proofs in this Chapter, and in the rest that
follow, prove only, that God always has had, has and will have a Church,
and therein always some teachers of the truth, and some learners and embraces
of it. And this the Lord has had, has and ever will have, though your ordinary
way of coming to your places, though your Bishops and Pastors, your personal
and local, visible and glorious succession, and your supposed Catholic truth
had never been seen or heard of in the world. Yea far more apparently and
gloriously should we have seen the truth hereof, if this ordinary way of
yours, these Bishops and Priests of yours, this succession and counterfeyght
truth of yours, had not in the just judgment of God, for the sins of the
world been the stop and let thereof. And yet you either were so simple your
self, or else you thought you should only meet with so simple a Reader, as
would account the proving of one of these, thus severed and disioyned the one
from the other, the just and due confirmation of the other. But I cannot be
persuaded, that such was your own simplicity, as once to imagine, that the
fifth of Matthew, Ephesians. 4, Esaie. 62. or any other proof that you use to that
end, did serve at all to prove your entrance to have been as you said: I am
therefore flat of this mind, and so must every man of any wit and discretion
be (unless you will give us leave to think, that you had neither of both in
thus reasoning) that this was your Romish and Popish cunning herein, finding
your self unable to prove any of these four points, that your entrance is by
the ordinary way, that your Bishops and Priests are right Bishops and Priests,
that you have had from the Apostles right succession, and that also now and
always you have been in possession of the Catholic truth: you thought it
good, confidently, as though their were no controversy to be made with you
about any of these, to aduouch, that you had all these to justify your manner
of coming to your offices. And so persuading your self that you should meet
with such frank and liberal Readers, as would easily, upon this your bold
begging, grant you all these four for an alms, taking them for given, as
sure as though you had them already in your beggars budget, even for and at the
very first asking, you go on as you do, supposing that your Reader is already
won to this, to imagine that all and every place of scripture that speaks of
right Bishops and pastors, and of their lawful calling and succeeding one
another from age to age in the truth, must needs be understood of yours. But
with this conceit and phantesy of yours, howsoever you may prevail with men of
your own humor and complexion, that have their wits benumbed and blu^dered
with the drunken and enchaunted cup of the garish whoar of Babylon, whiles you
take this course, you set your self but forth upon a scaffolde, to be laughed
at and derided, as one that has neither sound Religion, nor common reason
left him, of those that are indeed wise, sober and godly.

Seeing therefore you have said so much and proved so little, well enough
might I even with the detection, in this sort, of your vanity, leave you as
sufficiently answered, for any thing you have said concerning this point. But
because I have not taken in ^and, only so to answer you, as might be
sufficient to take away ^^e power and force from any thing you have set down
in this ^our discourse, to win any more to be of your judgment then ^ee
already, but also so, as, by the grace of God, may be likely to ^ake your
own friends ashamed of your dealing in their cause, (...) will both in this,
and throughout your book, for the further bene^it of the Reader, take the
pains to follow you from step to step ^how crooked soever your paths be)
and so disclose and lay open before ^im, not only the vanity of your
proceeding, but also the untruth and gross impiety of your words and sayings.

Wherefore, whereas to justify your manner of coming by your ^ffices, you first
say you come thereunto by the ordinary way, the Reader is to consider, that
through the ambiguttie of your speech, you seek wilfully to abuse him. For
you could not be so simple, but you knew and remembered well enough, that as
there is a lawful ordinary way ordained and allowed by God, and therefore
accordingly practiced in his Church, whereby his Church officers should enter
into their callings (whereby if you could have proved yours to have come to
theirs, you had indeed justified their entrance thereupon) so have there been
in tract of time, through the boldness of men to alter Gods ordinance, and
therein to prefer the way devised by themselves, before that which the Lord
himself had prescribed, many ways both invented and practiced, which though
they have by custom and long continuance of time grown to be too ordinary,
yet for all that, they have been and yet are too bad: by any of which (though
in respect of one or other of them you may truly say yours have entered by
the ordinary way) yet you have said nothing to prove their manner of entrance
to be holy, good, and of God. But to speak plainly, and yet no more then I
can prove out of your own Cronicles, your very Bishops of Rome, of whose
lawful and ordinary calling you use to brag most, and of whose lawful
entrance and calling (if they be such heads of the Church as you pretend) the
lawful calling and authority of all other inferior Church officers is
derived and depends, for many hundredth years, a number of them have so got to
their Prelacies, that unless you account those in your sense to have come to
their places by the ordinary way, that in compassing of them have broken all
good order both of God and man, I wonder with what face you durst thus
indefinitely and generally say of all your Bishops and pastors, that they have
been called to their estate by the ordinary way. For furious braules, monstrous
and long contentious, force of arms, and cruel bloodshed, have been the
ordinary ways, whereby a great multitude of them have entered, as namely and
for example, these: Symachus, Boniface the second, Pelagius the first, Boniface
the third, Cono^, Sergius the first, Zozimus, Paul the first, Constantine the
second, Eugenius the first, Hadrian the second, Formosus, Leo, Benedict,
Gelasius the second, Honorius the second, Innocent the second, Gregory the
tenth, Nicholas the third, Clement the fifth, Urban the sixth, and sundry
others. Bribery also has been the ordinary way, whereby many of them have
clymed into that chair, as namely, John 13. Boniface the 7. Gregory the sixth,
Siluester the third, and most of late days. Nicroma^cy, art magic, and
plain barganing with the devil for it, have been ordinary ways also,
whereby a shameful sort of them have compasse^ that place. For, from Syluester
the second, unto Gregory the seventh, including them, there being an eighteen
or nineteen Popes, your own Cardinal Benno shows, that the greater number of
the^ so came to their rooms, and since we read, that Alexander the sixth got
it the same way. It appears also in the said Benno, that the greater number
of the Popes from Syluester the second, to Gregory the seventh, were poisoned,
or at least by violent means dispatched by such, as for themselves and their
friends, thought good so to make the way readier thereu^to, for themselves or
some others whom they fancied. And to the same end, other authors write, that
very many of them beside, have in like manner from time to time since, been
suddenly vnpoped, that others the sooner might be popt into their rooms. Yea
Genebrard a late writer, and a great friend to the Roman Religion and Bishops,
in his fourth book and tenth age in his Cronology, by the plain evidence of
the truth, is enforced to confess, that from the year 884. to the year 1048.
that is, from John the eighth to Leo the 9.50. Popes all in a row successively
entered not by the door, but by the posterne gate, whom he calls Apostaticall
monsters, and in whom he graunts that lawful Apostolic succession was
disordered. And he that reads Luitprand lib. 3. cap. 12. and 13. shall find
testified by him, that the two famous harlottes Theodora the mother, and
Marozia the daughter, were in their times the makers and marrers, and in effect
the only setters up and dispatchers again of Popes at their pleasures.
Whereupon it came to ^asse (as it there appears) that Pope Christopher, having
shoo^ed out his predecessor Leo, by the aid of his concubines, he ^as quickly
shouldred out again, by one Sergius, who got the ^lace from him, as partly by
much brawling and fighting, ^o especially by the help and support of his
paramour Marozia.

Again (as he shows) hence was it, that Pope Laudo John the ^leuenths father
by adultery, was by the means of Theodora his sons paramour deposed, that so
she might bring him nearer her, from Rauenna to Rome: whom again her daughter
Marozia, having found the means to smoother, she, without consent either of
people, or clergy, set up in his room a bastard of hirs, which she had by
Pope Sergius. And though he were shortly after thrust out again, yet by the
help of his old friend Marozia, the matter was so handled, that both Leo the
sixth, and Stephen the seventh, his successors, by poison were quickly rid
out of the way, and so he (called John the twelth) recovered his place again.
Likewise her son Albericus son John the thirteenth, as he ca^e of a filthy
generation, so being a most filthy man himself, he had his preferment to that
place by the like means. And in like sort we read, that Vrba^ the second ca^e
to that room, by the means of his lover Mathilda. Also craft and subtlety in
supplanting and cosening their predecessors, has adua^ced many to the Papacy.
For Vigilius got it by crafty accusing of Syluerius, so procuring his
deposition, to make way for himself thereunto. By the same door of craft and
cosenage entered Stephen the second, Martin the second, Boniface the eight, and
many others. And when these have been the ordinary ways, whereby such a
rabble of these your most holy fathers, and highest Prelates have come to their
estates, is there any likelihoode to the contrary, but that their inferiors of
all sorts, in their times learned of them to enter in like manner? For what
reason is there, that a man should not be resolved, that down from the head so
corrupted, ran corruption over all the body, even down to the lowest
Hedge-priest? And in very deed, ever since these have been the ordinary ways,
whereby these your head Prelates have compassed their places, all stories, to
the everlasting sha^e of your Synagog, do most usually and notoriously show,
how that there was nothing more ordinary, then for the next great Prelates
under them (as Cardinals, Bishops and Archbishoppes) to come to those their
dignities, by the like means or by worse, as namely for favor borne them for
the sin not to be named, for that they were the Popes bastards, or for some
other such like (...) honest cause. For Innocent the eighth Pope of that name,
was first made Prelate of Sauo^, then of Melphit, and then Secretary to Pope
Sixtus, and Cardinal of Cicilia for his rare beauty, and not for any other
good quality in him, and Julius the third of very late days promoted none
sooner, then young wa^ton Ganymedes, especially one of that sort, a very lad
called Innoce^tius, to be Cardinal, whom he had long filthily fansied, and then
still did. And to be a Popes Bastar^ either in the first or second degree,
has of long time been a rea^ way to such preferments. And therefore we read,
that John the eleventh Pope Laudoes Bastard, by the help of Theodora his
paramour, not only (as I have said) in the end became Pope, but before easily
got first to be made Bishop of Bononia, and then Archbishop of Rauenna.
Caesareus a bastard of Alexander the sixth, for this was by him made Cardinal,
and Paul the third stretched his favor so f^^ in this regard, that he made
one Alexander son to his bastard son Petrus Aloysius, and one Ascanius
son to his bastard daughter Co^sta^tia, Cardinals. And the writers of his
life do him wrong, unless he himself before he was Pope, obtained the
Cardinals hat, and to be Bishop of Hostia, by delivering his sister Iulia
Farnesia to be concubine to Alexander the sixth. Sure I am, that our Cronicles
are much troubled, and a very great part thereof consists, in displaying the
brawles, contentio^s, and dangerous consequents, that have arisen (sometime to
the shaking both of our Kings estate and kingdoms also) about the election
here of the Archbishops of Canterbury. Yea in them it appears, that few
elections either of them, or of any other great bishops of this land in these
latter days of the iollity and ruff of the Roman Prelates and their Romish
and Antichristian Hierarchy and religion, have past here in England of late
years, whiles your kingdom stood, but thereabout either there has been
notorious brawles and co^tentions amongst the electours or else some other
famous disorder and corruption, and likewise we may be sure it fell out in other
places and countries. And as for your ordinary Priests, for the most part, all the world is witness, so doltish and ignorant they have been, that there was no
ordinary way for them to enter, but that Balaam was the Bishop, Judas the
patron, and they were affectioned as Simo^ Magus. In Boniface the ninthes
time, he had an Antipope called Benedict, but howsoever otherwise ^hey raged
and raued one against another, in this they both agreed, ^o make open sale and
merchandise of all Church liuinges, the ^^le began the fifth of Noue^ber in the
fifth year of Bonifaces reign ^^e that would give most spedde best, yea his
covetousness was so ^otorious herein, as that Theodoricus writing his life,
confesses ^ot only thus much, but further, that he had seen one benefice
sold ^o many men in one week, yea the former sale revoked, though under seal,
and the benefice sold to another, that offered more, the first ^eing well
chidden for going about to cosen the holy father for see^ing to get the
benefice at an vnderualew: by means whereof and as ^ee writes for that this
Pope was before a sturdie yonker but of ^0. years of age when he was chosen
Pope, and one so ignorant, that he could neither write, sing, nor understand
so much latin, as to ^nderstand the ordinary pleading of advocates: dolts
always at his ^ands sped best. And yet this fellow was Pope above 200. years
^go: whereby though it appear, that to enter by this door of Simo^y, be a very
ancient ordinary way, for Popish Priests and inferior Prelates, to enter into
their dignities by, yet this is not the ancien^est president they have: for
Vrbanus the sixth Pope before this Gregory the ninth, having caused a Cardinal
of his in one day, to ^epose, rack, torment and spoil all the Prelates of
Cicilia, because they would not aid him, according to his mind, against his
Amipope Clement. 7. was by this way easily entreated, within a very short time,
to let into their rooms 32. new Bishops, Archbishops and Priests how ignorant
he cared not, so that otherwise they would be of his faction and satisfy his
humor, as the foresaied author testifies. And Platina in the life of
Siluester the third, 300. years before either of these, to note both the
antiquity and dissent of this ordinary way, by occasion of Benedict the ninth
his selling of his Papacy to Gregory the sixth for 1500 l. (as some write) and
many like tricks that he belike had observed amongst them, through the
notorious evidence of the thing, is enforced to write, that then even the
Papacy it self was come to that point, that he that would go beyond others
not in holiness of life and learning, but in large giving and ambition, he
only, the good being oppressed and rejected, should attain to that degree of
dignity: which fashion I would to God sometimes (says he) our times had not
retained. And when he has said thus, he adds, but this is but little, we
shall, unless god prevent it, see hereafter sometimes far worse things. This man
lived and flourished in the time of Paulus 2. who was Pope above 400. years
after Syluester the third, and surely herein he was, all the world knows, both
a true reporter and prophet, and since it has not bee^ better, but rather
worse, eue^ from the head to the foot in that kingdom of the Pope. His
testimony cannot but press them of the Religion and Synogog very much, because
it is well known, the he, both for his office and opinion, was very partial
of that side. Wherefore even these things considered, every man sees, yt
thou^^ it were granted you, that your Bishops and Priests, have entered al^^
time some ordinary and common way, that yet thereby would arise a ver^ slender
justification, of their manner of coming to their offices. Y^^ in this case,
somewhat further to pose you and to press you, the r^^der is further to be
advertised, that beside the most ancient and (...) pure ordinary way of entering
of Church officers, used and contin^^^ in the primative Church, until
Constantines time at the least, the^^ have since, according to the variety of
times, and diversity of the^^ states of the Church, been sundry other things
appointed and prescr^bed, by the decrees of sinods and councels, ordinarily to
be observed (...) the election and ordinatio^ of such officers, which have most
ordinaril^ been broken and neglected, in the entrance upon their offices, of
(...) of yours, now these many years. For proof whereof, I refer the render no
further, but to the consideration, first of your manner of co^mi^^ to your
places, for these last three or four hundredth years; and to th^^ canons, that
your own friend Gratia^, concerning this matter, h^^ hudled together, did. 61.
62. and 63. for going no further, thereby sh^^^ he find, in that the consent
of the Emperor, the assent of the people, the peaceable and orderly election
of the clergy, has bee^ a long time wanting in many of yours, that indeed
you cannot tr^ly say, that such of your Church officers have entered by any
ancient ordinary way, either prescribed by the word, or the ancient canons of
the Church, of a long time. Now the election of your Popes is only by the
Cardinals, which to be the ordinary way of their entrance, was first devised
and enacted in Nicolas the second time (as it is noted did. 23.) which was a
1000. years and more after Christ; and after, under Alexander the third, it
was further confirmed in a Lateran council, held in his time about the year
117^. Nicolas the first began, and Hadrian the third concluded the quite
removing and shutting out of the Emperor, from their election, which was about
the year of the Lord 889. John 19. first shut o^^ ^he people about the year
1003. And so then about 70. years after, his decree of Nicolas the second was
made. If therefore, including our Bishops of Rome, you mean by the ordinary
way of their en^rance, this, decreed by Pope Nicolas the second, then they that
^ere before entered not by that ordinary way. And if you look v^on his decree
well, and the decrees of others since made to back that, ^ou shall find not
half the Popes that have been since, to have en^red orderly. Yea in reading
of the stories of the Church, the de^rees of the councels, and your own Canon
law, though I find ^t the least, that there has been since Constantine, a
six or seven ^euerall ordinary ways, decreed and used for their entrance,
yet I ^an hardly find, that three Bishops of Rome succeeding one another
immediately, did orderly in every respect enter the ordinary ^^aie, then in
force and use. For whereas I find, that the Empe^ours and the Princes of
Italy, or his deputy in his absence, by cu^tome, their own right, interest and
authority therein, and after by ^he decrees of Hadrian the first, about the
year 773. and of Leo and Clement in three several councels in their times
consented unto, ^ore a principal stroke therein a great while: yet whiles that
was ^ecessary in the ordinary way of entrance thereunto, I find, that many
entered not only without their consent, but quite contrary to their minds, as
one may read in the lives of Pelagius the 2. Stephen the 4. Hadria^ the 2.
Martin the 2. Hadrian the 3. and diverse others. And likewise, whereas
sometimes, as in the time of Constantine the 4. by the Emperors own consent,
other sometime without his consent, as by the decree of Pope Stephen the 4. the
Emperor was not to meddle therein, but only the clergy and people of Rome,
yet even then the stories show, that sundry had their entrance, not only not
without, but altogether by the means of the Emperors, yea after the decree of
Hadria^ the 3. many years. Likewise, though for the avoiding of braules and
contentions, in the election of the Roman Prelates, Leo the 8. gave absolute
authority to the Emperor, to choose the Pope, about the year 994. and in
Clement the 2. time, upon that consideration, the Romans themselves also gave
over their right therein unto him, insomuch that besides others, Leo the ninth
and Victor the second, had the place by his absolute authority: yet, even
whiles this stood as the ordinary way agreed upon, many entered otherwise.
To be brief, I dare confidentlie set it down, for I am able to prove it by
their own story writers, how often soever they have varied and altered their
ordinary way of entering unto that place, sometimes by admitting the Emperors
consent thereunto, sometimes by shutting it out quite, sometime by giving him
his due right, and sometime more and sometime less, or howsoever: in like sort
they have varied both as touching the Clergy, and the people that should have
to deal therein, wherein they have had as many diversities as about the
former, or finally whatsoever concerning other circumstances of their election,
they have thought good to add or detract from the ordinary way before in
force, they have neither long continued any one ordinary way, neither during
the time of the continuance thereof, have they followed inviolably that way.
And as it has been with that chief Sea of theirs, so has it been with other
inferior places, so that no constancy has been in any of their ordinary
ways of entrance, nor yet any due care either carefully to observe the canons
of the scripture, the canons of the Church, or their own decrees made for that
purpose. In their late council of Trent, by sundry canons and Chapters therein
set down, it appears, that they there assembled, considering what horrible
abuses there had been in the election and ordination of unfit Bishops and
Priests amongst the^, thought it most needeful (to prevent the like for the
time to come) to devise and to enact sundry holeso^e canons, to breed a learned
preaching ministry, and to procure an election and ordination thence forth for
them, as free from corruption, as in their wisdoms they could conceive: but
yet who knows not, but that those canons have since bine and yet are, as
carelessly looked unto, and herein kept amongst them, as though they had never
been made. Wherefore, to conclude this point, let Albine and never so many
more of them, brag that they enter by the ordinary way, unless thereby he mean
a way that ordinarily is naught and corrupt, he speaks more then ever he can
prove, and so therein has said nothing to prove the coming of their Bishops
and Priests unto their places to be lawful and good.

And yet if we will believe him, their Bishops and Priests are right Bishops
and Priests, but if it be true, as it must needs be, that they can not be so,
who neither have a lawful way of entrance to their offices, nor yet their
offices are themselves of Gods ordinance, then it is apparent even by that
which I have said already, that neither their Bishops nor Priests are right
Bishops nor Priests. Their Bishops from the highest to the lowest, by their
usage and practice challenge and take unto themselves, an office of another
essence and nature, then the office that Christ and his Apostles have left and
prescribed to true Bishops, and so likewise is it with their Priests. For one
universal and head Bishop over all others (such as they take their Pope to be)
Christ never ordained, for he made all his Apostles by giving them all equal,
one and selfsame commission, his officers equally to bear for their times
the general and universal care of oversight, ruling, ordering and directing
his Church; and to bring it to full perfection, ascending into heaven, when he
was disposed this way in bestowing Church officers upon his Church, by the
ministry of his word and sacraments, to consummate it unto the end, besides
these, as inferior ministers, he gave only, as you may read Ephesians the
fourth, Eua^gelists, Prophets, Pastors and teachers, where neither your Popes,
Cardinals, nor Mass Priests, are once remembered. The matter wherein the full
execution of the off ce of all the ministeries consists, that Christ has left
unto his Church, is, duly and sou^dly to feed Gods people committed unto
them, with heavenly food, by painful and diligent preaching unto them the
word of God, and ministering unto them the sacraments, and rightly and oderly to
govern the Churches of Christ, by the administration of ecclesiastical order
and discipline, which are things, that the greatest and fattest in your Romish
Synagog, think themselves little or no whit at all bound unto. These things
are too base matters for your Popes to be occupied about, their office
consists, and therefore they accordingly must busy themselves in other
matters: as namely, in making and marring, in setting up and putting down
seculer Princes, as they call them, in studying by all means fair and foul,
to mainetaine and to enlarge their authority and patrimony, and in devising by
a thousand ways, though never so couetously, tyra^nously and insatiably, to
gather together infinite sums of money, to buy or to win by force of arms,
great principalities for their bastards, nephews and neeces, to spend in the
persecuting and subduing better Christians the^ themselves, to build sumptuous
palaces, banqueting houses, and temples to shroud idolatry and idols in,
costly beutified, the better to entice men for their further advantage, to
commit spiritual whoardome with them. In and about these things, your Popes
now, these many 100. years have spent their wits, and all these parts of the
world, and all Croniclers of any credit, can and will testify. If they have any
leisure from these affairs, then they must show themselves not to have been
idle and fruitless in devising some new ceremony, in adding some patch or
other to their Church service, in proclaiming the cross against the Turk, for
the recovery of the holy land, in publishing some Iubile and indulgences, in
setting up some new order of Religious men, for the better support of their
kingdom, or at least in plotting and contriuing some conspiracy or treacherous
devise, to supplant and murder some Christian Prince, that has drawn or is
like to draw his people from their Antichristian Religion. And your other
Bishops occupation lies most in blessing with their fingers, in consecrating
of their unholy holy Chrisme, in christening of belles and Churches, in
ordering vnorderlie and contrary to their own canons, of an idolatrous and new
found sort of Priests, and in running up and down fondly and superstitiously,
to minister the sacrament, as they count it, of confirmation: scarce the tithe
of them ever had either skill or will to preach. And as for your Cardinals, as
they are of an order but of a late devise, so by their behavior we can not
judge their office to lie in any thing else, but to serve the Popes turn, for
the better setting forth of his magnificence at home, and to be his agents in
foreign kingdoms, the easelier to contriue his purposes their. They are and
have been a long time (their first nativity considered) notable fellows to
hau^t and maintain the stews at Rome, and to devour and to consume, in riot,
vanity and impiety, all the Bishoprics and benefices that they could heap
together, without any care for the good of the people: and the use of them has
been, to brawle and to breed scismes in choosing of Popes, and to stur al
coals, and to move every stone, as fast as they could one after another, to
thrust into that place. Now to come to your ordinary Priests, though the
matter of teaching and ministering of sacraments, especially was posted over
unto them, and unto Friars, yet either were they not able to do it, which was
the condition of most of them; or else if they did it, in stead of feeding the
people with the milk of Gods word, which only Saint Peter warrants to be
without deceit 1. Pet. 2.2. they fed them, with vain dreams, fancies, tales
and traditions of men. For these only are the grounds of that which is
properly now the Romish Religion. And in very deed, when they were ordered,
their especial business appointed for them was, to sacrifice for the quick
and the dead, which is a thing not only beside the office of any true
minister of Christ, but also directly contrary, both to their office, and
Christ's also. For they by warrant expressly from the canonical scriptures are
to teach their people, that Christ himself in his own person once for all,
when he dyed for the redemption of man, offered the sacrifice that for both
quick and dead soly and wholly, fully and effectually must serve the turn for
ever, and that in offering this propitiatory sacrifice, he is an everlasting
Priest, and may have no successor, either to offer another sacrifice, as
though this were not sufficient; or to offer this again, as though he had not
himself offered it well enough. Besides, herein commission is given them,
directly to pervert Christ's institution of the sacrament of his body and
blood. For whereas by the right use thereof, thereby should be offered unto
man the body broken and blood shed of Christ, for him to be fed on, and
received by him to salvation: by their commission and intention herein, they
offer these things to God the father. Further, if we consider their reading
unto the people, all in an unknown tongue, their praying to Saints and Angels,
their praying for the dead, their blasphemous imagination, that they by
breathing a set number of words upon a wafer cake, make it very Christ, and
other their superstitious and magical incatations and coniurations of water,
oil, salt, palms and other creatures, these being so directly contrary to
the word of God as they be: whatsoever here Albine has said of them, we may
most justly and truly aduoutch them to be right Priests of Antichrist, and
consequently no right Priests of Christ. But seeing he will needs so
indefinitely and generally pronounce his sentence, That their Bishops and
Priests be right Bishops and Priests, to leave these general objections and
reasons against them, and to come to some particular examples: first I would
feign know of him, whereas there have been a twenty three scismes at least in
the Papal see, sometime two, sometime three, sometime four, all at once
contending that they were right Popes, which of these was always he, that for
the time was to be accounted the right Bishop? And if never but one of them,
yea sometimes none of them were right, and therefore they were driven to depose
and suppress them, and to set up a new, they all during their times having
had many followers, and many were made Bishops and Priests by them, and so
success^uelie from these, infinite others have had their consecration and
orders, how can we count these right Bishops and Priests, that were made by
such, as had no right to make any? or how shall we sever them, that if they
fetch their pedegrees, have had their original from such, from those that are
descended from them that were made by the right Popes? This nutte will trouble
the whole Church of Rome to crack. But to deal plainly and particularly,
what can he or any of them, unless they be disposed to be convinced of
wra^gling by a cloud of witnesses, say for Joan the eighth, that in the end
proved her self, openly in a solemn procession, to be a harlot by her
fruitfulnes; for Christopher, Sergius, Laudo, John the 11.12. and 13. all Popes
in a row, and yet especially advanced unto, and kept in that dignity, by
their concubines and harlots; for Siluester the second, and a number of his
successors, who were promoted by Nicromancy and poisoning their predecessors;
or for Hildebrand after called Gregory 7. who the same evening that his
predecessor was dead, thrust into the place, not one Cardinal subscribing to
his election, rather even by force then by any means else? Boniface the
eightth got the place by cosening Caelestine his predecessor, by the sound of
a voice through a tronke through the wall of his chamber: Boniface the ninth
was chosen Pope by the Cardinals at Rome, and yet, as I said before, when
they chose him he was but twenty years old, he could neither write, nor
sing, nor understand his latin tongue: Balthazar de Cossa Cardinal, through
fear at Bononia drove the Cardinals to refer the nomination of the Pope, whom
there they were about to choose, to himself, who by and by chose and set up
himself. Sixtus the fourth, builded a famous stews at Rome of both kinds (as
Agryppa writes of him) and witness Wesselus Groningensis, he granted an
indulgence to the family of S. Lucia, that for the three hoate months in the
year, they might use the sin not to be named. The like Indulgence granted
Pope Alexander the sixth, to a Spaniard Petrus Mendoza, Cardinal of Valentia,
so to abuse his base son Marquis Sanatensis. Monstrous are the incests,
adulteries and Sodomitries, that stories report of Paul the 3. And Julius the
3. his Sodomitrie, especially with one Innocentius, whiles he was Cardinal at
Bononia, who^ therefore he made, being still but a very boy, Cardinal, when he
was Pope, is in the stories reported very ill of. And the rather, that which in
this respect is written of him should seem to be true, because in his time,
there was one Hiero^. Mutius set up, publickely in books to defend certain
filthy and loathsome amarous verses, written by one Camillus Oliuus, companion
to the Cardinal of Mantua, to one Hanibal Coliuus: and that in his time
Ioha^nes Casa Archbishop of Beneuentum, Deane of the chamber Apostolic, and
the Popes Legate in the dominions of Venis, wrote in the commendation of that
filthy fact of Petrus Aloysius Paulus 3. his son, with Cosmus Cherius Bishop
of Fane, and that with the applause and liking of that time. Now what? Will
Albine say, for all these things, that these were right Popes, Bishops and
Cardinals? right and seemly they may be, to serve the whoar of Babylon,
otherwise, such can never be right Bishops and Priests to serve the Lord Jesus.

But if neither that which he has said, concerning their coming to their
places, by the ordinary way, nor this vaunt of his, that their Bishops and
Priests be right Bishops and Priests, can do him any good: yet it may be, he
hops some credit will grow unto them, in that he has said, they have their
places vy right succession. Indeed succession and the deriuation of it without
interruption, down from the Apostles, especially in their line of Popes, is a
thing that such as he brag much of, saying, that that they have, and we have
not, and that therefore their Church and the ministers thereof, must needs be
good and lawful, and ours the plain contrary. Howbeit, if we examine this
point thoroughly, we shall find, that they have as weak help hence, as from
the other, or from any thing else. For whither they understand by right
succession, succession without interruption in place, person or office,
severally or jointly together, neither can their Bishops and Priests, as they
are now, truly say they have it, nor yet if they could, they being gone as
they be, from the soul and life of right Apostolic succession, namely the
Catholic and Apostolic truth, are they ever the better. And of the
contrary, though it were never so true, that we could not deduce unto our
present Bishops and Pastors down from the Apostles or their times, without
interruptio^, the line of succession, in place, person and office; yet we being
able to show, as we are, that we hold one and selfsame doctrine with them,
that would justify our Church, and ministers sufficiently, notwithstanding the
want of the former. This is quickly and easily said (you will say) but these
things cannot so readily be proved. I grant, to prove them will cost the
more pains, otherwise the proof is ready and pregnant enough, and that I
doubt not, but (if, with any indifferency, that which I shall write to that
end be marked) shall ere it be long appear. I say therefore, first, that
the Roman Bishops and Priests, as they are now and have been a long time,
whatsoever they brag, no not their very Popes (unto whose right succession
Stapleton and others trust most) have any right succession, either to any
Apostle or Apostolic man, in place, person or office. For first, they can
never soundly prove (the proofs out of the scripture are so strong to the
contrary, and their proofs out of the stories so disagreeing and variable in
all circumstances) that Peter the Apostle, whose successors their Popes claim
to be, and from whom al other Bishops and Priests amongst them, have their
vocations and authority derived, was either ever at Rome, or being there, that,
having laid aside his Apostleship, which was the greater and higher office, he
sat there as Bishop. Secondly, unto this day they cannot agree, of the order
of succeeding one another betwixt Linus, Cletus, Clement and Anaclet.
Vrspergensis in the life of Claudius, has notably and at large set out, both
the difference of opinions in this matter, and also the uncertainty of the
truth. Thirdly, none of any learning and reading, can be so ignorant in the
stories of the Bishops of Rome, but he knows, that they have not succeeded one
another, from the Apostles to this day without interruptio^ always, neither in
place, person nor office. For besides that sundry times, many Popes for some
short time have sat from Rome, it is notoriously known, that Clement the 5.
about the year 1305. translated the Popes see from Rome into France to
Auinion, where it continued above 70. years. And as for immediate and orderly
succession of persons amongst them, how is it possible truly and certainly to
define and set down that, seeing that see has not only stood vacant, days,
weeks, months, and years, sometimes 2. sometimes more, but also there has
been at once so often, not only 2. but often 3. and sometime more, every one
striving with his favorers to be accounted to be the right Pope. And lastly, by
that which I have said before of the nature of their offices of Popes
Cardinals, Bishops and Priests, their practice proving daily my words
therein to be most true, how dare any man, that has any fear of God, once say
or think, that they in their offices have any affinity with the Apostles, or
any Apostolic man? Light and darkness are not more differing the one from the
other, then the offices of Apostles, Eua^gelists, Prophets, Pastors and
Doctors in the ancient primitive and Apostolic Church, differs from these
offices of theirs. Secondly, whereas I said, though yet they could, which now
you see they cannot, truly say, that they succeed the Apostles and Apostolic
men in place, person and office, yet they were never the nearer: my reasons
thereof are these. First, I find, that wicked people and wicked Priests in the
scriptures, often have had this kind of succession, to plead for themselves,
against the true Prophets and against Christ himself, as you may see Ierem. 7.
verse. 4. and cap. 8. verse. 8. John. 8. v. 44. Vriah the Priest in King Ahaz
time, had this succession from Aaron, and yet he to please that Idolatrous
king, set up, contrary to the commandment of the Lord, an altar according to
the pattern that the King had sent him, of one that he had seen at Damascus,
2. King. 16.10.11. The high Priests, that withstoode always Christ and his
doctrine, and in the end crucified him, had this kind of sucession, and yet
none of these or their doings were any thing the more justifiable for this.
Again though Stapleton lib. 13. doctrinalium principioru^ co^fesses, that the
Greeks have been scismatiques and heretics this 500. years, yet he and all
the sort of them of any reading know, that not they only, but also the
Patriarchs of Antioch and Alexandria, and the Bishops of sundry other famous
Churches in the world, all which likewise, they hold, be scismatiques and
heretics, can and do make as great show of this kind of succession for the
countenancing of their ministry and Churches, as they themselves, for they
know, that the Patriarch of Constantinople does deduce his local and
personal succession from Andrew the Apostle; and that the Patriarch of Antioch
now sitting at Damascus, does likewise his from Peter, which he may do more
certainly, then the Popes when they sat at Auinion could, for it is evident
Gal. 2. ver. 11. even by the scripture it self, that Peter was at Antioch, and
so is it not that he was at Rome. In like manner, they know that the Patriarch
of Alexandria, now holding his seat at Alcairum, deriues his, from the
Evangelist Saint Mark. And ignorant they are not, that the Arrians, prevailing
as they did, and in the end having got the most seats of Bishops to be
furnished with men of their damnable opinion, that they for that time were able
to hold this plea as well as themselves, and yet I am sure they will grant,
that none of these were therefore, or are therefore to be allowed and justified.
They will say, I am sure (for so I find the^ plainly to reply in their
writings, yea even John de Albine himself afterward Cap. 7.) that though these
all can and do plead succession in place, person and office, that yet it
cannot justify them, because not only they have held, some of them,
detestable heresies, but presently also do still. Indeed I must needs
confess, that I read, that Macedonius, Nestorius, and Paulus Sergius abrupted
the line of right succession, by their heresies at Constantinople; that Paulus
Samosatenus did the like at Antioch; and that Dioscorus and Petrus Moggus did
likewise at Alexanderia. And I cannot deny, but that I find all these and the
Churches under them still charged, to hold errors and heresies, but this then
withal I infer, the more true that it is, and has been thus with them, the
more evident it is, of what small acount this personal and local succession
is of it self, either to give credit to Bishops and Pastors, or their
religion, that can plead that. And this further I add, if these be sufficient
causes to make their alleged succession to be of no value, then there is as
great cause, why succession bragged on so much by the Romanists, should be
rejected, as a thing not worth the naming. For not only in inferior places of
Bishops and Priests (which is a thing that they will not strive with us about)
it is so manifest, that there have been many heretics amongst them; but also
even in their line of Popes (who, as some of them hold, cannot err) there have
been sundry heretics also. For Tertullian contra Praxeam, writes of a Bishop
of Rome, that did allow of the Prophesies of Montanus, and, as he says,
therefore sent letters of communion to the Churches of Asia, and Phrigia
thereabout. And Athanasius in his epistle ad solitariam vitam agentes, and so
also Damasus in the life of Liberius, and Hiero^ de ecclesiasticis scriptoribus
testify, that Pope Liberius was drawn in the end to subscribe to Arianisme.
And Honorius died an heretic, as it is to be seen in the first general
council, Act. 12. and 13. etc. Liberatus also Breuiarii Cap. 22. witnesses,
that Vigilius in secret favored heretics. Anastasius the second, fell into a
condemned heresy, as we read Did. 19. Cap. Anastasius: and therefore would
have restored Accatius a condemned heretic. And yet I say nothing of Pope
John 23. condemned for an heretic by the council of Co^stance and the schole
of Paris, for denying in effect the immortality of the soul. Yea the evidence
of the truth in this point is so open and strong, that it has caused their
own friends to condemn them of gross flattery, that hold, that Popes have
not and cannot fall into heresy; as any man may see that will read Alphonsus
contra haereses lib. 1. Cap. 2. and 4. Lyra upon the 16 of Matthew. and the third
Synodall Epistle of the council of Basil. And that the Romish Church does
now hold as gross and palpable errors and heresies, as they charge these
withal, if I prove not ere I have done with Albine, I will never crave credit
either to our ministers, or to our Churches and cause. Wherefore to leave the
proof of this to his place or places (to go on with that which I have
undertook to prove against them, concerning this their brag of right
succession) whereas thirdly I said, that though we were not able to deduce or
derive down from the Apostles without interruption, any local and personal
succession unto our Ministers that now be, yet as long as ours teach, and our
people embrace the same doctrine that they taught, we are well enough,
whatsoever they say to the contrary: that rests only now in this case to be
proved. But before I come to the proof of this, least in this my assertion I
be mistaken, I would first, that it were marked, that I speak but by way of
supposition, that is, if we were not able to set down a continued line, down
from them to us without any interruption, for in the 4. Chapter following, I
hope, I shall set down such a descent of our Church from them to us, as
whereby it may sufficiently appear, that there was never age nor time since,
but our Church and religion has had her teachers and hearers. Secondly, I
would have it also understood, that my meaning is, though it were so, that we
could not make recital or demonstration of any such descent or succession: in
that process of time, distance of place, and the force and subtlety of our
enemies kept us from knowing their names, persons and places; that yet for the
continuance of the truth and the Church of Christ amongst men, I constantly
hold and believe, that there has been a continual and uninterrupted
succession of teachers and embracers of GODS truth, whereof his Church
consistes, even from the first beginning thereof, and shall be to the end.
Only this is it that thereby I am contented be insinuated, that the Churches
of Christ, if they can prove, that they are taught by such ministers as God
does raise up unto them, according unto his good pleasure, whither ordinarily
or extraordinarily, and that they embrace no other doctrine but that which
Christ and his Apostles taught (witness the canonical scriptures) that then,
they are to be accounted Apostolic and holy Churches of God, and that in such
a case, especially in and after great persecutions, ruins and long oppressions
of their members and children, they need not to be daunted nor discouraged,
neither in respect of their ministers and teachers, nor in respect of their
doctrine, though they cannot be able lineally to name the persons, either by
whom their ministers, down from the Apostles, have had their vocation derived
unto them, or else by whom ever since, that truth has been continued. For
howsoever in visible Churches of GOD, whiles they stand in flourishing or
vnoppressed state and condition, by the fury of persecutours, there is a set
order and form visibly to be observed in the vocation of Church ministers, in
respect of which estates and times it is easy for them that live therein, or
within the knowledge and remembrance thereof, to make demonstration of the line
of succeson: yet when in the just judgment of God, the Churches shall be
oppressed, as now a long a time they have been, under the tyranny of
Antichrist, then and after such a time, such a thing grows to many not only
hard, but also impossible. And in such times we find, that the Lord of his
wisdom and power to continue yet his Church, rayseth up men, though not by
the ordinary way used in the former times, as after the dispersion of the
Church at Jerusalem, by means of the persecution there, when Stephen was
stoned, we read that the Disciples being dispersed, and namely with them
Philip the Deacon, that he preached, the Apostles not aware thereof, for any
thing that appears: so under Co^sta^tine, Antonius the heremite taught at
Alexandria, and under Valens, Aphraates, Flauianus, and Iulianus at Antioch,
being then but Monks, who in those days were not so much as counted amongst
Clerks, as we read in Nicephorus libro 11. Chap. 15. These things thus
premised, thereby not only my meaning shall rightly be conceived, but also
that which I have said, in some sort is already confirmed. But my reason
indeed is, that true and sound apostolic doctrine, in the good providence
of God toward his Church, opened and continued in the same, though by men not
coming to their places of teaching by the ordinary way always, but sometimes
somewhat extraordinarily, as he sees need thereof, is and may be such
effectual seed to beget children unto God, and so wholesome food to feed
the^, yea even until they grow to a full age and perfection in Christ Jesus,
that though their teachers cannot show for the defense of their calling, who
always successively in person and place have gone before them, yet even this
truth of their doctrine does prove them, and their people to be Apostolic
Churches, whereas though they could do the other without this, it were
nothing. And because my adversary seems in this point, and otherwise to make
great reckoning of the testimony of Irenaeus, Tertullian and Augustine, I will
stand to their judgment in this, whither to succeed the Apostles in
doctrine, be not sufficient without the other local and personal demonstrable
succession, and not this without that. Irenaeus in his fourth book and forty
three Chapter, teaches us only to obey those Elders in the Church, which from
the Apostles with the succession of their Bishoprics, have received Charisma
veritatis certum secundum placitum patris, that is, the certain gift of truth
according to the pleasure of the father; for, as for all other, whatsoever they
pretend (for he excepteth nothing) he there immediately shows, that absistunt
a principali successione, that is, they are gone from the principal
succession, and therefore must be suspected. And Tertullian in the very same
place, de praescriptionibus haereticorum, quoted by Albine after, in his 9.
Chapter, immediately after the words there cited by him, wherein he calls for
personal succession, has added these, Co^fingant tale aliquid haeretici etc.
but let heretics devise some such thing, for after blasphemy, what is not
lawful for them (says he) but though they do feign some such thing, yet it
shall nothing prevail the^. For their doctrine compared with the Apostolic
doctrine, by the diversity and co^trariety thereof, will pronounce, that it has
neither Apostle nor Apostolic man to be the author thereof. For (says he) as
the Apostles taught not amongst themselves contrary things, so neither did
Apostolic men teach contrary things to those that the Apostles taught. After
this sort therefore let them be provoked by those Churches, which though they
cannot produce either Apostle or Apostolic man to be the founder thereof, in
that they were long after planted, as daily there be, tamen in eadem fide
conspirantes, non minus Apostolicae deputantur pro consanguinitate doctrinae,
yet they agreeing with the^ in one faith, are no less to be reputed
Apostolic Churches, then they that were planted by the Apostles. What can be
plainer then this, to show, that though our Churches could not satisfy his
request, in pleading the former succession, that yet if they can show this,
that they agree with the Apostles in doctrine, that they therefore are far
rather Apostolic, then they that can produce the former without this. And
though Augustine in his 165. epistle, and also in his fourth Chapter against
the Manichees epistle, which they call their foundation, remembered by Albine
cap. 6. do there seem to make great reckoning of personal succession: yet
when he had showed of what force that and some other reasons were with him, he
preferres truth indeed warranted by the scriptures, before them all.
Wherefore, what I have said, concerning the vanity of their brag of personal
and local succession, either to justify theirs, or to disgrace our Church or
ministry, is sufficiently proved.

But all this labor (will Albine say) I might have spared, for he spoke not
simply of succession, but expressly of right succession of Bishops and
pastors; and to show what he meant thereby, he expressly added the continuance
of one Catholic faith derived from the Apostles to our days, without the
interruption of it universally at any time. Moreover, I confess that sundry
times after (so forcible was the truth in this point with him) that in words
he confesses, that personal and local succession, without continuance in
this truth, is not the thing that he urges, and yet for all this, this that I
have said of this point, is not needless. For besides that few of his
opinion, will be brought to confess thus much, this both in others, and in
himself in sundry Chapters following, may be observed, that when this
confession is made by any of the^, it is wroong from them much against their
wills, for their show of proofs run wholly for the magnifying of personal
succession to be the mark, whereby true Churches, and the ministers thereof
may undoubtedly be discerned. Again, if in this he spoke as he thinks, why
does he make so much ado, about the personal and visible succession of
Bishops and pastors, and never ioines this issue with us, to try out soundly
and thoroughly, whither they or we have this Catholic and Apostolic truth.
For herein only lies all the controversy betwixt them and us, and this
determined, the question betwixt us were quite ended: let them once therefore
but prove indeed, that they are in possession of this sound truth, and that
always down from the Apostles they have continued therein, if we join not
straight with them, and repent us heartily of our departure from them, accursed
be we. Yea, if we cannot prove by co^paring their doctrine, with that which we
are most sure the Apostles taught, to be both diverse from that, and contrary
unto it (understanding by their doctrine, as we do, that, which is proper to
them, and wherein we are against them) let us for ever leese our credit and
cause. Now for the decyding and determining of this great and maine
controversy, we appeal to the canonical scriptures, which we know are most
fit and sufficient judges herein: whereunto, unless they will deserve the name
of lucifugae (that is, of shunners of the light) which for the like cause
Tertullian gave the heretics of his time, de resurrect. carnis, they will be
contented to bring their doctrine as to the touchstone. Indeed in Tertullian
and Iraeneus time, the heretics (as it appears in their works) for the
trial of their opinions, fled from this touchstone, and when they were urged
herewith, they behaved themselves the likest these our adversaries that ever I
saw. For Iraeneus in his third book and second Chapter testifies thus of
them: cum ex Scripturis arguuntur, in accusationem conuertuntur ipsarum, quasi
non recte habeant neque sint ex authoritate, and quia vary sunt dictae, and
quia non possit ex his inueniri veritas ab his qui nesciunt traditionem: that
is, when they are reproved by the scriptures, then they are turned straight
into an accusation of them, as though they were not right, nor were of
authority, both because they are so set down, as that variably or diversely
they may be taken, and because by them the truth cannot be found out by those,
that are ignorant of tradition. This notwithstanding, it appears both there
and elsewhere, that he calls them to this trial. And so does Tertullian de
resurrectione carnis, Cap. 3. saying, Auferantur ab haereticis quae cum
aethnicis sapiunt, vt de scripturis solis suas quaestiones fistant and stare
non possunt, that is, let those things be taken from heretics which they
hold with the heathen, that only by the scriptures they may determine their
questions, and they cannot stand. And nothing was more usual and familier with
Augustine against the heretics of his time, then to call them, for the trial
of the question, both whither he or they were of the true Church, and also
whither of them had the truth, to this way of trial by the scriptures. And
therefore de vnitate ecclesiae, Nolo humanis documentis, sed diuinis oraculis
ecclesiam demonstrare, I will not make demonstration of the Church by the
writings of men, but by the divine oracles, says he Cap, 3. and again, there
also he further adds, pressing the heretics with whom he had there to do:
sunt libri dominici, quoru^ authoritati vtrique consentimus, ibi quaeramus
ecclesiam, ibi discutiamus causa^ nostra^, that is, there are certain books
of the Lord, unto the authority whereof we both consent, there let us seek the
Church, there let us discuss our cause. To the like effect he writes in the 2
Chapter of that book, and elsewhere very often. Unless therefore they will once
be contented to come to this trial of the controversies betwixt the^ and us,
we must needs tell the^, yt they are not desirous in earnest ever to have it
appear, which of us have the better cause, but as men who know in their own
conscience, that their cause is bad, they labor to maintain the credit
thereof, as long as they can, by cunning shifts and delays. But yet let them
assure themselves, as long as they shun this trial, how cu^ningly and
colourably soever, though simple fools already besotted with superstition, and
bewitched with popish enchantments, upon their bare word and stought bragges,
that it is nothing but the ancient catholic faith that they teach, may
sometimes believe the^: that yet withal those that have any wisdom at al, by
this means they leese quite both the credit of themselves and their cause. For
faith being, as it is, not a wavering and uncertain conceyt and opinion of the
thing believed, but a most certain sure and infallible persuasion of the truth
thereof, how can any be assured, that the doctrine that he believes, is such as
he may soundly and firmly rest upon, for undoubted truth, without evident
ground thereof, out of the written word of ye Lord in ye canonical scriptures?
For thence only Peter dare warrant the sincere milk, which cannot deceive ye
children of god, to be fetched, 1. Pet. 2, 2. and therefore, yt he would have
the^ to desire, as newborn babes do milk, yt they may grow up thereby. And as
for ye writings and traditions of me^ beside, has not and does not experience
daily teach, that they may not nor cannot challenge ye preeminence and
prerogative, always to be free from error? And every one that is a Christian
has learned, that this prerogative all the writers of the canonical scripture
had in the writing thereof, therein not to have erred at al. Who therefore ca^
be so simple (unless the Lord in his justice has blinded him, because he would
not see ye truth shyning about him) yt he should receive yt for the sound
catholic faith, yt he hears not first from point to point, proved unto him
so to be, out of this undoubted certain word of God, ye canonical scriptures,
what show or color of proof soever otherwise be made thereof? And this John
de Albine could not but conceive, and yet never once going about in this his
discourse thus to cou^tena^ce his cause and religion, but as one loath to be
brought to this trial, he labors most earnestly to discourage al me^ from
appealing unto it, and yet almost in every leaf braggeth and boasts, that
both his Church, his doctrine and al, are sound and catholic. Wherein howsoever
he pleased himself in that his vain, any indifferent man may see, he has
rather bewraied ye weakness of his own cause, the^ any way (whatsoever he have
said otherwise) impaired the credit of ours. But how vainly he has swet,
even to the tyring of himself, and his reader about this point, in many
chapters: That by ye scriptures controversies are not in the church to be tried
and determined: when I come unto that place I shall god willing show more fully.

In the mean time ( John de Albine, to turn my speech to you) I having thus
examined your answer to our demand, how you come to your prelacies and
offices, and having found the weakness and untruths thereof such, as that your
calling or coming thereunto can claim no more credit thereby, the^ ye calling
and coming to their offices amongst ye Arria^s and Greeks (who^ you count
heretics and scismatiques) ca^ do, because they ca^ and could say as much,
and that as truly for theirs, as you have here said for yours: let us now
proceed, to the examination of ye places of scripture in this Chapter quoted by
you, and urged as you thought strongly to your purpose. By ye Mat. 5. Ye are
the light of the world etc. by christ spoken properly to his Apostles, you
would seem to prove, yt therefore right succession of Bishops and pastors in ye
Apostolic truth, in all ages in diverse parts of the world has been ever
clear and shining like a light set on a table. and by that Ephesians. 4. and Esa.
62. (with your book quoteth Sap. 61. very wisely) you would infer, yt not only
always, until Christ's body come to full perfection, there should be doctors and
pastors in the Church to teach the truth (wc is the most that by those places
ca^ be proved) but also that they and their co^gregatio^s have ever ben known
and visible, thereby (doubtless) meaning so visible (as the rest of your side
do, when to this end they allege these or the like places) as yt from time to
time in all ages, me^ may be able to name the^ and their places. Wheru^to I
answer, that you stretch these places and the words therein further the^ their
native sense will bear. For the first of these, is properly to be understood of
Christ's Apostles only, who in respect of their ministry and other graces of
the spirit that should be powered and bestowed upon the^, to beutifie and
stre^gthe^ their extraordinary ministry withal, are there by Christ comp^^^^^
the light of the world, to a lighted candle set upon a candlestick not put
under a bushel, lightning all in the house, and to a city (...) on a hill,
which could not be bid: all which afterward they in the ^^ecution of their
Apostleship, and holy conversation, proved to be ^^^tles truly and justly
given them. This was no prophecy (as yo^ would make it) that their should be
until the second coming (...) Christ, a visible and always demonstrable
succession of such ^^^^sters in the Church without interruption, as these
metaphor^ ^^^scribe. And yet I deny not, but that always, in one place or ot^
(...) the Church has had from the beginning thereof, and shall have (...) the
end of the world, such and so many ministers, whereby the L^ (...) has
always and will continue the life thereof: but that this pl^^^ of Matthew
proves so much (which is yet far less then you (...) enforce upon it) I deny.
Notwithstanding I grant, that all (...) faithful pastors and teachers,
according to the nature of their ^^ling, and measure of their gifts, so far
forth as they therein have ^^^thing common with the Apostles, and are found
like unto the^, (...) also in some sort have these things applied unto them,
and vnderst^^^ of them: but then withal it must be noted, and always
remembr^^ that as there was and is diversity of gifts and offices in sundry
^^spects, betwixt the Apostles and common pastors and teachers, (...) it must
follow, that there is proportionable difference, betwixt the apparent light and
visiblenes of the one and the other. The Apostles were by their office
appointed to preach to all nations, Math. 28. (...) therefore worthily called
in that respect, the light of the world: and by their extraordinary gifts they
were set up as burning lamps, and mighty cities, to be seen and discerned a
far off: whereas Bishops, Pastors, and Doctors have charges limited unto
them but of final compass; and gifts but such, as if they give true light,
and be seen of those that be about them, and near unto them, it is well
Howsoever, certain it is (as I said before) that Christ does not there
prophecy or foreshew, how visible and lightsome his Pastors and teachers
should be from time to time to the worlds end: but he teaches his Disciples
and Apostles, what by his grace they should be, and so others succeeding them
in the office of teaching, what they ought according to their place, to strive
to be. And I would have this marked also, that even they, to whom Christ spoke
properly, were but told, that there light should lighten those of the house,
and that a city built on a hill, though it be not hid to those that are ^eare
unto it, yet to those that dwell in another country far of, it may be hid;
and that therefore though this place, were as properly to be understood of al
true Pastors, as of the Apostles: that yet ^t infers not, that their persons
and light should be seen and ^iscerned but of them, that be nigh them, or
joined with them in the ^ame house, or communion of religion. And as for that
in the 4 to the Ephesians. though it prove, that there shall be teachers in the
Church to gather together the Saints, and to edify the body of Christ, until
it be brought to perfection: yet it proves not therefore your visibility of
them; neither does that in the 62 of Esaias. For it only shows, that God
would bless his Church with watchful and discreet pastors, which accordingly
after he performed. But there is nothing said, to prove that they and their
succession in the truth, should be so visible and apparent, as you dream of.
But to awake you out of this dream, you must hear and understand, that though
it be as certain, that neither the truth, nor teachers thereof, has at any
time, or shall hereafter utterly fail, or cease to be in the Church, as it is,
that the Church if self continues ever, and never quite cease: yet
thereupon it follows not, that therefore both the truth and teachers thereof
have so continued a personal succession one unto another, or one immediately
after another, and are withal so visible and apparent, that their names and
places may straight not only then, but always after of every one (as you upon
these places would infer) be pointed and painted out. And for the confirmation
and proof hereof, let us briefly take a view of the state of the Church from
time to time, as it is set down unto us in the holy Scriptures. And in this
point, let us begin with the Church, when in respect of all the former times it
was best settled, and began to have the most visible appearance, namely when
under the conduict, and by the service of Joshua God had placed it in Canaan.
After this, though God therein had established a Priesthood, and tied it Leuit.
10. by his ordinance and promise to the tribe of Leui, and though the Church
the^ had most notable promises of Gods presence, and favor toward it, Psalm.
68.2. Chro. 33.2. Chr. 7. Esa. 60.62.63. yet for all this, for the sins and
iniquities of ye people, it was driven often into those streights, that
succession of priests and pastors was interrupted, and of ye teachers and of
the professors of the truth there could hardly be made demo^stration. For in
the time of the judges, that followed Joshua (as it appears in the book of
the^) Cap. 10.13. etc. it had many such ecclipses, that we read there, of their
general Idolatry, and other sins, and therefore of their slavery under
heathen princes, in Gods justice laid upon the^ diverse times, for many years
together: and in ye mean time we find little mention, either of priest or
people, that feared God aright. And in Elies time (1. Sa. 2.) the priesthood
and al grew so corrupt, that therefore by Samuel Elie is threatened, that the
priesthood (notwithstanding Gods promise Leu. 10.) should be translated from
his house: and after we read (Cap. 4.) that ye very Ark of God was lost, and
taken of ye Philistines. And it cannot be denied, but ye God had his church in
Israel, in king Achabs time. For Obadiah had the^ hid 100 prophets in two
caves, 1. King. 18. and God himself told Eliah, that he had 7000 there, that
had not bowed their knees unto Baal, Cap. 19. and yet Eliah (though there and
the^ a prophet) was so far from being able to name the^, and to point out, who
they were, and what they were, ye he thought himself in that kingdom to be
left alone. And in ye kingdom of Judah, where (in comparison of the kingdom
of ye ten tribes) the Church usually had a more visible estate, yet in the
latter end of Salomons reign, Rehoboha^s, and Ahiiahs, ye estate thereof was
so grown out of order, that the prophet Azariah said unto king Asa, their
next successor there (having relation to the state of the Church in ye
kingdom, as sundry good interpreters take his words) now for a long season
Israel has been without the true God, and without priest to teach, and without
law. 2. Chr. 15. Be like then their succession, and their na^es were not so
visible, as you seem to imagine, always they must be in the Church. And though
by Asa and his son Iehosaphat, the church was well reformed again, yet in king
Ahaz time (as appears 2. Chr. 28.2. King. 16.) gross Idolatry ouerspred the
kingdom so, that the temple was polluted and profaned, and Vriah the priest
joined with the king in the erection of a new altar, and in committing
abhominatio^ before the Lord, though he were one yt had his calling by the
ordinary way of succession of priests from Aaron. Again, though Ezechiah,
succeeding Ahaz, for his time did notably rid ye Church of the abhominatio^s,
wherwt his father had defiled it, yet when he was dead, his son Manasses, and
his son Amon, brought it to as il an estate, as ever it was: in so much, yt
from ye beginning of Manasses reign, unto the 18 of Iosiahs, the book of the
law of the Lord was lost, wc was well nigh 80 years: for the^ it is noted yt
Hilki^h the priest found it, 2. King. 22. In Manasses his time it is evident,
Idolatry openly prevailed, and the whole Synagogue, save a few prophets and
their folowers erred. If we proceed, during the 70 years captivity in Babylon,
what visible and appare^t show of any succession of Bishops and pastors ca^ we
find, ye joined together in the exercise of Gods religion? Was not their
temple then destroyed, and consequently did not the public exercise of their
religion (wc for the most part was tied theru^to) cease? as it was prophesied
by Hosea, Ca. 3. and therefore lamented by Jeremy, Ca. 3. La^. When Christ our
savior ca^e into the world, surely then God had his Church. For it is a most
certain article of our faith, yt since it began, it has never ceased, nor
never shall, and yet what visible succession of pastors and priests was there
the^ in possession of sou^o religion? Had not they (as evidently appears by
ye stories written by the Eua^gelists) yt were in ye visible personal
succession, corrupted the doctrine of the Messiah, both concerning his person,
and office so, that they were the deadliest enemies, that he had?

But you will say perhaps, that though these things were thus in the Church, in
the time of the old Testament, yet it may not be so in the Church now, in the
time of the new. And why so? Howsoever otherwise there be some difference
betwixt the Church then and now, in respect of the more clear revelation now,
then then of the doctrine of the Messiah (whereof that Heb. 8.6. is by so^e
understood) yet in this respect you shall never be able, by the word written, or
any true story, to prove any necessary difference; unless it be that God had
tied then his promises to that peculier people, and his service in great part
to their temple, and that he had ordained amongst them a priesthood to continue
by natural succession so, yt the Church the^ had more right to plead visible
succession, then now. In the mean time, thus much is gained by these stories
of the Church, in the time of the old testament, that this outward clearenes
and visible succession, you talk of, is not an inseparable note of the true
Church, for thereby we have seen it separated oftentimes from it. And unless men
were peeuishly disposed to maintain a manifest untruth, convicted so to be
both by Scripture and experience, you would see and grant, yt it is as
separable from the Church now since Christ. For is it not plainly prophesied
2 Thessalonians. 2. that there should come a departing from the faith by the coming
of Antichrist, and that very great and effectual? And least you should
babishly, and foolishly (as many of you do) understand this of an Antichrist,
that toward the end of the world should come and reign, and seduce men, 3
years and an half: mark, that here Paul tells us in his time, that this
mystery of iniquity did already work, which it did, in that there were false
Apostles there that taught men to seek justification partly by faith, and
partly by the works of the law, as it appears by the Epistle to the
Galathia^s: and weigh that he attributes unto him such things, as could not be
brought to pass in that space: and lastly consider, that he teaches, that
though he should be detected and fall into a consu^ptio^ by the Spirit of Gods
mouth, yet he should not be fully abolished before Christ's second coming. All
which make it most evident, that Paul here prophecieth of a longer lasting
Antichristianity, which should trouble the Church, the^ yours of 3 years and an
half continuance. But least yet, this notwitsta^ding, you should imagine, that
the fulfilling of this prophecy, and your fa^sie of perpetual clearnes and
universality of the church, may stand always together, S. John in his
Revelation describing (as you al must confess) the state of the Church, sees
her in a vision by the great 7 headed Dragon, driven into the wilderness, and
there glad to be fed for a season, Chap. 12. And he sees the Babilonish harlot
(the true pattern of your Romish prelacy; by wc harlot he most notably sets
forth Antichrist, and his kingdom) committing fornication, not with a few, but
with the Kings and inhabitants of the earth; not ruling or sitting over a few,
but (as the Angel there expounds the waters, whereon she was seen to sit)
people, multitudes, nations, and tongues. Apoc. 17 Al wc laid together do
plainly show, that after Christ, there should grow such a defection from the
faith, in the world by the means of Antichrist, that during the flourishing of
his kingdom, the true Church and her pastors should be driven into the
wilderness, and so for that time should have in comparison of Antichrists
followers, small visibility, and show in the eyes of the world. Which we say,
and constantly are able to defend, has been verified in the late flourishing
of your Romish Prelates. Besides, view the stories of the church, and the
Cronicles of times, and you shall be driven to confess, that though ye Church
has had always her two witnesses (Re. 11) to testify to the truth, and that
they never could be extinguished quite by Tyra^ts, yet she has often been
driven from carrying any great show of visibility in the world. For certain
marble pillars at Salmantike erected in the hill of S. Bartholomew, do witness,
that Diocletian, Iouius, and Maximinianus Herculeus imagined, when they caused
them to be erected, that they then had quite laid the honor of Christ for
ever in the dust, and as it should seem by the circumscriptions, that they
thereupon caused to be engraued, they set the^ up even of purpose to brag,
that they had like great conquerers quite extinguished (as they term it) ye
superstition of Christ. Which they would never have done, if either they or
their favorites had then seen a visible succession of Bishops and pastors
amongst them, and had known their names, and where to have found them. If we
go on to the time that the Arrians most flourished, we shall read, that the
Emperor Constantius said to Liberius, Quota pars es tu orbis terrarum, qui
solus facis cum homine scelerato, meaning Athanasius, Ecclesiast. Hist.
Theodoreti. lib. 2. cap: 16. whereby it appears, that then the Catholics
that withstood the Arrians, in the sight of this Emperor, had but a poor
visibility to brag of. Yea Piggius, your own man, confesses Hierar. lib. 1.
cap. 6. that their poison had defiled not a part, but almost the whole world:
in so much that almost all the Bishops not only of the east, but also of the
West, by one means or other were blinded, and no small time continued this
heresy: and this is certain, that they bragged then as much of visible
succession, of the name of the Church, and universality, as ever since you have
done: calling the true Christians Homousians (as you do now Lutherans, and
Zwinglians) as appears in the writings of those that wrote against them. You
may see therefore, that these weapons or stays, are common to you with
blasphemous and condemned heretics. These places of Scripture, and
experiments therefore caused August. upon the 10. Psalm. and 78. Epist. to
compare the Church unto the Moon, which besides the monthly waynings,
suffers oftentimes ecclipsies. And surely unless we be too too wilful, al
these things together may make us out of doubt, that the Church of God both
before Christ and since, has often failed to carry any such outward visible
show in theeies of the world, that it is so easy a matter, to make at al times
demonstration of her Pastors and teachers, who they were, and where they
taught, as you our adversaries would bear the world in hand it is. And
therefore for answer to this Chapter, to any reasonable man, this is
sufficient.

The II. Chapter.
SAint Thus you are fallen from proving that you are come to your places by the
ordinary calling of such as have ri htly succeeded one another both in person,
office and truth of doctrine, which is the thing you should have proved, to
show that there has always been and must be a succession of Pastors to
continue and settle me^ in the truth, which is another point. For though this
were granted you, yet you have not thereby wun the other.
Paul follows this discourse in the fourth Chapter unto the Ephesia^s, where
as he does declare unto us, the fruit that does proceed of this succession of
Pastors, and of the perseuera^ce of the reasonable sheep in one kind of
spiritual doctrine, called the unity of faith. For he says, that God
established this order to that end, that we should not be like light
children, The more is your sin, that have suffered yourselues to be carried
away from the truth, by the enticements of Antichrist.
carried away with every blast of false doctrine, through the subtilitie of men,
and their crafty words, full of deceit. In these words you do see, how the
Apostle does declare unto us the counsel and the intention of the holy
Ghost: If you had been constant in this faith, we and you had been all of
one mind, and unless we can ^ustifie our faith to be even so grounded as you
say, we will forsake it, and join with you, but if we ca^, then you are to
forsake yours and to join with us, if you will answer the intention of the
holy Ghost.
I mean, that we should be constant in our faith, the which is grounded upon
the word of God, and interpreted and declared unto us by the Doctors and
Pastors, that successively have continued in one kind of faith and Catholic
religion, from the first time that it was preached, with out turning with
every wind, but rather that we ought to stand firm and stable. Here is to be
noted, that when the Apostle does tell, how he has left us pastors and
doctors, to warn us of the subtletie of false teachers, he does use a certain
greek word very apt for this purpose, the which has in English the
signification, of the I would not you had forgot this note, for it does lively
paint out your doctors, which by this their skill in cogging and cosening, do
make the scriptures to have a flexible sense always suitable to the practice of
your Romish Church. how variable so ever that be.
playing or cogging at dise. And even as he that has no great skill, if he
play with such a one, he will soon lose his money, because the other ca^ cast
what he will: Eue^ so, if a simple man, being unlearned, do chance to talk
with such a one as ca^ cog, or (to speak plainly) falsely interpret the
Scriptures, he may soon be deceived: as we see it daily happen to many, that
play away and put in hazard the rest of al their spiritual inheritance, I
mean, the faith, which has been left to the^ by their fathers, from age to
age, since Christ's time. Thus have the Arrians, the Nestorians, and diverse
other heretics deceived many a man, as I will show more at large hereafter.

The II. Chapter.
IN this second chapter, you observe further out of the 4 to ye Ephe. before
alleged, that God established a ministry in his Church, that we should not
be like children carried away with every blast of vain doctrine, through ye
subtlety of me^, and their crafty words full of deceit: whereupon you infer,
that thereby God has taught us, to be constant in our faith, grounded upon ye
word of God, interpreted and declared unto us by ye doctors and pastors, that
successively have continued from the beginning in ye same. Who of us ever
either wrote, spoke, or thought otherwise? But herein is your subtlety, that
you take this still for granted, which indeed is the maine question betwixt us,
and for determination whereof on your side, you have as yet said nothing, that
the faith and religion, which your Synagogue is in possession of is that faith,
which you speak of, which we constantly deny, affirming ye faith and religion,
which we profess, to be that indeed, wherein the Apostle would have us
constant and settled, and which has always continued in ye Church, and has
been taught and justified out of the word written, by the true pastors thereof
in one place or other, from time to time. And therefore herein you have said
nothing, but ye (we understanding it of our faith and religion) makes as much
for us, as for you. We grant you also, that false teachers, and wrong
interpreters of the Scriptures, worthily there, may have their subtlety
expressed by a word importing cogging or cosening, but then still we add, that
your teachers a long time have been the me^, that have used, and yet do use
that cogging trick. Which (if it would please you once by the sound rules of
interpreting the scriptures, to let your interpretations and ours be examined)
we doubt not, but to make most manifest unto all men quickly.

The III. Chapter.
THe place that I have quoted of the Apostle does show, how dangerous a thing
it is, to fall into the hands of such Coggers of the scriptures, and likewise
how certain a thing it is, Such interpretation of the doctor, we will most
willingly follow, and if you should, you would quickelie forsake your popery
and join with us.
to follow the interpretation of the ancient Doctors, standing to that, that
ever the Catholic Church has taught, and not to turn at every blast. Upon
this matter one Lib. con. haer.
Vincentius Lyrine^sis, who flourished above a thousand years agone, he says
thus: If any man percha^ce demand, saying: Since that the rules of the
Scripture are certain and Yea and more then sufficient says he, Mark he
graunts the rules of the scripture to be sufficient: how is then that true,
which your Andradius says, the greatest part is left to tradition not written?
sufficient of themselves: And what need have we the^ of the authority of the
Church? He answers: For that (says he) that the secrets and mysteries of
the holy Scriptures are such, that every man does not understand the^, and
interpret the^ after one sort, but that of one place this man and that man
shall seem to maintain their opinions, being clean contrary one to another,
so that, look how many me^, so many interpretations: For, one way it is
interpreted by Nestorius, another way by Arrius, another way by Sabellius, and
so forth, according to diverse heresies that have risen from time to time. And
therefore it is necessary for the knowledge of the truth, among so many
errors, to draw the And for these reasons we allow of Vincentius rule,
understanding, as he does, that by the right line and rule of interpreting is
meant that sense which has the consent of the Prophets, Apostles and Catholic
Church, for no other sense we give of the Scriptures.
right line of the Prophetical and Apostolical interpretation, according to
the rule and true sense of the Catholic Church. This is the learned opinion
of this ancient father Vince^tius Lyrinensis.

The III. Chapter.
IN the 3 Chapter, you say as little to the purpose, as in the second. For
understanding by the Church, the true catholic Church indeed, and not your
late Synagogue of Rome (falsely by you so named, because neither it, nor the
faith thereof is universal, neither in respect of time nor person) whatsoever
you have written therein, we confess to be most true, and sure we are, it
makes more for us, then for you. For we never denied the ministry of the true
Church to be needful (according to Vince^tius rule) to find out the true
sense of the scriptures: and certain we are, that we are far better able, to
justify our interpretations thereby, then you are yours: and he living a 1000.
years ago (as you write) we boldly affirm, that you shall never be able to
prove, that the Catholic Church and her doctors and pastors before or in
his time, taught the errors and heresies now taught by yours, for the which
we account yours Antichristian. And yet, as in the former Chapter most
beggarly you begged this principle, that your doctrine is the ancient
Catholic faith: so here in this you beg this also, that your Church is the
true and undoubted Catholic Church. But you must understand, howsoever your
own friends will give you at your first asking both these, that yet we will
grant you neither of them both. And therefore writing (as you would seem)
purposely against us, you should not thus miserably always have begged them at
our hands, but by sound and just proof (at least) have endeavored to prove,
that you had just right thereunto, and then with some more honesty and credit
might you have gone on, in this supposall, that they are yours. This also you
must understand, that when it is in question, which is the truth of Religion,
yea even in the fundamental points (as indeed it is betwixt you and us) it is
always also in question, which is the Church of Christ. For as both parts
imagine, they have the truth, so will they persuade themselves, that they are
the true Church. Your friends also and all others must be advertised, that it
is no new thing for damnable heretics, to brag much both of the truth of the
titles of the Church and of the doctors thereof, least through too much
simplicity, they think straight, that you have al these things on your side,
because you have them so much and so often in your mouths. For (as Cyprian
writes Epist. ad Iubaianum de baptizandis haereticis) the Nouations (after the
fashion of apes) challenged unto themselves the name of the Church, and all
other they called heretics. And we read, that in the time of Arius,
Macedonius, and Donatus, these heretics accounted themselves the only
Christians, and that the true Christians indeed were counted by them
Homousians, Macarians, Caesarians, and Caecilianists. So does Tertullian de
Prescrip: aduersus haereticos, testify, that the heretics did in his time. So
did the Donatists (says August: Contra Epist: Parm: lib. 2. cap. 1. and
Epist. 161.) and he writes Co^tra Epist: Fundamenti cap. 4. that amongst the
Manichees, there was great brags of the truth. Bernard also in his 66. sermon
upon the Ca^ticles, speaking against certain filthy heretics that condemned
marriage, and superstitiously absteined from meats, yet says that they
gloried, that they alone were the body of Christ, bragging also, that they were
the successors of the Apostles and Apostolic, and the Church of Christ. And
indeed we find nothing more usual with the ancient heretics, then to
boast, that they had the Church and Catholic truth on their sides. And very
usual we find it also with them, to stand much upon fathers, in the defense
of themselves and their heresies. For it appears in the Council of Calcedon
the 1. Action, that Eutiches bragged, that he had read Cyprian, and
Athanasius: yea that then and there he confidently said for his defense, that
he had so learned of his ancient predecessors, and that he had been baptized
in that faith, had lived, and hoped to die in it. And we read in the 4. Action
of the same council, that Carosus an Eutichian heretic, said stoutly, I
believe thus, according to the exposition of the 318. fathers, and so was I
baptized. Dioscorus also, in the 1. Act: of that Council, cried and said, I
have the testimonies of the holy fathers, Athanasius, Gregory, and Cyrill on
my side, I go not from them in any thing, I am cast out with the fathers, I
defend the fathers doctrines: I have their testimonies, even set down in their
books for me. And (as we read in August: contra Cresconium the Donatist, 2.
book cap. 23. and in his 4. book cap. 17.) he cited for himself Cyprian: and
it seems that Maximinus the heretic (against whom August. wrote) used to
allege for his defense, the council of Ariminum, and therefore Augustine
says unto him. Neither will I object the council of Nice against thee,
neither ought thou to object that of Ariminum against me: 3. book. 14.
chap. What a vain thing is it (these things considered) for you and your
fellows then, to carry away the simple under the bare titles of Catholic
truth, Catholic Church, Catholic faith, Catholic Bishops, succeeding one
another? When as indeed and truth, it is as impossible for you to prove that
you have any just right to any of these, as it was for those heretics. But
howsoever you make some believe, you have all these, yet I say unto you, with
Saint August: De vnitate Ecclesiae, against the Epistle of Petilian chap. 10.
That even Catholic Bishops are not to be consented unto, if that any where
they be deceived, in thinking any thing contrary to the Canonical
Scriptures. And therefore when all comes to all, and when otherwise you have
run your selves out of breath, in conclusion (will you, will you) by these
Canonical Scriptures must it be determined, whither you have any right to
any of these or no. For if you appeal from them (as indeed you do) to the
Church and fathers, they will send you back again for the trial, whither
that which they speak, be true or no, only to the Scriptures: as it may
appear unto you, not only by this one place, which I have cyted out of
Augustine already, but also by a number such like places, both to be found
in him else where, and also in others. For you may read in the first book
and seventh Chapter of Theodoret, that when Constantine saw great
controversies in the Church in the Nicene council, and perceived that every
several company bragged of the truth, and so also of the Church, and fathers
to be on their side, to end all those controversies, he said, Ex diuinitus
inspiratis oraculis quaeramus solutionem eorum quae proponuntur; that is, out
of the oracles, that are come by divine inspiration (thereby meaning the
Canonical Scriptures) let us seek the determination of those things that are
propounded: and so they did. And as Constantine the Emperor was of this mind,
so it appears that Athanasius was of the same. For to Serap: he says,
Solum exsacris literis condiscas (meaning, that the holy Ghost is God)
sufficient enim documenta, quae in illis reperias: Thou may learn it only
out of the holy Scriptures, for the documents or lessons, which thou may
find in them, are sufficient. And Origin upon the 16. to the Romans, in his
tenth book (agreeing herein with these) says, that only by the holy
Scriptures the difference of truth from error, in the examination thereof, is
to be discerned. And yet more plainly, the same Origin in his first Homily
upon Jeremy writes, of necessity we must call for the testimony of the
Scriptures: for our senses and declarations without them as witnesses, have no
credit. Well therefore said Augustine, de natura and gratia cap. 61. Only to
the holy Scriptures do I owe my consent without refusal: And therefore
franckely he tells Hierome in his nineteenth Epistle: that he had learned
to yield that honor only to the Canonical Scriptures, to think that the
authors thereof therein never erred. Where he plainly shows us, by his
example, how we should read his writings, or the writings of any other father,
namely, believing that which they wrote no further, then we see it by scripture
confirmed, or by probable argument not dissenting from the truth. And the like
he teaches yet more plainly in his 111. and 112. Epistles, to Fortunatus and
Paulinus, and in the proeme of the third book of the Trinity. Wherefore with
the same Augustine, I confidently say and write, whither of Christ, or of his
Church, or of any thing that appertains to our faith and life (I will not say
we, that are not to be compared with him that said though we, but as he
adds) though an Angel from Heaven shall preach any thing, besides that ye
have received (mark he says not contrary, but besides) in the legal and
Evangelical scriptures, let him be accursed; in his third book against
Petilian. cap. 6. Yea your own Vincentius in the very place quoted by you,
denies not, but takes it for granted, that the scriptures of themselves
alone, are sufficient for all things, yea and more then sufficient. Whereupon
it is evident that Vincentius, by the rule, line and true sense of the
Catholic Church, that there he speaks of, understands only such a sense
or line, as agrees best with the scriptures themselves, and the right rules of
the interpreting of them, whereof more afterward. In the mean time, howsoever
Vincentius his meaning was, Augustine an ancienter father, and more famous
somewhat then he, speaking of the rule of faith, that always in interpreting
of the scriptures, men must have an eye unto, and be ruled by, says, that it
is even that which is taught in plainer places of the scripture: de doctrina
Christia: lib 3. cap. 2. and de trini: lib. 1. cap. 2. and. 4. Yea in the same
Augustine de doct: Christ: lib. 2. cap. 6. and distrinc: 37. c. Relatum. we may
read, noted out of Clement, that the church is not to receive any fence for
the true se^ce of the scriptures, which cannot be proved so to be out of the
scriptures themselves. And therefore all interpretation of scripture, new or
ancient, delivered by the fathers in former time or received of their children
of this later age, must and ought according to this rule and line, be judged
catholic or not.

The IIII. Chapter.
Cant. 1.
WHose discourse does make me remember the complaint, that the soul does make
unto her Spouse Jesus Christ, being both represented by Solomon, and his
legitimate spouse. I pray thee (says she) O my dear friend, tell me in what
place thou do lie and rest at no^^ days, for I would be very glad and
desirous to follow the flocks of thy fellows? The which is as much to say, as
if she meant thus: I see many shepheardes in these mountains, which have great
abundance of sheep, I see those of the Roman Church, I see Donatistes, I see
Nouatians, or, to speak of our time, I see one flock follow Luther, another
follow The Caluenists Zuinglians and Sacramentaries: are commonly amongst you
taken for one, yet here that the variety of opinions may seem the greater, you
reckon them up as three distinct sorts.
Zuinglius, another follow Calvin, another the Anabaptists, another the
Sacrame^taries, and so forth diverse others, of who^ when I demand
particulerly, Whose is this flock? they do al answer me, It is of Christ, and
every (...) says this is the catholic Church, every one does say, that he
is his fellow, that is to say, as touching the guiding of his flock. Now it is
not possible, that they do al teach the truth, considering how they vary
among themselves: therefore I do desire thee to tell me, where thou do rest
thy self at noone days? That is as much to say, teach me, which is the true
Catholic Church, which does celebrate the true mystery of the Cross, which
is the place, where thou wast nailed at noone days, being nailed both hands
and feet? Hear now the answer of Jesus Christ: If thou do not know the
place where I rest, O most beautiful amongst all women, follow thou the path
that thy flock has made before thee, setting thy tabernacle or thy lodge,
hard by the tabernacle of thy Shepherds. If we well note, and understand this
answer, it will learn us that, that shall suffice to keep us from running
ever astray. The sense is this: O thou Christian, which art troubled in thy
conscience, not knowing, because of so many heresies, which way thou shall go,
or how thou shall discern the true religion from other false doctrine, take my
counsel, the which is to follow step by step the flock that went before
thee. If that a thousand or two thousand sheep run over a plain, those that
come afterward, do not they know well the path that is made before them? Do
not they discern the way that the first went? Yes surely, although there be no
Shepherd to guide them. And if thou do answer, that this does not
suffice, for I do see diverse paths, I see the path of the Caluinistes, Cant.
1.
the path of the Lutherans, and the path of those of the Roman Church: but yet
do not I know which flock I should choose. To this I answer thus: set thy
Tabernacle by the Tabernacle of the shepheardes, and of thy Pastors, I mean,
that Then we may not lean to yours for this can it never do.
I would have thee to lean to that flock, that can lead thee from age to
age, and from year to year, unto the cross of Jesus Christ, on the which he
was nailed at noone days: and there it is where thou ought to quiet thy
self and thy conscience. Then to begin: If thou do ask the Caluinistes,
Where is the true faith (the which, as they say, does consist in the true
preaching of the word of the Lord, and in the administration of the
Sacraments, according to the institution of Jesus Christ) they will answer:
It is at Geneua; the Lutherans will answer, at Wittemberge; and the
Anabaptists will answer at Monasteriu^; the Vbiquitaries, they will answer, at
^ubing; and the Trinitaries, at Petricone; and so consequently of the rest.
And then pursue, and ask further, where it was twenty years agone? They will
say, in the said cities: but if thou come to demand of them, where it was an
hundred or two hundred years agone, if they are ashamed any thing at all to
lie, they will not answer at all, for there is none of them, that can deny,
but that Luther, who began to preach his new Gospel the year This is a
monstrous and impudent untruth, for constantly and generally we say and prove
by the Scripture, that our religion has plentiful warrant, both in the old
and new Testament.
1517, was the first beginner of all these troubles, and the father of al those
that teach this reformed Religion. Then is it far from that place, where thy
friend was nailed at middaie, or where he was crucified above 1500. years
agone, before the new Church was dreampt of. And therefore thou may easily
perceive, that this flock cannot lead thee to the place that thou do
desire: and consequently, that is not the flock that we should follow. Then
let us come unto the Roman Church, and demand, where was this flock an
hundred years agone? They will answer thee, in France, Spain, England,
Germany; and so over all Christendom. And of thou ask, where it was 500.
years agone, They will say so: therefore it was so?
they will say, In the said places. And a thousand years agone likewise: and
likewise, a thousand and five hundred years agone. This flock then will not
leave thee by the way, as the others do, but it will lead thee unto the
very time of the death and passion of This is also most untrue, for the popish
doctrine, from point to point, we are able to show, when it began: and how it
has grown by degrees to that which it is, not in a thousand years after
Christ.
Christ, by continuance of o^^ doctrine, and by succession of pastors, which
Solomon does call the Tabernacle of the sheep heardes: And therefore this is
the place where thou must seek thy Tabernacle, and quiet thy conscience to the
end that thou be not a lost sheep, and that thou be not ready to turn at
every blast of new doctrine, None such coggers as Papists, in giving the
sense of the Scriptures, who make not them the rule of their practice, but
their practice, how mutable so ever, the rule to give the sense thereof by.
that our new coggers of the Scriptures do set forth, to deceive the simple
sheep.

The IIII. Chapter.
TO this fourth chapter, I answer, that with Solomon to find out the true
Church of God, we as well as you, exhort Christ's sheep, to follow the
tracte of the flock of Christ, and to feed by the tents or Tabernacles of
his sheepheardes: that so they may be led on and up, to Christ himself.
But then forasmuch as we have learned before, by that which has been noted
in the former Chapter, concerning the fashion of heretics, especially seeing
the same confirmed in you, and other heretics and apostataes in these our
days, that every flock is not Christ's flock, that will pretend so to be:
nor they always his true sheepeheardes, that are so accounted, we wish every
one that wilfully is not disposed to suffer himself to be seduced, by those
that falsely thus pretend, to learn to be able (as Saint John has taught
all true Christians in the first Epistle and fourth verse) to try the
spirits, whether they be of God or no, which they shall and may do in trying
both the flocks, and their sheepheardes, by the infallible word of Christ
contained in the Canonical Scriptures. For Christ's sheep will hear and obey
his voice, Ioh. 10. which undoubtedly and sufficiently is sounded in the
written word. For the Scriptures are able to make a man wise unto salvation,
through the faith which is in Christ Jesus. For the whole Scripture is given by
inspiration of God, and is profitable to teach, to improve, to correct, and to
instruct in righteousness, that the man of God may be absolute, being made
perfect unto all good works. 2. Tim. 3. And therefore his true sheepeheardes
will feed his sheep, with the sincere milk of this word, because that is it
which they must desire, as newborn babes do milk, that they may grow up
thereby, if so be they have tasted how bountiful the Lord is. 1. Pet. 2. And
because that is it, according whereunto he that speaks must speak, because
it is written, if any man speak, let him talk as the words of God 1. Pe. 4. By
which rule, if the flocks and sheepeheardes whom we follow, be tried, they
shall be found the sheep whose tracte is to be followed, and the
sheepeheardes by whose tents is safe feeding. And contrarily by this rule,
your flocks and sheepeheardes (come to the trial of it when you will) shall
be found flocks of goats and not of sheep, and foxes and wolves, seeking
the destruction of the sheep, rather then true sheepeheardes. But you would
make the Reader believe, that Solomon in this place by you cyted, out of the
first of the Canticles, does teach the true Church, safely always, to pitch
her tents, and to feed by the visible and apparent succession of pastors
which from age to age, can lead her without leaving her by the way even to
Christ's time, Which you say yours can do, and ours cannot, boldly
aduouching, that unless we be not ashamed to lie, we cannot show where our
Church or Religion, was an hundredth years ago, and that we cannot deny, but
Luther began to preach our new Gospel, in the year 1517. And thus again,
partly by this note of visible succession of pastors, and partly by
vpbrayding us with certain differences of opinions amongst us, about the manner
of Christ's presence, and diverse and sundry fantastical heresies, that of
late days have sprung up, and been revived, you labor to justify your
Synagogue of Rome, and to condemn our Church of Christ: which things you
harp upon, very much and often afterward in this your treatise. Wherefore to
answer you to all these things, here once for all: first I tell you, you
offer violence to Salomons words, in making them to contain a prophecy of
any such perpetual and visible succession of flocks and pastors, in the
possession of one truth, as you infer thereupon, and make it the special
mark and note to discern Christ's true Church, from all that falsely be so
called. For then it should be contrary to that view of the state of Christ's
true Church, which I have set down unto you, and proved by infallible
arguments in the first Chapter: which may not be, se^ing the scripture always
agrees with it self. And yet the Church may have good use of Salomons advise
given her here, in her greatest ruins and interruptions, of her ordinary and
visible form and beauty, in looking to the visible flocks and sheepheardes,
that were before that God so chastised her: as in Achaz time, in looking to and
following those, that were in David's and Salomons time^ in Manasses and Ammons
time, in looking to and following those in Ezechiaths and Iehosaphats times:
and in the time of the captivity, in looking to and following those, that were
in Iosiahs time. And yet do not so take me, as though I thought, that either
Christ's true Church, or the true sheepheards thereof, did at any time vtter^^
cease or fail: for I am persuaded they never did, nor shall. But this only
is the thing that I now say, that though this place of the Canticles does
show, that in no time there is any true flock^ of Christ, but there has gone
before a flock, and shepheardes, which that may safely follow even to the
finding of Christ: yet it proves not, that there has always immediately gone
before it, from time to time, some visible and so apparent flocks and
shepherds, one immediately succeeding another, as that the names of the sheep
and shepheardes, are always famously known, and therefore easily to be
reckoned up of every one: which are the things, which you seem to infer
hereof, and therefore require of us to be done, or else you would feign make
the Reader believe, that we neither are the Church, have the truth, nor true
and right ministers thereof. Wherein, many ways, you offer us great wrong, for
after you your self (distrusting belike) that in any seat or line of Bishops,
without interruption, this can be performed (speaking of your line of Popes,
whereof all the sort of you brag in this case most, cap. 8. to uphold and
draw along your right succession) you tell us flatly, you mean not, when you
speak thereof, only of them, but of al Bishops elsewhere, that they may
continue it, in the interruptions of that live somewhere else: and yet at our
hands, you require under the penalty aforesaied, that we should from age to
age, and from person to person, orderly succeeding one another, deduce ours.
For when we say it was continued always by some, in some other places, when
we can no longer find it in your Romish see, whereinto by little, and little,
you have craftily ^rept: and wherein for many hundred years before, men of our
Church, and Religion sat and taught, you reject that our answer as a shift.
Another wrong that you offer us herein, is this, that your Antichristian
Synagogue having according to the prophecy Revel. 12. persecuted our flock
into the wilderness, with the sheepherdes thereof, you require that we should,
even in respect of such decayed and distressed times of the church, give you as
evident demonstration of our flocks and sheepheardes, as may be given thereof
in the flourishing and peaceable state of the same. For there is no reason in
requiring that, in the decaies and ruins of the Church, which accompanies
always the Church in her prosperous and standing estate. Besides, herein you
offer us the greater wrong, in that notwithstanding it be granted of us, that
both perpetual continuance of the Catholic faith, and also some kind of
succession therefore of teachers, be necessary always for the continuation of
the Church, yet you cannot but know (especially seeing that prophecy before
named, and that also 2. These. 2. must be fulfilled of the church of Christ, in
respect of some time of her soiourning here on earth) that thereupon it
follows not, that therefore their succession is visible and demonstrable
always, in your sense, or else we must yield, that there were none such. For
who is so simple, but he is resolved, that all men now alive come by lineall
succession from some of Adams children, and yet few or none can be found that
can rightly, no not the skilfullest harrold of them all, deduce their pedagree
from thence. Must it therefore follow that there has not always been, for
all that, a certain lineall descent? if you should thus infer, every one
might laugh at your folly. For long process of time, distance of place,
betwixt some of our progenitors and us, lack of Cronicles, or the neglect of
such genealogyes in them, alterations of names and countries, and diverse such
like things makes the one not only hard, but for the most part impossible,
and yet no man doubts of the certainty of the other. Even so in this our
present question, most certain it is, there have always been both flocks
and sheepherdes, to continue both the truth and Christ's church. For that we
grant is necessary: but yet through continuance of time, force of your
Antichristian persecution, distance perhaps of the flocks and sheepeheards in
place from us, that God in some ages under your tyranny has used to continue
his church by, and lack of faithful and careful writers to cronicle such
matters, especially your wouluish and foxy sheepheardes, being always
watchful, and mindful to their uttermost, either to blot out their memories
quite, in not suffering their Croniclers to mention them; or else in causing
them to deface them, with strange name and false slanders, makes it very hard
(yea if impossible no marvel, you having the evidences, whereby we should do
it, for the most part, a long time in your own keeping, to use at your own
pleasure) for us to name from time to time, the places and persons, that have
always succeeded one another, for the continuance of our faith and Church. But
to return again to the consideration of this place of the Canticles: further
I say, as I said before, that you err in alleging this or any other place
of the Scripture, to prove that the Church of Christ may safely account those
flocks in possession of the truth, and therefore to be followed: and those
sheepheardes true sheepheardes, and therefore meet always to be consented
unto: that lineally down from Christ can deduce their personal succession.
For so (as I have showed in the first Chapter, and it is not denied of your
selves) sundry heretics in their times, have done and can do still. If
therefore you say, you mean still that flock and those sheepheardes, that
together with their visible personal succession, have always been in
possession of the true ancient faith, I answer, first, you beg still the
thing in question, in supposing that, to have been always joined with your
flocks and sheepheards, which we say, and are able to prove, they fell from
many hundredth years ago.

Secondly, I tell you once again, and now this time for all, that you shall
never be able to prove, but that both that personal succession may be
separated from truth, and also truth from it, and that therefore it is
neither a certain means to know the truth, nor the Church of Christ by.
Thirdly, for your collection out of this place, for the justifying of your
Church before ours, because (as you say) from time to time, for this thousand
and five hundredth years, you can show the descent and continuance of yours,
and we cannot of ours for one hundredth years, no not beyond the year one
thousand five hundredth and seventeen, we affirm that both in the one, and in
the other, herein you write untruly. For first, if your Church as it is now
either in respect of the doctrine, or government thereof, be compared with
the ancient Roman Church in the Apostles times, or for many hundredth years
after, there is such diversity betwixt the one and the other, as that the one
being found the chaste spouse of Christ, the other must needs be proved to
be the very whoar of Babylon. The simplicity of the ministry that then was,
is turned amongst you into a pompous, Lordly, and more then Princely prelacy.
And then the Church was fed, with the pure word of God, contained in the
Scriptures, and so led thereby perfectly to understand the will of God; and
with you, as carefully as may be, that is kept from her, and in steed
thereof, she is fed with the dreams, inventions, and traditions of men.
Then she was taught to account the name of Christ, the only name, whereby
comes salvation, Act. 4. and therefore that in him all things were prepared:
Math. 22. and now with you, besides him, Saints, Angels, your own merits,
and the merits of others, satisfaction in this life by your selves, and after
by others, with a number of baser things, must join with him in the office of
intercession betwixt us and God, and in the most glorious work of our
salvation: as though he either could not or would not, go perfectly through
with the work of our salvation in himself, and by himself, but had so
begun it, as that the accomplishing and perfecting thereof were left to these
vain and foolish by-meanes. Then her faithful doctors and teachers taught
her, that Christ, in saying, Hoc est corpus meum, this is my body, meant, that
it was a sign and figure of his body, as you may read in Augustine against
Adimantus, the Maniche cap. 12. and in Tertull. against Marcion cap. 4. and in
infinite places elsewhere, in the ancient fathers: and now contrary to nature,
yea to the very nature of a sacrament, contrary to the analogy of faith and
good manners, yours teach, that those words being uttered by your Priests,
thereupon follows such a transubstantiation of the bread into his body, that
whosoever receives the outward part of that sacrament, receives in by his
mouth, the natural body of Christ. If thus I were disposed to go a long, as
far as I might, and to lead the reader to a full view of the difference,
betwixt the Romish Church that now is, and that which has been, I should
even therewith make a great book. But further of these differences I have
noted, as you may read Chapter 19. and 20. and else where in this book. And
Doctor Fulke against Stapletons Fortress, has noted out of Bid and other
authors of good credit 50. differences betwixt the church of the English
Saxons in the time of Augustine the monk (who was 600. years after Christ at
the least) and the Popish church, that now is; and infinite be the differences
then, betwixt the Church before, in her puerer times, and the Popish Synagogue
now. And therefore whatsoever you brag, neither you, nor all your fellows,
shall ever be able to prove indeed, that your personal succession has been
joined with the continuance of one and selfsame doctrine of Christ, unto these
days.

And to come to the other point, therein I say, you write untruly also. For
so far of is it, that we grant Luther to have been the first that preached
the Gospel that we now embrace, and that we cannot show by whom and where
it was preached and received before: that there is nothing more common with us,
in answering this your objection of newnes, then to tell you, that so far of
is it, that it is new indeed, that it is the very ancient Religion and
Gospel, taught both in the old testament and new: and therefore (though it
grieve you) we tell you that the ancient Patriarchs and Prophets, Christ and
his Apostles, taught the very same, and no other, and all the ancient doctors
and fathers, as far forth as they were able to justify that which they
taught, by the Scriptures, were sheepheardes of our church, and teachers of our
Religion. Indeed, we confess, that as Hilkiah the Priest in Iosiahs time (2.
King. 22.) found the book of God, and was so a means to bring those things
to light, that by the wicked proceedings of Manasses, Amon and others, had for
a certain season lien hid: So Luther in these late days was a singular
instrument of God, to revive and bring to light diverse points of Christian
faith, which your Antichristian Synagogue had long labored to smother, and
hide from the eyes of the Church. And yet hereupon it no more follows, that
he was the first that preached our Religion, then upon the former it followed,
that Hilkiah was then first the means, to preach the law of God. And I tell
you truly, that I cannot marvel yet sufficiently, that any man of any
reason, judgment and learning (as you would seem to be) should be so far
past all shame, as confidently to set down in print, that we cannot deny, but
that Luther 1517. began first our Church and Religion: and that we can name
none 100. or 200. years before, that taught it: when you cannot be ignorant
(unless your ignorance be very gross) that we name unto you very many, and
that in all ages, to have been of the same Religion and Church, that we are
now of. For first there is nothing more usual with us, then to tell you, that
all the ancient Patriarchs, Prophets, Evangelists, and Apostles (witness the
canonical Scriptures) lived and died in our Church and Religion. The same
opinion we tell you we have of all the Christian martyrs (whose number is
infinite) that were slain in the first 300. years after Christ, under the 10.
bloody persecutions, that were in that time. For during that time, our Religion
was only professed and embraced in the Church, and very little or nothing
was there of those opinions, for the which especially, we account your
Religion Antichristian (unless it were of heretics, and such as had learned
it of them) in those days once thought of. And after for three hundredth years
more at least, in all the most substantial points of Christian Religion, and
the greatest questions betwixt us and you, all the ancient doctors, and the
Christians that lived in their times (as we have diverse times said, so have
we often so proved it, that you shall never be able therein to disprove us)
were fully ours. And though after these times, when Boniface the third, had
once obtained of that traitorous murderer Phocas, the Antichristian title of
Oecumenicall, or universal Bishop, the mystery of iniquity did every day work
more plainly then other, and hasted to his height: yet (as I have showed in
my answer to your publishers preface, and in the sixteenth Chapter of this my
answer to your self, where you brag again, as you do here, of 1500.
years antiquity and continuance) there were after these times from time to
time, that both spied the growth and proceeding thereof, and set themselves
against it. For Bertram and Johannes Scotus, were with us against your gross
real presence, above 700. years ago. Trithemius makes mention of a book
written 400. years ago, which is supposed was written by one Arnulphus, for (as
Sabellicus and Platina testify) much about that time was he put to death of
the Romish clergy: in which book the author grievously complains, of the
enormities amongst the said Clergy, and finds many faults in the Romish
Church. Gisburne also in his story writes, that in the year 1158. Dulcinus
Nauarensis and Gerrhardus, preached earnestly, that the Pope was Antichrist:
and that they had thirty followers, whom they brought into England, who were
persecuted then, here for preaching that, and other such like doctrine against
the Romish Church. Much about this time (but somewhat rather before) a company
of Christians (who by your Prelates were nickenamed Albigenses) did flourish:
and there were great multitudes of them, even about Tholossa (whereof you
Master Albine are called Archdeaco^) who did vehemently resist your Pope, and
his proceedings, setting up unto themselves a Bishop, whom they called
Bartholomew, oppugning the gross points of your Religion, even as we do:
witness Nicolas Trivet and others, in their Stories. Hildegarde, though she
were a Nun, yet in the year 1146. prophesied the ruin of your kingdom at
Rome, and bitterly inueighed against the wickedness of your Clergy and
Friars. So did Geffery Chaucer about the same time (namely in his Dialogue
called Jack Vpland) very saltly taunt, and deride the vanity of your frierly
superstition. In the year 1164. was Petrus Valdus a citizen of Lions, whose
followers after had given them diverse names, to disgrace them withal. For
your friends call them Waldenses, Albigenses, pauperes de Lugduno, Picardos,
Boslauienses, Thaboritas, and Leonistas, changing their titles and names,
according to the diversities of places and times they lived in, howsoever their
Religion was all one. And these have been of ancient time, and of great
continuance, in very many places, namely in Province, Sarmatia, Lyuonia,
Bohemia, Morauia, Polonia, Silesia, Belgia, and in Calabria: and of you
wheresoever, or whenever they were, they have been cruelly persecuted for
heretics: and yet if their opinions be judged of, not as you (the more to
disgrace them) have charged them, but as they in their own confessions of
their faith and Apologies, have set them down, they in many things held the
very same that we do, and condemned the same for errors in you, that we
now do. They are of 400. years continuance at least. For Aeneas Syluius a man
of your own (for he was Pope ere he died) writes, handling the stories of
Boeme, that they had continued unto his time from the year 1160. And Gulielmus
Paruus writes, that their doctrine was examined in Oxforde, and found sound,
concerning God and the merits of Christ (for your doctrine concerning the
iorning of our own merits with Christ's, to make up full satisfaction and
redemption, is of far later invention) and their life (says he) was
commendable, but in the doctrine of the Sacrament, they were found to differ
from the Church of Rome. Yea Reinerus a writer 300. years ago, who (as he
himself says) was often at the examination of them, in his book of
inquisitions, writing of them, calling them Leonists, confesses that some
said they had continued from Syluesters time, and that some said, they had
been even from the time of the Apostles: and he further reports that they had
great show of holy life, in living justly before men, and that they believed
all things well of God, and all the articles contained in the creed: only he
charge them, that they hated and blasphemed the Romish Church. And this he
further writes, that there was no land, wherein that sect did not creep, and
speaking but of the^ that were the^ but in one country, yet this he testifies,
that they had there, ten schools in one parish, called Camach, that there were
forty congregations or Churches of them, every one having their leaders or
teachers, and that their power in his time was such, that none (as he says)
durst then openly resist them. There are yet to be seen (as good authors
report) the consultations and records of the proceedings of four great Bishops
in France against them, written three hundredth years ago; namely of
Narbonensis, Arelatensis, Aquensis, and Albanensis: yea 355. years ago, I
read, there was a Council kept in Tholossa especially against them. And yet
though both of ancient times, and later days, the Synagogue of Rome has
sought to root them out by all possible cruelty, they and their successors
continue unto this day, in great numbers in Bohemia, and in other places.

But because you very often in this your book, and the rest of your side
continually bear the simple reader, and unlearned Christian in hand, that
before Luther there were none of our religion, that have so condemned your
Church and religion, as we do: I will vouchsafe for the better inabling of
every one, that shall read this my answer, to see your vanity and impiety
(though this which I have noted already be sufficient to lay open your folly)
to proceed yet somewhat further in this matter. Wherefore (to go on in the
course of times) though your popish Church has been in her ruff, and at the
heighest, that ever she was, this latter 400 years, yet we are able to show,
that there have been many even in this time from time to time (and that in
sundry places) that have joined with us against you, and that therefore, there
is no such newness, or strangenes in our religion a d doings, as you would
make the ignorant believe. For in the days of Gregory the 9, in the year 1230
the Greek Church, and other Eastern Churches did quite forsake communion with
yours: who ever since join with us, in a number of things against you, as
namely in withstanding the supremacy of your Romish Bishop, as appears not
only by one Epistle that Germanus Petriarch of Constantinople wrote unto the
pope in the year 1237, but also by a large book, written about the year 1384
by Nilus Archbishop of Thessalonica, wherein he does not only confute his
Supremacy, even as we do, but also he enueigheth against al those that hold
communion with the Popish or latin Church. And (as it appears in ancient
record, in the Church of Herford, wherein 29 of the Articles, wherein they
differ from the Church of Rome, are set down) they join not only with us in
this point, in seperating themselves from the Romish Church, and in denying the
popes supremacy (which is the very foundation of your Church and religion) but
also in denying purgatory, and masses for the dead, in holding it lawful for
their ministers, to enjoy the benefit of matrimony, in not using any private
mass, in not denying the cup to any that receive, in not ministering the
communion in private houses, in not using extreme unction, and in sundry other
points. And by diverse Epistles written from thence of late, extant in print both
in greek and latin, to Chitreus and other Germans, it evidently appears,
that they join with us against the Romish Church in many other great and
weighty points of our religion, and that great hope there is, that they might
easily be brought to join with us in the rest. Besides these Eastern
churches, eue^ here in these western parts, evident it is, that there have
been many great, learned and famous persons, with innumerable followers, at
all times from age to age, in these latter 400 years, when the tyranny of your
popes to repress them has been the greatest and strongest, that ever it was,
which yet have openly with us stood forth against them and their religion. For
Frederick the second (as diverse other Emperors had been before him) as
namely Constantine the 5. Leo his son, and Constantine the 6 in the East, and
Henry the 4 and 5 in the West) was a notable Antagonist of the 3 popes in his
time, contending against them, to maintain the authority of Christian princes
against their usurped Supremacy over them, about the year 1260, as notoriously
the Cronicles of those times written by your own men Platina, Sabelicus and
others declare. And 20 years before that, Kra^tzius testifies in his history:
that there were many that preached openly in Sueuia, that the Pope was an
heretic, his clergy Symoniakes, and generally they all seducers of the
people. Ten years after that, flourished Arnoldus De noua villa, a Spaniard,
who taught, that Satan had the^ seduced the world, that the faith the^ taught,
was but such as devils had (meaning belike a bare historical faith) that the
pope led men to hell, that he and his clergy did falsify the doctrine of
Christ, that masses were naught and not to be said for the dead etc. and
therefore your popish Church condemned him for an heretic. Much what about
the same time was Gulielmus De Sancto amore, a master and chief ruler then in
Paris, who went as far as Arnoldus, applying the same Scriptures, which
concern Antichrist, as we do, to the pope and his clergy: and therefore he
also was condemned for an heretic, and his books burnt by your popish rout.
And in the year 1260 Laurentius Anglicus a master of Paris also, took this
Williams part against the pope, and wrote a book in his defense. In the year
1290 Petrus Ioha^nes, a Minorite, directly preached the pope to be Antichrist,
and Rome great Babylon, and therefore he was burnt after he was dead. 30 years
and more before this, Robert Grosthead, a famous learned man, and Bishop of
Lincoln (for he died in the year one thousand two hunderd fifty three) was a
great withstander of the popes tyranny, and three days before his death,
having conference with his clergy, he labors to make them see by sundry
demonstrations, that the pope was Antichrist, and his doings Antichristian.
King Philip of France, about the year one thousand three hundred, was a great
withstander of the Supremacy, which now the Pope challenges, and a resister in
his dominions, of sundry of his enormities; and William Nagareta, and the
prelates of France, then joined with their king against the pope. Grosthead,
this king Philip, and his clergy, as afterward king Edward the 3. king of
England, in the year 1346, despised the popes curse, and appealed from him to
God. There is in an ancient Chronicle of S. Albons, a notable Epistle of one
Cassiodorus to the Church of England: wherein are laid forth a number of
lamentable abuses in the Roman Church: in the year one thousand three hundred
twenty eight. In the Extrauagants, we read, that Marsillius Patauinus,
Johannes de Ganduno, Michael Chesenas, Petrus de Carborea, and Johannes de
Poliaco (all great learned men) were condemned by the Pope for preaching
against his Supremacy, and other errors of that Church of his, about the year
1326. There were the^ also many learned me^ more, that disputed and wrote
against his Supremacy, and which took part with Ludouicke the Emperor against
him, as William Occam, Luitpoldus, Andreas Landanensis, Vlricus Hangenor, the
Emperors treasurer, and others. Dantes, living in the year one thousand three
hundred, wrote against the Pope, the orders of religious men, and the Doctors
of the Decrees, saying, that these were three great enemies to the truth: he
flatly has left in writing in his ca^ticle of Purgatory, that the Pope of a
pastor was become a woulfe, and that he was the whoar of Babylon. In the year
1350. Gregory Ariminensis, Andreas de Castro, and Burdianus, taught as we do;
against your doctrine of freewill and merits. Taulerus then a preacher in
Argentine, preached openly against your doctrine of man's merits, and praying
to Saints etc. And Franciscus Petrarcha flourishing about that time. in his
ninteenth and twentieth Epistle, calls the seat of the papacy, the whoar of
Babylon, the temple of heresy and treachery: and in such sort describes it,
both at Rome, and at Avinion (where then the Pope sat) that he (as it there
seems) counted it the greatest evil, that can befall a man, to be made pope.
Johannes de rupe scissa, about 10. years after, in the year 1340, was so sore
a rebuker of the abominations of the clergy, that he was therefore
imprisoned: he also compared the pope to a bird, richly clad with other birds
feathers: and yet so, as that for the pride of that bird he prophecieth, that
the time would come, when the other birds would call for their feathers
again, and so make him know himself. Co^radus Hagar one of the city
Herbipolis, about this time preached 24 years (as it appears in the Records
of Otho, bishop of that City) that the mass was no propitiatory sacrifice
either for the quick, or the dead. And within three years after, the book
called Paenitentiarius Asini, was written, wherein the Pope is resembled to the
Woulfe, the Clergy to the Fox, and the Laity to the poor Ass. In the year
one thousand three hundred and fifty, Gerrhardus Ridder, wrote a book, called
Lachrima Ecclesiae, wherein he vehemently inueigheth against begging Friars.
Michael Chesenas before mentioned, amongst other things, preached, that the
pope was Antichrist, and Rome Babylon. He had many followers, whereof I read
some were burned, as Johannes de Castilone, and Franciscus de Arcatara, and he
himself being Prouincial of the Gray Friars, was deprived and condemned, in
the year one thousand three hundred twenty two, or there abouts. And in the
time of Innocent the 6. 1353, I read, that two Fra^ciscane Friars were burnt at
Auinion: whereof the one was one John de Rochetalayda, otherwise called
Hayabolus, witness Premonstrat: and Henry Herford. Who (as Henry of Herford
writes) preached in the time of Pope Clement the 6, in the year 1345, that he
was commanded by God to preach, that Rome was Babylon, and that the pope, and
his Cardinals were very Antichrist: and being brought before the pope for it,
to his face he boldly did aduouch the same. Brigit (whom you your selves have
made a Saint) about the year 1370, in her book of Revelations, was a most
bitter rebuker of the pope and his clergy: and so likewise was Katherina
Senensis 2 years after, as Antonine writes in his 3 part of his story,
terming the pope a murderer of souls, a spiller and pillar of the flock of
Christ, saying, that they were more abominable, the^ Jews; more cruel, the^
Judas; more unjust, the^ Pilate; and worse then Lucifer himself. And ye former
of the^ plainly prophesied, that their kingdom should be thrown down as a
milsto^e into the deep: and that the clergy had turned al Gods co^mandeme^ts
into these two words, Da pecunia^, give money. Mathias Parisie^sis a Bohemia^,
about the year 1370 wrote a large book of Antichrist, proving him to be come,
and that the pope was he, and the Locusts in the Apocalypse (he says) are his
hypocritical clergy. About this very time Greg. ye 11, sent a bull to the
Archbishop of Prage, stirring him up thereby to persecute one Melitzius, and
his followers, who is charged in that bull to have preached, that the Pope was
Antichrist, and to have had congregations following him. As Brushius writes,
in the year 1390. there were burned at Bringa 36. citizens of Moguntia, for
the doctrine of the Walde^ses, holding also that the Pope was Antichrists and
Massens records, that there were burnt about the same time 140. for the same
cause in the province of Narbon: and the same author testifies, that in the
year 1210. 24 suffered at Paris, and that the next year there were 400.
burned for the like cause; 80. beheaded; Prince Armericus hanged; and the Lady
of the castle stoned to death. Houeden also notes, that about these times,
there were great numbers put to death, in France for this cause of Religion.
Trithemius writes that Ecchardus a dominicke Friar, was put to death at
Hiddelberge in the year 1330, for withstanding the Popish doctrine. There is
an old monument of process against 44^. persons for the same cause in
Pomerania, Marchia and places there about in the year 1391. And certain it
is, that if the records and statutes of all countries in these western parts
should be searched, even thereby would it appear, that the number of those
that have gainesaied the Pope, and his proceedings, in the time of his greatest
flourishing, and cruelty' have been from time to time infinite, how much
greater then, is it likely, was the number of them, that informer times (when
he was not grown to that power to vex the servants of god, as he has been
for these last 300. or 400. years) have professed the truth boldly against
him? Thus are we come to John Wicklifes time, who flourished here in England
about the year of the Lord 1372; and yet I have, for the avoiding of too, too
much tediousnes, omitted the names of a number of famous men, that have also
withstoode popery, and joined with us in sundrypointes against them, in those
times that I have run through, as namely Alcuinus Archbishop of Canterbury,
directly with us against them in the matter of real presence, Aelfricus,
Ioachim Abbot of Calabria, Arnoldus Brixianus, Almericus a learned Bishop in
Innocents time the third, judged a^ heretic, for teaching (as we do) against
images; Beringaiius, Reymundus Earl of Tolossa, Lord Peter de Cogneriis, Eudo
Duke of Burgandie, the Archbishop of Armah, and infinite others. I might also
here again have remembered that with H. Mutius writes, of an 100 burnt in one
day in Alsatia, under Innocent the 3, in the year 1215, when Antichrist in the
Lateran council, bringing in the new and monstrous article of
Transubstantiation, showed himself to be even grown to his highest degree of
iniquity.

But to let these pass, and to proceed: John Wicklife (as it is famously
known) was with us against you in the most and weightiest things betwixt you
and us in controversy, and therefore in your council of Constance, you
condemned him and caused his dry and rotten bones to be taken up again and
burned. Whiles he lived, he had many great learned men here in England that
joined with him, as namely Nicholas Herford, Philip Repington, John Ashton, and
Laurence Redeman, and so many followers had he, and they and he had such
favor and protection, especially of the Duke of Lancaster, that then was, that
though your prelates here in England vexed and molested them what they could;
yet they and their favorers in short time grew to that strength and multitude,
that by the year 1422 Henry Chicheley then Archbishop of Canterbury certified
the pope, that they all could not be suppressed, they were so many, but by
force of war. Now betwixt John Wicklifes time and the flourishing of John Hus
(which was about the year 1410) very many both here and elsewhere for
following Wicklife were persecuted, as namely here in England William
Swinderley, Walter Brute, William Sautry, John Badby, and William Thorpe,
whereof diverse were most cruelly burned. Then when John Hus and Hierome of
Prage had been burnt at the council of Constance, for taking the like course
in Boemia, that John Wicklife and his fellows had done before here in England,
about the year 1417, the religion that we now profess began to gather so
great strength in Boemia, that the professors thereof were able, not only to
defend themselves, by force of arms, from the intended oppressions against
them by the Bishop of Rome and his adherentes, but also to get many glorious
victories against the strongest powers, that the pope could raise against them.
Now from the year 1410, when Hus began to flourish, unto Luthers time 1517,
wonderful many both there in Boemia, here in England and elsewhere, continually
rose up and stood forth, even unto the death, against popery, in the
profession of our religion. Amongst who^ here in England, at one time, in the
year 1413 there were burned in Saint Giles field, under the name of Lollardes
36. Amongst whom Sir Roger Acton Knight, Master John Brown, and Master John
Beuerley, were put to death. After, 1415, Richard Claydon, and Richard Turning
were burnt in Smithfield: about this time 16. of name, were persecuted in Kent,
and very many in other places of this Land. Within a while after, in the year
one thousand four hundred twenty two, William Tailor was burnt here, and two
years after that, William White was burn: and betwixt that time and the year
1430, father Abraham of Colchester, John Waddon, and Richard Houeden were
burnt. And about that time Paul Crow a Bohemia^ was burnt there, and Thomas
Rhodonensis, at Rome. And ere Luther began to preach against the Pope and his
doctrine, from the year one thousand four hundred and thirty, here suffered
for the same religion that we now preach and embrace, amongst many others
Richard Which, John Goose, one Babran, one Jerome, and others with him, James
Marden, William Tilsworth, one Father Roberts, and Sir John Olde-castle, the
Lord Cobham. Now since Luther, I hope you will not deny, but the number of them
that are on our side against you, even in these Western parts, carry such a
visible show, that you cannot but hear and see the multitudes thereof, round
about you, at home and abroad to be such, that I dare say your hearts begin to
fear, that if the number increase but a while longer, as it has done of late,
your Roman prelate is like to turn up his heels, and to leese his glory in
these western parts, as well as he has done long ago, in the Eastern
cuntries. And therefore you cannot but likewise think, that he does very
wisely and prouidently to send before hand (as he does) his Ihesuits amongst
the savage and wild Indians, to prepare him there a new kingdom, against he
has lost his old here. For not only under your own noses in Italy and
Spain, and elsewhere, wheresoever your antichristian tyranny causes your
religion to have outward and public allowance, to your grief you see, do
what you can, our religion finds still many constant confessors even unto
death, and has done now these many years: but also you know, that so many
kingdoms and cuntries, have given and yet do, open allowance to ours, and
defyance to yours as antichristian; that by this time, you cannot but see, your
old argument of universality, grows fast to be out of date and force with
you, and begins a pace to stand on our side. For eue^ in these Western
parts, our doctrine is embraced and professed, and has been now a good while,
with the allowance of public authority, and yours openly defaced, written and
preached against as antichristian, in the kingdoms of England, Ireland,
Scotland, Denmark, Sweden, and France; likewise in Bohemia, and in Polonia in
diverse whole territories and Dukedomes, in Holand and Zeland, and in the Prince
of Russia his dominions. And besides who knows not, that in like manner it is
now, and has been long, in the Dukedom of Saxony and of Brunswicke, in the
dominions of the Palsgraue of Rhene, the Dukedom of Wittenberg, and in the
territories of the Lantgraue of Hessia, and the Marquis of Brandeburge, besides
the great common weals of Heluetia, Rhetia, Vallis Tellina, and the cuntries of
diverse other noble men in other places of Germany and elsewhere?

But they that hereby sufficiently do not perceive the folly and falsehood of
your saying, that before Luther we can name none to have been of this mind, I
refer them for further confutation of that your shameless untruth, unto
Illiricus Catalogue of the witnesses of the truth, to the Centuries of them of
Magdeburge, and to master Foxes Acts and momuments of the Church, where they
shall find not only much of these things, here briefly touched by me, more at
large set down, but also further proof out of good authors, that this religion
which we now profess, has had always since Christ, to these days in once
place or other, both embracers and teachers of it. And therefore though it has
not always had so visible and glorious a succession of pompous, ambitious, and
proud prelates, as yours has had, for these later times, since Antichrist grew
to his pride and height; yet it has never been without flocks and
sheepheardes, one going before another in the profession of our religion, even
up from our days unto Christ. But when for very shame, convicted with the
force of the truth, you are driven to confess, that in some part it may be
true, that there were always some that joined with us, yet to drive us from
alleging their names and succession against you, you say, they yet held so
many different and lewd opinions, that we cannot fetch any continuance to our
faith or religion from them. Whereunto I answer, first, that we are not to
believe your reports of them, but their own Apologies and writings: whereby
it appears, that it has been always your fashion (the more thereby to
discredit the^) to charge them to hold a number of absurd opinions, which they
never held. Besides, I say, though it may be in some points, we and they
differ, yet as long, as we and they agree in the foundation, we have learned to
account them our brethren. 1. Cor. 3. and so to join with them, in that which
they hold well. And lastly (to drive you from this shift) we tell you, that if
you will countenance your religion and Church with none, but with those that
agree with you fully in all points, there is never an ancient father for 600
years, no not any writer, or pastor in the Church of any good credit, for
1000 years, that you may make any reckoning of: and that (which then will go
very near you) even since Augustine the monks coming into England (as I have
said) and for 300 years after him, your glorious succession must fail: there
are so many apparent differences for so long space at least, betwixt the
opinions, that your pastors and doctors hold now, and them that were held then.
Take heed therefore, whiles you measure thus to us, and so seek to disgrace
them, whose names we cite, that the same be not measured to you again, and so
the neck of your visible Succession be broken, to the peril of the life of
your Church, which draws her breath thereby.

Now to come to your disgracing of our Church with the difference of opinion
betwixt Luther and Zuinglius, and your laying to our charge, all the heresies,
that have sprung up, since Luther began first to preach against you, therein do
you us manifold wrong. For who knows not, that it is no strange or new thing,
to find the dear servants of God, and the true members of Christ's Church
sometimes and in some things differing, and hoatly dissenting in opinion? Do
we not read ( Mat. 16.) that one thing seemed good to Peter, and the contrary
seemed, and was indeed, good in Christ's judgment? Did not Peter take one
course, and Paul another at Antioch, Galat. 2. insomuch that Paul there rebuked
Peter openly and sharply? And find we not ( Act. 15.) Paul and Barnabas,
grown to that heat of contention, about the receiving again or refusing of
John Mark, that they parted companies? And if we leave the Scriptures and go
down to later times, and view the state of the Church even in the purest times
thereof, we shall find it no strange thing to see diversities of opinions, and
therefore also hot contentions, betwixt those, whom yet we will and must
account the true members of the Church. Betwixt Polycrates and Victor, the East
and West Churches, Irenaeus and certain other Bishops of France, and some
Popes, the contention about the observation of Easter, was such Euse.
5.21.22.23.24. that one side excommunicated another, that diverse Synods were
held to appease it, and yet it continued 300 years and more. And who knows
not, that there was contention betwixt Cypria^ and other Bishops of Afric;
and Cornelius and Stephanus Bishops of Rome, for yt they eue^ the^ at Rome,
encroched too much (as ye other thought) to intermeddle within ye iurisdictio^s
of the Bishops of Afric, in receiving condemned and excommunicated fugitives,
that ran to Rome from thence. Neither was the controversy small betwixt them,
about the rebaptizing of those, that had been before only baptized by
heretics. For proof of both which points, I refer you to the third and
fourth Epistles of Cyprians first book of Epistles, and to the first Epistle
of his second book, and to the third and fourth Chapters of Eusebius seventh
book. Basil also, and the Church of Caesarea (as it is well known) were at
hot contention about Ecclesiastical songs and ceremonies. Theophilus of
Alexandria, and Chrysostom of Constantinople, had between them a violent and
troublesome contention, and great part taking there was of both sides, and that
along time. Cyrillus of Alexandria, wrote against Theodoret, in a controversy
of Catholic religion. Betwixt Miletius a Bishop of Egypt, and one Peter of
Alexandria, and their followers of both sides, there arose and continued a long
while, to the great trouble of the Church, a lamentable contention. All
Ecclesiastical stories (for the most part) have with grief made report of
these: yea down from Christ to the age wherein every one of them wrote, it too
plainly appears in them, that there was never yet any one century of years,
but it has had new contentions and those many, not only betwixt heretics
and catholics, but also even amongst those that otherwise of both sides, were
to be reputed sound Christians. Hierom and Augustine (as all men will
confess) were in their times worthy so to be accounted, and yet it appears
in their works, that there was great diversity of opinions, and that in many
things of great moment betwixt them. Epiphanius Bishop of Cyprus and
Chrysostom (of whom I spoke before) were both famous Christians, and yet the
stories of their times show, that they were bitter enemies. It is notoriously
known, that amongst the Bishops assembled against the Arrians at the council
of Nice, Constantine by the books offered unto him one against an other found,
that they then had amongst themselves many contentions and varieties of
opinions: and infinite it were, to reckon up all the examples that might easily
be found to this end. Indeed I read, for these and such like differences, the
Jews and Heathen people, mocked at the Christians, and hereby sought mightily
to deface them and their religion: seventh Stromat: Clement: Alexandrini. But I
never read, that either then or since, ever any sound Christian (though for
this cause they took occasion to mourn) yet that they or any of them took
occasion to condemn either the one side, or the other, or both; as not to be
therefore at all of the Church of Christ. For, notwithstanding these
differences, they saw, that they joined together otherwise as brethren in
holding together the fundamental points. And that they, whom you call
Lutherans and Zuinglians, do so, the book of late set forth of the Harmony of
the confessions of all the Churches, that hereabouts profess the Gospel,
does make it most manifest and evident. And therefore for any force, that this
reason carries with it, this their difference (which is in effect only about
the manner of the presence of Christ in the Sacrament) they both may be members
of the true ancient Catholic Church, as well as these other, who^ I have named.

Another wrong that herein they offer us is this, that being themselves at
variance amongst themselves, and having had many and great contentions, and yet
having still some, about as great a matter of religion, as this: that yet
forgetting the beam in their own eyes, like hypocrites, they are so busy
with the moate in ours. For who so reads the histories of their Popes written
by their own friends, besides a number of hot and contentious schisms,
troubling all Christendom, for many years together, yea sometimes forty
years, continuing betwixt their Popes and Antipopes, he shall find it so
common a thing for the succeeding Pope, to contrary the proceedings of his
predecessor, as though the chief glory of their papacy lay in that: and
therefore, poor Gratian took a combersome work in hand, to make a concord
of such discording Canons. Their religion considered, it is one of the greatest
controversies that can be, whither the pope or a general council, have the
superior authority; and so must be the carier of the Churches tongue, to
decide and determine controversies: and yet even in this controversy, they are
so at concord, that the council of Constance and Basil, determined one way,
and the councels of Florence and Ferraria the other way, and yet both sides
has his stout champions. The Scotistes and Thomistes many an hundred years
have been at contention, and yet (doubtless) are not agreed, about the
conception of the Virgin Mary, whither it were in sin or no, and about diverse
and sundry other great mysteries of their religion. Yea even in the Sacrament
of the body and blood of Christ (wherein they would seem to be at greatest
unity) yet if a man were disposed to note the diverse opinions therein amongst
themselves, he should scarce ever know, when to make an end. For there be
some of them that hold, that there Christ's body is torn and chewed with the
teeth (as it appears in the Recantation, that they prescribe to Beringarius)
others (as Guymund: de Consecra: Did: 2.) think that too gross. Some (as
Gardener) would have Hoc to signify indiuiduum vagum, a certain thing that
is, but they cannot tell what: others now would have it to note that, which is
under the accidents of bread and wine. Scotus and Innocentius the fourth,
hold consecration to be, not by the five words, but by Christ's blessing:
others hold now that it is done, by the five words. When it comes to the
eating, some hold that it enters the mouth, but no further: others will have
it to pass into the stomach, but not into the guts: others will have it to
go thither also. Infinite are the questions, that they are fallen into about
this matter. And in their last conuenticle at Trident, where they had hoped to
have healed all these sores, yet even then there grew a great contention
betwixt two great captains of theirs, Archbishop Catharinus, and Friar Soto;
and that about no small matters, namely, about assured confidence of the favor
of God: Predestination, original sin, free will, and such like matters;
Insomuch, that for all the council could do, for six years together, they
continually went on in writing books bitterly one against another. The same
Catharin also, wrote a book against Caietan a Cardinal, laying therein to his
charge 200. errors. Contention also the same Catharin had, with Fra^ciscus
Torrensis, a man otherwise of his own faction, about single life of priests,
and residence of Bishops, both which, the one held was (as he taught therein)
warranted by Gods word, the other stoutly holding the contrary. In the
Articles of justification, free grace, and original sin, Ruard Tapper a
great Papist and Deane of Colen, in his second tome, wrote against Piggius an
Archpiller of that Synagogue, contending to prove, that he was deceived and
erred in those points. But what should I take upon me, to reckon up the
contentions and controversies that are amongst them: For certain it is, they
are so many and infinite, that a man, if he were disposed, might write a book
of a whole quire of paper, consisting only of a bare recital of the
differences of opinions, that their writers have set down in their own
books, about points and questions of religion. And yet see, as though there
never had been jar amongst them, they brag of unity amongst the simple, and
labor our disgrace, with the objection of variety of opinions amongst us,
especially about this one point, of the manner of Christ's real presence in the
sacrament.

But seeing now hereby in part you see, at what agreement they are, I hope you
think it reason; that they should agree better amongst themselves, before
they insult any more against us, for our disagreement. Lastly, they do us
wrong, in seeking to disgrace us and our religion, in that since Luther began
to preach, there have risen up diverse and sundry fond and foolish
heretics. For we read, that immediately after the Apostles times, even within
few years, Epiphanius by his time, could reckon up eighty, and Augustine more
several errors and heresies, which in effect did grow together with the
Gospel, and yet the Gospel not to be blamed therefore, but Satan, who where
the good seedes-man sowed good seed, uses to sow also his tares: Matthew the
thirteenth. And yet it seems by Saint John's prevention of this objection,
that some, as well affected to the Gospel then belike, as you be now, were
ready hereby to discredit both the Apostles, and their doctrine. But John's
answer is, they went out from us, but they were not of us: for if they had
been of us, they would have continued with us. But this came to pass, that
it might appear, that they were not all of us: 1. John. 3. Even so, we
answer you concerning those, that you say, have any where since Luther risen
amongst us, and fallen into heresies. Yet further, so much the more apparent is
the wrong that you offer us in this behalf, in that not only you know, we
shun communion with them, as well as you: but that also it evidently has
appeared to the world, that we have been both the first and the forwardest in
detecting of them, and in confuting of them from time to time. Wherefore I
conclude, that hitherto you have said nothing of any force, for the
justification either of your vocation, Church, or religion.

The V. Chapter.
THe like unto this is confirmed by Vincensius Lyrinensis (of whom we have
spoken before) for he says in the book above named, that that person ought to
be esteemed a true Catholic, This rule is sound and good, but it quite
overthrows popery, because it cannot be proved to be this ancient Catholic
faith. For ^he contrary is certain both by scripture, and all sound antiquity.
that has nothing in greater co^me^dation, then the true religion of the
Catholic faith: yea, although it were the wisest man in the world, and the
greatest Philosopher, and the fairest speaker that ever was, if he came to
speak against the old doctrine, that has been taught us of our forefathers,
time out of mind, we ought (says he) to disdain that learned Clarke, with all
his philosophy and cunning, and to hold our selves to the ancient opinion of
the church, the which has continued until this present day. But such as all
popery, and no part of our religion.
And if that now one should bring a new doctrine, that was not heard of
before, contrary unto that, that has ever been taught in the Church, say, that
it does not appertain unto the state of the Catholic faith, and that it is
no religion, but a temptation. And therefore, if we will be saved, we ought to
live and die in that faith, that has continued by succession of Pastors, even
from Christ's time unto these days. S. Irenaeus a very famous writer, Lib. 4.
contr. haer. cap. 65.
in his fourth book against heresies, the 65. Chapter, who was within a few
years of the Apostles, Archbishop of Lions, writes the very like, Prove your
religion now to be the same, that was in Irenaeus time, and then you say
something, and his testimony make for you, otherwise not; and this is
impossible.
saying that the true faith and the true knowledge of God, is the doctrine of
the Apostles, and the ancient estate of the Church throughout the world,
according to the succession of those Bishops, unto who^ only the Apostles
committed the custody of the Church throughout the world; the which (says he)
is come to us. This said Irenaeus does write in his third book, and second
Chapter, that he and his fellows did withstand the Valentinians and the
Marcionistes, which were great heretics, by the traditions of the Apostles, A
cursed gloss, for it corrupts the text; for the tradition that he speaks
of, had good warrant in the written word.
that is to say, the doctrine not written, but received from age to age of the
Apostles, and so continued till their time. He says likewise: unto the
Traditions which are of the Apostles, and that by succession of pastors have
been used in the Church, we do persuade and provoke those that speak against
Traditions. He writes as much more in the third Chapter of the said book:
Forasmuch (says he) as it were to tedious to set forth in one book the
Successors of all the Churches, and to tell the^ one by one, we do^^^^^ throw
those, that for vain glory do seek to gather disciples together, touching
them contrary to that, that does appertain unto the traditions of the
Apostles, the which we do show to the^ by the said Traditions, and by the
faith that has been taught, and is come to us by succession of the Bishops of
the great and ancient Church of Rome, the which was founded by the two glorious
Martirs and Apostles, Saint Peter and Saint Paul. These are his words in his
third book aduersus haereses, The third you should say.
the fifth Chapter. And at the beginning of the said Chapter he says thus:
All these that will understand the truth, may presently regard the traditions
of the Apostles, which are manifest throughout the world, and we cannot count
the number of those, that have been instituted and ordained Bishops in the
Church, and their Successors till our days, which have neither known nor
taught any thing like unto the fables and tales, that these do preach unto us.
If you say so, you say it without cause, and untruly.
Not without cause we may now a days say the like of the Lutherans,
Caluinistes, and other sects of our time. After this he does set forth all the
Popes of Rome, If the Popes ever since had been like these, you and we should
not have needed to strive, as we do.
from Saint Peter unto Eleutherius, which was Pope in his time. And he did
affirm, that that number did suffice to prove that the doctrine of Marcian and
Valentinian was false and very hurtful, because that it was unknown, or at the
least, not received or approved by the Church, being under the governance of
any of th^se Popes. Then with greater reason ought prescription to take place
against True, but such you shall never prove ours to be.
a new doctrine, which has been unknown this 1500. years, or at the least,
if any body sought to publish it, he was condemned, as a false per^itious
heretic.

The V. Chapter.
YOu must remember, that Vincentius lived 1000 years ago (by your own
confession) and that therefore he speaks of their time, and of the Catholic
Church, and ancient faith, that then was. Whereof (if you understand him) we
say as he said, and are more willing to join and hold communion with that
Church of Christ, that he speaks of, then you; but then his saying makes
directly against you. For neither your Church, nor faith was in his days. We
grant you also, that Irenaeus did urge succession of persons, to stop the
mouths of the heretics, as you show in this Chapter out of him: but withal
then you must not forget, that he lived not long after the Apostles times, when
as yet they, whose Succession he alleged, continued in the sincerity of the
Apostolic doctrine, from which long ago your Roman Church, as it is now, has
fallen by antichristian apostasy. For that he calls the principal
succession: and those bishops only he teaches are to be obeyed, who together
with the succession of their Bishoprics, have received the gift of truth, as
I noted unto you out of his fourth book 43 Chapter, in my answer to your
first Chapter. But Irenaeus no where prescribes, that his example of urging
heretics to see their folly by Succession, for a perpetual rule to follow;
neither therein does he prophecy, that for 1000 years after, and further,
those successiue lines of Bishops, or any other would continue so in possession
of the truth of doctrine, as that safely always they might be joined unto.
For he was not ignorant, what was prophesied concerning the coming of
Antichrist, 2, These. 2. and Revel. 17. and that Paul told to the Pastors of
Ephesus (Act. 20.) that after his departure, there would arise up even amongst
themselves grievous wolves not sparing the flock: which must needs import, that
howsoever in his time he thought sometimes of succession of bishops, that
continued in the truth; that yet it was far from his meaning to prophecy,
that so it would be always. You reason therefore in this point as one; that to
prove the stews at Rome now to be pure virgins, should allege for proof
thereof, that they were so when they were young children. For even like
difference and ods there is, betwixt the Church of Rome now, and her bishops
and pastors, and that that was in the days and times, that you and the
authors, that you allege, speak of. For whereas unto these times, ye Church
of Rome and her bishops and pastors, stood and continued in the truth;
since, not only many of the bishops of Rome themselves, whom you hold are
freest and furthest of, of al other from erring (as I have showed already most
plainly) fell into heresy, but also al your Romish doctrine, which we now
count and call papistical, was divised and found out since those times, and is
also not only beside, but contrary to the doctrine then taught and received, by
the ancient Church of Rome and her pastors; as, ere I have done with you, I hope
(at least in great part) sufficiently to prove. It should seem therefore, that
either you in thus reasoning are very childish your self, or else you think
you have to deal but with babes and fools; in that because Irenaeus that
flourished within two hundred years after Christ (when the Church was yet pure
and undefiled, in comparison of the times that followed) could and did urge
Succession of persons joined with succession of truth: therefore you may, that
live 1500. years after Christ and more. You must first prove, that succession
of truth is inseperable from personal succession, and that ever since, and
now also, the Bishops and pastors, whose personal succession you brag of,
have continued in the truth as well, as they did, whose names he recites.
Whereof neither, shall either you or any of you be able to prove, as long as
the world stands. Fie therefore for shame, that you never having proved
either of these, nor yet being able to do it, you should conclude, that your
prescription against our doctrine (which you call new, at your pleasure though
indeed it be most ancient; witness the old testament and the new) much
rather ought to take place, then his in his time against heretics, that then
taught diverse basphemous heresies directly against the scriptures. You say,
our Religion has been unknown this 1500. years: or at least, if any body
sought to publish it, he was condemned as a false pernicious heretic. But you
do but say thus, you prove it not, nor ever shall. For it was both heard and
known, many 100. years before yours was hatched: and if every one were so
condemned that taught it, then was Christ and his Apostles so condemned. For
unless by scriptures we can prove ours to be, the same that theirs was, we
ask no favor at your hands. And as long as we can do so, the more we and our
predecessors have been condemned by you, the more we know, we have been
blessed of God. Now whereas you say in this Chapter further, that Irenaeus did
withstand heretics, by the traditions of the Apostles, adding your gloss,
that is to say, by doctrine not written, but delivered from hand to hand, and so
received from age to age, from the Apostles to that time: therein through the
ambiguity of the word (Tradition) craftsly you seek to deceive your simple
reader, and indeed you give a gloss, that corrupteeh the text. For let that
place of Irenaeus in his third book and second Chapter be perused, and that
also which follows in the third Chapter of the same book (though either you
or the Printer mistaking it, send us to the fifth Chapter, where the words are
not, which you cite) and most evidently it shall be proved, that though
Irenaeus have there the words by you cited, yet by the traditions of the
Apostles, which he speaks of there, he means no doctrine, nor points of
doctrine (as you do usually by that word) contrary, or besides that, which was
also taught in the word written. For the question was of God the father of our
Lord Jesus Christ, which Vale^tinian and Marcion denied: against who^ he there
shows, that he fought first with the scriptures: wherewith when they were
urged, he says, they are turned straight into an accusation of the scriptures,
as though they were not right, had not authority, might diversely be taken;
saying further, that truth could not be found of them, by those that are
ignorant of tradition. For the truth was not delivered by them, but by lively
voice: and that therefore Paul said, we speak wisdom amongst them that are
perfect, not the wisedo^e of this world. And this wisdom to every one of them
(says he) is that which he himself has devised. Of which heretics (their
words and yours, when you are called to the touchstone of the scriptures, are
so like) undoubtedly you have learned to plead against the scriptures, for your
unwritten traditions. Now when thus he had showed, how the heretics in his
time, shunned trial by the scriptures, and appealed to tradition, he goes on
and shows, that when he was contented to come to the tradition of the
Apostles, kept and observed in the church, down from the Apostles to those
times by succession of pastors, then they resisted tradition also, saying,
that they were wiser, then either those pastors, or the Apostles themselves:
and so indeed neither by the scriptures, nor yet by making demonstration unto
them, that the same doctrine taught in the scripture, was also delivered by
lively voice, first by the Apostles, and so received from age to age and
continued in by those pastors, of whose succession he speaks, could stop
their mouths. And thus any man of mean capacity may perceive, that in these
places Irenaeus his drift only is, to show the heretics, that the doctrine
which he taught, concerning God the father of our Lord Jesus Christ, first was
warranted by the Apostles writings, and then also taught by them, by lively
voice, and so delivered and continued from hand to hand, amongst the faithful
pastors, succeeding one another even unto that time. And that he calls this
the tradition of the Apostles, and not (as you falsely expound him) doctrine
unwritten, beside or contrary to that which is written (as the Popish traditions
you strive for be) if you had been disposed you might have learned in the 1.
Chapter of the same book, where he says, That which first they preached,
after by the will of god, tradiderunt nobis, they delivered us in writing, to be
the foundation and pillar of our faith. And indeed it is an usual thing, with
the fathers of the primitive Church, often by the tradition of the Apostles, to
understand the very same doctrine, which is contained in their writings. Herein
therefore, and so likewise in all other points in controversy betwixt us, it is
a common trick with you papists, to urge the fathers words quite contrary to
their true meaning.

But because you first, and namely bring in Irenaeus for your unwritten
traditions, which is the window indeed, that you would have feign left open
unto you, for then thereby, you hope you may thrust in and upon the Church,
what you list: and so countenance thereby your Antichristian doctrine, when all
other shifts fail: let us see, whither this cannot yet further be made
manifest out of him. He (as Eusebius reports Hist. Eccles. lib. 4. cap. 14.)
said, that Polycarpe taught, that one and sole truth, which he had learned of
the Apostles, quae and Ecclesia tradit, which the Church delivers forth.
Where of necessity, by those things which the Church delivers by tradition
(that he there speaks of) you may not understand any other, but those which
have warrant from the word written, and in no case those things that are besides
that or contrary thereunto: for then, he would not have called that which
Polycarpe preached, the one and sole truth: for questionles those things are
true, that are contained in the scriptures. And this clearly appears, if you
mark the words as they are in Irenaeus himself, in his 5. book and 20. cap.
that Eusebius has relation unto; which are these, Polycarpe did mention, or
teach those things, which he had heard of the Apostles, that is, all things
agreeable to the scriptures. Again the same Irenaeus in his 3. book and 3.
cap. (which is one of the Chapters by you before alleged) says, that under
Clement, the Church of Rome wrought to the Corinthians, showing them, quam
traditionem, what tradition of late they had received of the Apostles, that is
to say, that God the father almighty, and so forth (as is expressed in Moses)
is the father of our Lord Jesus Christ. And that he is so taught to be, of the
Churches (says he) they that will learn, may by the Scriptures, and so they
may understand the Apostolic tradition of the Church. Where it is most
clear, that he tells us himself, that by the Apostolic tradition, he
understands this same doctrine of God the father, which before they wrote, the
Apostles delivered unto the church by lively voice, and afterward, as it
appears, they set down in writing. Is this the^ honest dealing in you, to
make your Reader believe, that he meant of unwritten doctrine (such as ye is,
for which you and we strive) seeing he tells you himself, that by the
Apostolic tradition of the church, you are to understand this doctrine of God
the father, most plainly and plentifully written and set down in the
scriptures? You might have learned of S. Paul (2. These. 2.15.) that the word
(...), tradition, may as well be referred to express doctrine in scripture, as
that wc is delivered by word of mouth: where the Apostle (as then very little of
the new testament being written, and as then therefore the whole Apostolic
doctrine therein not being expressed) says, Hold fast brethren, the docume^ts
delivered you, whither by word, or by our Epistle. But you are the less to be
blamed and the more to be borne withal, for this your wilful thus abusing your
reader, because the making or marring of your church and Religion, stands
upon unwritten verities (or rather forgeries) which you call the Apostolic or
the holy churches traditions. For there are few or none of those points of
Religion, wherein we differ from you, and strive with you about; but your own
great champions have confessed, have their ground from hence, and not from the
scriptures. As any man, that will take the pains to read them, may see, in
Peter Soto against Brentius, in the 5. cap. of Canisius catechism, and in the
5. book and 100. c. of Lindans panoply, where they reckon up almost all the
points in controversy betwixt them and us in Religion, and when they have
done, plainly confess the ground thereof to be but tradition. And therefore
to countenance this only bulwark of your church and Religion, at least with
those that either for lack of leisure or learning cannot examine your
quotations, it is not your fault here alone, but the common fault of you all,
where you find any mention in fathers of tradition, though it be never so
evident that thereby they mean nothing, beside that which also has warrant
from the word written, to allege that place straight to countenance your
vnwrite^ traditions. To prevent you therefore hereafter of thus abusing the
simple, I would wish the^ and all others to mark, how flatly against your
vnwrite^ and vnwara^ted traditions by ye written word, the fathers with one
consent have written, for ye absolute sufficie^cy of ye scriptures. Besides yt,
wc you heard out of Irenaeus and Tertullia^, to this purpose, Irenaeus says
further, in his fifth book, we must run to the Church, and be brought up in her
boso^, and nourished with the scriptures of god. And Tert: against Hermog.
writes, Let Hermogenes show, that it is written: if it be not written, let him
fear that woe, that is threatened or appointed to the adders, or takers away. As
for Origin, we have heard him tell us before, that our senses and declarations
without the witness of the scriptures, have no credit in his. 1. Hom. upon
Ierem. And great and worthy Athanasius says, The holy scriptures given by
divine inspiration are sufficient to show the truth, against Idol: Hillarie
says, it is well, that we are content with those things that are written, in
his third book of the Trinity. Cyrill upon John in his 12. book and 68. cap.
grants indeed, that all things that Christ did are not written, but he
says, those things are written, which the writers thought sufficient both for
manners and doctrine. Chrysostom writing upon the 2. to Timothy. Homil. 9.
says, If there be any thing needful, either to learn or to be ignorant
of, we shall learn it in the Scriptures: and in the commentary upon Matthew.
commonly also fathered upon Chrysostom, we read these golden words, They that
be in Christianity, let them flee to the Scriptures, because they can have no
other proof of Christianity, but by the Scriptures. To this end read also
Chrysostom upon the 2 to the These. Hom. 3. Basil also very sharply writes,
that it is a most evident argument of infidelity, and a most certain sign of
pride, if any man, either do reject any thing of that which is written; or
bring any thing not written, seeing the Lord says, My sheep hear my voice,
and they follow not the voice of a stranger: in his treatise of true and godly
faith. Where also he notes, that Paul Galat. 3. by an example taken from men,
most vehemently forbids, that any thing be put out of the scriptures of God,
or (which God forbid, says he) be added thereunto. And therefore he in Moral:
Reg. 26. says further, Whatsoever we say or do, it must be confirmed by the
testimony of the Scriptures. Where likewise in his 80 rule he gathers, that
seeing faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the word of God, without doubt
whatsoever is without the holy scripture, seeing it is not of faith, must
needs be sin: and therefore he adds in that rule, let us stand to the
arbitriment of the scriptures, and with whom doctrine is found consonant
thereunto, let the sentence of all truth be adjudged of their sides. Hierome
upon Agge. cap. 1. says, those things which of their own heads they
devise, as though they came by Apostolic tradition, without the authority and
testimony of the holy Scripture, the sword of God strikes: who also upon
Math. cap. 23. says, that which has not authority from the scriptures, as
easily is despised, as approved. And contra Heluidium he says, we believe it,
because we read it: and we believe it not, because we read it not. August:
against Cresconins the Grammarian in his 2. book, writes, That there is an
Ecclesiastical canon ordained, whereunto belong the books of the Prophets and
Apostles: by which books we judge of all other writings, both of the
faithful, and of the Infidels: out of whom already we have heard diverse
plain testimonies to this purpose, especially, that against Petilian in his 3.
book and 6. cap. set down in the end of the confutation of the 3. chap:
Damascen is as plain as any of these, in his 1 book of right faith, cap. 1.
Cuncta quae tradit a sunt etc. All things (says he) which are delivered us
by the Prophets, Apostles, and Evangelists, we embrace, we acknowledge and
reverence, beyond those, seeking no further. For all things concerning faith
and manners, he confesses are plainly contained in the scriptures; de doct.
Christ: lib. 2. cap. 9. Infinite such places might be cited, out of the ancient
fathers (for they are full of them) whereby it sufficiently appears, that
this was the uniform and general judgment and opinion of them, of the
sufficiency of the scriptures. If therefore in deed and truth you made any
reckoning of their general consent (as often times you will pretend) you would
yield unto them in this point, and so spare much labor, that you bestow to
get credit to your traditions unwritten. Which if you would once be brought
unto, we should quickly by the sole and sufficient authority of the scriptures,
have a fair hand of you. Which you espying (whatsoever otherwise you would
seem to account of the fathers, to bleare the eyes of the simple) in this they
shall keep their judgment to themselves, for you like it not. So that this,
and such your like dealing with them, caused one once to tell you, that the
fathers are unto you, as counters in the hands of him that casts an account,
according to whose will and pleasure, sometimes one and the selfsame counter
stands for an ob: that stood immediately before for a pound or more. So with
you, when it pleases you, an ancient fathers testimony is of great weight, and
when it pleases you again, 20. of their testimonies are nothing. Howbeit, I
hope, the indifferent reader by these testimonies does and will perceive, that
you wonderfully seek to abuse Gods people, when yet you would persuade them at
any time, that the ancient fathers are favorers, and patrons of your unwritten
traditions. And I trust, this may serve to make it sufficiently appear, that
in the judgment of these ancient fathers, your Andradius may be ashamed, to
write as he has scripto suo aedito tempore Tridentini co^cilii. That the
greatest part of Catholic Religion is left unto the traditions of the church
not written: and that your Lyndan was extreme mad, or very drunk, when he
wrote, It is most extreme madness to think, that the whole and entire body of
Evangelical doctrine, is to be searched out of the Apostolic letters written
with ink, and out of the little book of the new testament. Panopl: lib. 1.
cap. 22. But thus to make unwritten traditions, sometime equal and sometime
superior in authority to the canonical scripture, and that upon this ground,
that al truth is not sufficiently taught therein, you have learned of the
Encratites, Manichees, and of the Montanists, Valentinians, and others, as it
appears in them, that wrote against them.

And yet (O good God) what a stir now of late this Andradius, Lyndan and other
such your great champions have made, and what cost they have bestowed, to draw
men from that estimation, that these fathers had of the authority and
sufficiency of the canonical scriptures, in making large treatises and
discourses to show, that the authority thereof depends of the testimony and
authority of the church that they are not sufficient, no not half sufficient
for the direction of the church, either for Religion or conversation; and that
they are obscure and hard to be understood, and all upon this occasion, that
will they, nil they, they are driven to perceive, that their opinions wherein
we differ from them, cannot any longer be defended by the scriptures, for all
their sophistry and cunning; and that therefore they see they must maintain
the credit of the^ by the authority of the church and her unwritten traditions,
which they may say to be what they lift, or that else they must be driven to
throw us the bucklers, and to run out of the field. But you do foully deceive
your selves, if you think in this great light, that men espy not, that this is
a shameful shift, and which argues that your cause is even giving up the
ghost, that you ca^ hold out no longer, unless it be, by preferring the
authority of the church the wife, before Christ the husband; and by giving her
your commission to sit as judge over her husbands word, and to add there unto,
and take therefrom; how and what seems good unto her. And your fault herein
is the more intolerable, because by the church you understand always your
popish Synagogue that now is. For even children, may see, that you are very
far driven, when there is no other remedy, but you must thus open your
mouths, and prepare your pens, to disgrace his written word (which all me^ know
to be his word indeed without question) for the gracing and countenancing in
this sort of that, wc though you call his word, you are never able to prove to
be so. And for this who sees not that we may justly say of you, as Tertull:
Apolog. 5. said of the heathen in his time. Apud vos de humano arbitratu
pensitatur diuinitas, nisi homini Deus placuerit, Deus non erit; homo ia^ Deo
propitius esse debebit, that is, with you the godhead is esteemed of, as man
shall think good; unless God please man, he shall not be God, man now must be
good to God. Howsoever you are ashamed, thus grossly with these profane pagans to
speak, yet it is evident in that you still say and write, that the written word
of God is inferior in authority to the church, and has the canonical credit
from thence, and that the sense thereof is and must be, whatsoever your Bishop
of Rome for the time being does define and determine so to be, relying still
upon unwritten traditions, and bearing men in hand, that they are as well the
word of God as the canonical scriptures, as you do, al me^ who^ your
enchantme^ts have not bewitched and made blind, may see, that in effect you are
as gross, as they of whom these words were truly written. This once we know
to be his word, which we find set down in the Canonical scriptures, and we
are sure this was written by the direction of Gods Spirit, for the information
of the Church. And we cannot be ignorant; but that this Spirit of God foresawe,
what dangerous heretics there would be, which (if they were not prevented by
leaving the word of God fully in writing) under the pretense of unwritten
traditions, would bring in damnable heresies. And therefore seeing it is
evident unto us, that he in these writings, began to leave instruction unto us,
to settle us in the certain truth, and we know he could go through with it,
because he is God and the fountain and author of all wisdom and truth; and
are sure that he was willing, because he perfectly loved the church, and by
Christ's promise, by the ministry of ye Apostles was to lead it into al truth:
we must needs think it flat blasphemy, to think, yt the written word of God is
any way vnsufficie^t for the full direction of the Church in all matters. And
therefore howsoever you please your Sects in this devise of yours, in feighting
thus for the traditions of the Church, think not to the contrary, but any man
of mean judgment will discrie both your v^^^tie and impiety therein, by
making this reason in his own mind unto himself; The spirit of God, in the
writers of the Scriptures, saw it good and necessary, to leave the word of
God for the full direction of the Church in all matters, written: by that is
done and written, it is clear he took it in hand; and to take it in hand, and
not to perfect it, is to leave the Church without a perfect touchstone, to try
all doctrines by, and argues that it was either because he could not, or
would not perfect it: whereof the one, robs him of his almighty power, and
infinite knowledge; the other of the perfection of love and faithfulness
toward the church^ therefore most certainly in the written word, there is
left a full and perfect direction for the Church: and consequently those
unwritten traditions, that some strive for, are superfluous. Thus you have your
answer to this Chapter.

The VI. Chapter.
SAint Augustine in his Epistle. You should say 165. f r there are but 204.
epistles in all.
365. about the like matter, does set forth all the Popes by order, which have
been from S. Peter's time until Anastasius, which was Pope in his time, and by
his continual succession he does prove, By the same argument we disprove
popery, because none of them that he recko^s up there, was of the Romish
religion that now is.
that the doctrine of the Donatists is heretical, because that none of those
Popes which he did recite, nor no part of the Church did receive it. I pray
you, may not we say the like by the No, not by the^ truly, whom you call
Caluinistes.
Caluinists and other heretics. The said S. Augustine in the Epistle that It
seems you are a learned man For Augustine wrote against an epistle so called,
he calls not his so. The Epithet Roman you add, and the words al and
continual, for he speaks but of succession to his time, and yet there he
says, that o^^^e truth is to be preferred before all these.
he does call Epistola fundamenti. cap. 4. does write the reasons that did
keep him under the obedience of the Catholic Roman Church. And among other,
he does allege the common consent of all nations, and the continual
succession of Bishops. This shows your great ignorance or negligence, for of
th^^ argument Augustine wrote two books, and in every book many chapters
there be, but this is common with you, the more to trouble your reader, to send
him to whole books, and beside, sometimes to set down your quotations, as
though the author had wrote but one, when he wrote mo of that argument, or as
though he had wrote more, when he had written but one.
And in his book which he made against the adversary of the old and new
law, he does name the succession of the Bishops, as most certain to answer
to that that we said before of S. Ephesians. 1.
Paul: You write Ephesians. 1. for Ephesians. 4.
I mean, that he would not have us to be wavering and doubtful in our
doctrine, but that we should be firm and stable, the which stablenesse is
obtained by the knowledge and intelligence of the Scriptures, according to the
traditions of the Church, and the succession of the Apostles and Bishops. It
continued so to Augustines time, that is, three or four hundredth years so,
ergo so a thousand five hundredth years and more it should so continue, the
argument follows not.
The Church (says S. Augustine) from the Apostles time, has continued
through the certain succession of the Bishops, until our days.

The VI. Chapter.
IN this 6. Chapter, you cite three places though some of them wrong quoted out
of Augustine, whereby indeed it appears, that as Irenaeus did object
succession, even so did he, to confute the heretics of his time: that taught
things contrary to the scriptures; but as I have said unto you, concerning
Irenaeus, so do I concerning him. You must remember, that Augustine lived and
wrote within 400. years after Christ: unto whose time the Bishops and pastors
whose succession he produces, had continued at least, sound in the
fundamental points of Christian Religion: from which you and your
predecessors fell away long ago, and therefore that which he might herein
safely and to good purpose do, you cannot do without peril, and to an ill
end. Again you must be told, that as Irenaeus was not, so neither was he in
thus doing a Prophet, to show that to the worlds end, it would be safe thus
to do. And lastly, I would have both you and your reader to remember, that it
is not bare personal succession, that Augustine here makes such reckoning of,
but that when it was joined also with succession of truth of doctrine, as it
was in his time with them, of whose succession he speaks, and is not now with
you, and them, of whose succession you brag so much Which three things
considered, whatsoever things further by you, or any of your fellows are
alleged to this purpose out of Tertullia^, Cyprian, or Epiphanius (which you
might have as well alleged, as Irenaeus or Augustine) be answered. For they
all of them lived within 500. years after Christ, when as yet the state of the
church stood in good terms, in comparison that yours does: and they all
spoke of succession of persons, succeeding also one another in the Apostolic
truth, and they spoke but for their own times: they prophesied not that so it
would be always. And yet thus it is your fashion, to beguile the simple, that
whatsoever you read 1000. years ago spoken in commendation of the Church of
Rome, that then was the Catholic church, or Catholic faith, yt you would
bear them in hand, is spoken of your Romish church and Religion now, when as
yours compared with those times, has no similitude with the Church of Christ
then, in a great number of weighty points. But for the better satisfying of the
reader, indeed S. August: (what account soever either in these places here
recited by you, or else where he seems to make of personal succession, or
of any such outward thing in the church) made more account of sole truth,
taught only by the canonical Scriptures; then of all other things besides. For
even in in his 165. epistle, which is the epistle (as it should seem) which
you meant, though you quote the 365. which is more by an hundred and one then
there are in all: after, he says, we presume not so much of these, as of the
scriptures. And in the second place, by you here cited out of him (which
ignora^tly you say he calls Epistola fundame^ti, whereas he calls none of
his epistles so, but writes against an epistle of the Manichees which they so
called, one book) in the later end of the fourth Chapter whereof, after he
had reckoned up the things which did hold him in the bosom of the Catholic
church, and might likewise hold any believer therein, though truth as yet did
not most manifestly show her self, he adds by and by, but with you (speaking
to the Manichees) sola personat veritatis pollicitatio etc. only promise of
truth rings; which truly if it be showed to be on your side, so manifest,
that it cannot be called into doubt, praeponenda est omnibus illis rebus,
quibus in Catholica teneor, that is, is to be preferred before all those
things, whereby otherwise I am held in the Catholic Church. The third place
likewise, which you allege here out of Augustine (as you have quoted it)
serves only to bewray either your gross ignorance or negligence. For I find
he wrote 2. books against the adversary of the law and the Prophets, but
none in all his tomes can I find fathered upon him, written, as you say,
against the adversary of the old and new law: and if you meant the former,
there being two books of that title, and every one consisting of many
Chapters, why speak you thereof as though he had written but one, and name not
the Chapter: when you tell us where to find the place, you shall be more
particulerly answered thereunto. In the mean time, you see in Augustines
judgment in the two other places, yt the truth taught in the canonical
scriptures, is to be preferred before all other motives to keep a man in the
true Catholic Church: contrary whereunto I am sure he neither teaches
where you mean, nor any where else. You should therefore in his opinion far
better bestow your time then you do, if you would bestow it in proving by the
scriptures, that you and your Church were stable in this truth: especially
seeing truth it self, even here has enforced you to confess, that that
stablenes is atteined unto, by the knowledge and intelligence of the
scriptures. But you add, yt these scriptures the^ must be understood
according to the traditions of the church, and the succession of the Apostles
and Bishops. If by the church you did understand (as you should) the true and
pure church of Christ, and by her traditions and Bishops, such as were sound,
that is, such as are truly justifiable by the canonical scriptures, as the
ancient fathers, Irenaeus, Tertullian and Augustine, with others of those, and
former times were wont to understand them, as I have showed before, when to
stop the mouths of heretics they did appeal to the^; then we would most
willingly join with you that issue, by ye scriptures so understood, to try
whether you or we have attained to the stablenes of truth. But understanding
thereby, as you do, your Romish church for these last 500. or 600. years, and
her traditions and Bishops: we say and sure we are, we are able to prove it, yt
so far of is it, that the scriptures are to be understood according to the^,
that there is no readier way to misunderstand them, and to make them to have a
mutable and flexible sense, now one way now another, then to make them (they
being so contrary as they be to the ancient and sound traditions of Christ's
church, which always were consonant (if not the very same) to yt is taught in
the word written; and the Bishops you mean, being likewise so different from
them, that were in the primative church, and often also so varying amongst
themselves, as they are in the interpreting of them) to be the rules of right
understanding of the^. Finally if you had any forhead or conscience, you would
be ashamed so to abuse your poor simple reader as you do, in going about to
make him believe: that because Augustine could or did say that the church had
continued in it, from the Apostles times, through the succession of Bishops, to
his: that therefore he said it had so to ours, there being above 1000. years
difference.

The VII. Chapter.
YOU do study as much as you can, to reiecte our succession, and not without
cause, Succession of persons, without succession also in truth, never was
esteemed.
knowing that this only does suffice to overthrow all the heresies of those
new reformed Gospellers. Calvin, as the most appare^t, does seek to prove,
that our reason is of no force, because that the Greeks have had ever
succession of pastors, and yet we do not hold them as Catholics. But if
the Reader do well note that, that we have already said, he shall find
the answer unto this objection, I mean, because that the Greeks have not had
succession Hold you to this, and you may give over your brags of succession
for shame.
and continuance of doctrine, called unity of faith by the Apostles, the which
ought ever to be joined to the continuance of the Pastors, to show the true
recognisaunce of the Catholic Religion. There is none that do study and
read of those matters, but that do know the unconstant faith of the Greeks,
as touching the proceeding of the holy Ghost: the which error they had
abiured at the last council of Florence, and yet notwithstanding they did
turn to it again; besides diverse other light things, to speak moderately,
You have as many things of importance and more too, gainesai^d by your
forefathers.
which are not approved by their ancient fathers, S. John Chrysostom, S.
Ciril, S, Basil, and Athanatius, nor yet by our adversaries at this present
time. The which errors I have no need to set forth in this book: for my
intent is but to speak of that, that pricks us at hand, because of ill
neighborhood. Some do allege unto us the We never allege this alone, but
together with the false doctrine and unlawful vocation of your Bishops and
Pastors.
negligence of our pastors, and their ill lives, for the which cause they
say, that the mentioned succession cannot take place. But this argument is of
no force: For although that the careless lives of some Bishops and
ecclesiastical persons, have been so great and so hurtful unto the blood of
our savior Christ (I mean, to the souls bought with it) yet notwithstanding
that, Yet thus for the principal point, you are glad to fly from your great
prelates to your poor priests.
the church has not lost the succession and continuance of one doctrine, as
touching the administration of the sacraments, by those that were deputed by
the Bishops. Indeed this kind of division is altogether practiced in your
Romish Church, by your Cardinals and great prelates.
If one should see a Prelate doing nothing, and his lieutenant doing all, which
of those two would you take to be Bishop? they have both divided their
charges: the one receives the profit, the other takes all the pain. If they
be both content, what loss do you feel? he that has any interest, let him
valewe the damadge. And although that the negligence of the Bishop be not
excusable And yet nothing more common wi h you, then wilful continuance, yea by
your Popes good leave in this sin.
before God with the diligence of the deputy, nor his conscience clear, yet
this ought to suffice, that though his faults be through negligence, or through
evil living, True: but such doctrine you shall never prove yours.
yet that ought not to perturbe the assurance of our doctrine, the which we
have taught us by the word of God, interpreted by the true doctors, that have
been before us, agreeing in unity of faith, as I have already said: For
neither the naughtines of There is no such there mentioned, this is your common
hap in your quotations It seems you would have said 2. Kings 16.
Achas, Number. 1. nor of Ioram, nor of diverse other great sinners, which are
enrolled in the book of the generation of Jesus Christ, were not able to
withstand the fulfilling of the promise of God made to Abraham, that is to
say, that he would be borne of this line: Even so, the ill lives and
conversation of diverse wicked Popes, that have followed after Saint Peter,
have never been This is true, and yet you never the nearer. For though al
Papists fail in faith, yet his church never fails.
able to move Christ to break his promise, that is to say, that the faith of
his Church should never fail, Math. 16. and that the gates of hell (that is to
say) of infidelity, which are the ports of damnation, should never prevail
against it. I see not how that chapter or any thing therein, serves to this
purpose, any whit at all.
Esaias. 58. Our adversaries therefore, that take such great pains to set forth
in golden legends the lives of the wicked Popes, that have been since Saint
Peter's time, thinking thereby to overthrow the succession of the Catholic
ecclesiastical faith, Your comparison is odiou^: neither do we lay open
their wicked lives, to that end you speak of, but to show that your glory is
your shame.
do no less offend God, then if they should go about to prove the promise of
God made to the Patriarchs to be vain, because of the evil lives of their
successors. Therefore those that do reproach unto us now, that the Popes of
our days are not altogether so holy as S. Peter, we do confess it. But
they cannot deny, or they will confess unto us, that the above named evil
Kings, Achaz, Ioram, Manasses, Amon, Iechonias, and others did lead no such
holy lives, as Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, or David: and yet notwithstanding those
evil Kings have been set forth in the generation of our Savior, as the
fathers of the just Jesus Christ. Let them judge then that have any wit,
whether this be a great folly or no, to see how these crafty coggers of the
scriptures should make many simple persons refuse, to be the Popes spiritual
children, because they were sinners, seeking thereby, to overthrow all the
ancient customs of the Church.

The VII. Chapter.
WHither only your succession does suffice to overthrow all our Religion, or
any part of it (though you here confidently say it is, and suppose that to be
the cause, why we reject it) I refer to ye judgment of the reader, by that
which hitherto has been said by you, and confuted by me concerning the same.
Whereby also, I doubt not, but every indifferent reader may perceive, that we
have and do still yield other causes of our reiection of it, and not this at
all. Whereas you call our Religion here heresy, that you have learned of the
corrupt Orator Tertullus, Act. 24. But as he terms poor Paul there, a
captain of the Sect, or heresy of the Nazarites, and the high Priest and
elders said, it was even so: yet he was not ashamed of the Gospel of Christ,
which they so termed, but stoutly said before Felix to their faces, that
according to that way which they counted heresy, he worshipped the God of his
fathers, believing all that was written in the law and the Prophets: so, though
you give us never so many nicknames, and term our Religion never so often new,
and an heresy, and have your high Priest of Rome and your elders to bear you
out in so doing, we never a whit the more mislike of our Religion, as long as
we are able in truth to say with Saint Paul (which our consciences witness,
comfortably we may) that therein we do but believe, that which is taught us in
the canonical Scriptures. Indeed not Calvin only, but every one of us, when
we have to do with you, in this question of your succession, we tell you your
reason drawn from your succession, is of no force, seeing the Greeks (whom
you account heretics) may use that argument, as well as you. But to prevent
this our objection against your argument of succession, you say, They have not
succession and continuance of doctrine, the which ought ever to be joined to
the continuance of pastors, to show the true recognisance of the Catholic
Religion. We are glad to see and hear, that evidence and force of truth has
wrong from you this kind of honest and true reply to our objection: yet we
thank you not for it at all. For full gladly (if our objections had not driven
you to it perforce) would you have run on wc bare succession of Bishops and
pastors, without any mention of this. Well, howsoever you have been drawn to
confess thus much, thereupon it does most evidently follow, that if there be
as little continuance and less too in the Apostolic faith, and doctrine in
your succession, as there is amongst ye Greeks; then by your own confession,
your succession is as weak a recognisance of the Catholic Religion, as
theirs. And therefore the case thus standing, you had need to have bestowed
less pains to prove your personal succession, and more to have proved this
succession and continuance of the true Catholic doctrine: for the other without
this, you see is nothing. What a preposterous course is this then, that you,
have taken, to take such leisure to bestow pains on that, which when you have
gotten is nothing, and to find no leisure to bestow any pains on this, which
if you could have proved, your adversaries would have stood with you no longer?
Enter yet into this controversy, when you will, and I dare undertake, if you
will be tried in this case, by the canonical scriptures (which as I have
showed, you must of necessity) it shall easily be proved, that (notwithstanding
all you can say against the Greeks) your popish Religion consists of more
heresies, and is a greater Apostasy from the ancient Catholic, Apostolic
faith, then theirs. The greatest thing you charge the^ withal is, their
denying of the proceeding of the holy ghost from ye Father and the Son: which
indeed, if they denied in that sense yt is objected against them by you,
doubtless therein they were heretics. But it should seem, yt they refuse only
that word, as not understood of the^, and added (as they say) without the
consent of the whole church to the creed, of fear only, least by admitting
ye word, they should thereby be enforced to confess, yt he came not of one
beginning, but of two beginnings: in the mean time using other words,
expressing in effect ye same thing. And if it be thus (as in the last session
of the Flore^tine council it should seem to be, and else where) the^ in that
respect, their cause is not so ill, as you would make it. But be it (though you
only say both, and prove neither of the^ against the^) yt they held it in the
worst sense now still, and that also (as you say) in certain other smaller
things, they hold otherwise, then was held by Chrysostom, Cyrill, Basil, and
Athanasius: yet I say, and will stand unto it, yt as dangerous heresies, and mo
in number be held of your own company, against the truth of Christ's person and
office, the^ they hold in all: and in far more and greater points of weight,
are you gone from the ancient fathers, yt have been in the latin church, wtin
the first 600. years, the^ they have done from theirs. And therefore in the
mean time, whiles you will join this issue with us, and until you have
disproued this my assertion, by ye same reason you reject their succession,
will we persevere in rejecting yours.

Now whereas you secondly imagine, that we labor to weake^ and overthrow the
force of your argument taken from succession, by lai^ng out the lewd lives and
negligence in doing of their duties in many of those pastors and Bishops, of
whose succession you boast: true it is, that provoked by your too too great
brags of your personal succession, and by your immoderate railing against some
of our pastors and ministers, whom yet you cannot stain, but with false and
maliciously devised tales, sometimes some of us have been occasioned, to cast
your own dunge into your faces. And we being able, as we are, even out of
your own stories, so justly to lay such a number of most notorious things to
the charge of very many of your greatest Prelates, and the matter being
notorious, that few or none of your Popes and Archprelates ever take it upon
them, by preaching to feed Gods people (which is the principal duty of a
Bishop) we think still, that that which we say and object against you in this
behalf, may justly cause you to be ashamed of such fathers, and so to cease
both your brag of succeeding them, and your railing against us. To disprove
the force of this our allegation, you dispute the matter, as though we went
about to prove that the succession of truth has ceased in the Church, because
we thus object against the persons of many of your predecessors: whereas we
most constantly hold and believe, that it has always continued, and that
(though you grow ten times worse, then any that has been before you) it shall
still, unto the worlds end. But withal we tell you, it has been continued
by others, and not by those wicked and negligent pastors and predecessors of
yours, that we speak against. For as their lives were deuilish, so was their
doctrine Antichristian, as yours their childrens is. Too too foolish therefore
is it that you write, that we do no less offend God in laying forth the
lives of sundry of your Popes, thinking thereby to overthrow the succession of
the catholic Ecclesiastical faith; then if one should go about to overthrow
the promise of Christ to the Patriarchs, because of the bad lives of diverse
of their successors. For we hold, that the Succession of the Catholic
faith, has continued, and will to verify that promise of Christ. Matthew. 16.
though never so many of your popes go to the devil. Neither did we ever in
laying forth their most filthy lives, think thereby to overthrow the
Succession of faith: for we never took them to have any society or conjunction
with it, since they became such. But you still (according to your old wont)
taking it for given, which shall never be offered you, that their personal
succession, and the catholic truth went always together, which we do most
earnestly deny, imagined that we could not speak against the one, but that
therein also, we sought to overthrow the other: when as we are persuaded, that
of al other persons under heaven, your Popes for this long time have been
Satan's most forcible means, to overthrow both the Apostolic truth, and
Catholic Church. Wherefore you see, you might well have spared your pains in
the greatest part of this Chapter: and so let any, that has wit, judge,
whither it be not great folly for any man to be so simple, as to seek to be
the child of such fathers, as neither had honesty, nor any soundness of
religion, as many of your Popes, for any thing that you have yet said to the
contrary, have been, whose children yet (how bad soever) you would have men to
be.

The VIII. Chapter.
Upon Moises Chair there sits (says our Savior Christ) who? not the
godliest me^ of the world, but the Scribes and Pharisees: do that they say,
but not that that they do. But if our new Gospellers had been in those days,
they would have told Christ, that his commandment was not to be observed,
because the lives of Anna and Caiphas were not correspondent unto those of
Moises and Aaron: for the first came to the vocation of priesthood, being
called of God: but the last attained to it by the vocation of their As many of
yours do, or by worse means, or else your own friends belly the^.
purses, and yet notwithstanding, rather then our Savior would break this
harmony of the mystical body of the Church, he was not only content to
permit, that Caiphas should execute his office (although he was unworthy, as
one that came to it by Simonie) but rather he did confirm his pontificat with
the gift of the Spirit of Prophesying, with the which he was That is gross
blasphemy.
as fully inspired, as ever was David, Esaias, or any of the rest; and all to
teach us that, that I have already said: I mean, that the Ecclesiastical
order, and the administration of the Sacraments, do not consist in the good or
evil lives of the pastors, but only of God and of his word, interpreted by
them. As touching that that appertains to our health, God has no regard to
the life of the magistrate temporal or ecclesiastical: for he can as well serve
him with an evil person, to do good to the common wealth, as of a good; as
the godly prophesies of the wicked Balaam do well witness. Number. 24. And here
is to be noted, that when we talk of the succession of Bishops, and of the
doctrine continuing in the Church, we do not mean only to talk of the
Indeed you do wisely to call for help of others, for otherwise the neck of
your succession has often been shamefully broken.
Popes, but of all the Bishops and other having Ecclesiastical charges, not
only at Rome, but through al other places, where the true preaching, and right
administration of the Sacraments be used. And therefore you do pretend in
vain, to prove, that the above mentioned succession has been interrupted by
the discention of Popes and Antipopes, and by the Civil wars that have been
at Rome in times past. For although that the Sea of Rome was vacant for a time,
the Chaires of Bishops in France, Spain, England, and over all Christendom
were not vacant, they did not for their debates let to administer the precious
body of Jesus, and the rest of the Sacraments, to preach and teach the people,
doing many other godly deeds. This is notoriously false, as the stories
witness at sundry times, when there were two or three Popes together, each
having his faction, and one banning the other.
And to be brief, the Civil dissension at Rome did not cause the rest of the
people throughout Christendom to break the unity of their faith, which they
held before their discordes. The ambition of the Popes of Rome was in nothing
prejudicial unto those that held the integrity of their faith, nor through
the reason of their ill governance, our Savior Christ did not lose his
rightful inheritance.

The VIII. Chapter.
THat which is further alleged in this Chapter to prove, that Scribes and
Pharisees must be heard and obeyed, sitting in Moises chair, notwithstanding
their ill lives, does nothing at all serve to prove, that your lewd Popes were
to be heard and obeyed. For to sit in Moises chair, is not (as you imagine) to
succeed him in place or office, but in teaching the truth, as he did; and so
your wicked Popes, that we speak against, never sat in Moises chair, nor in
the Chair of any Apostle, or Apostolic man: but in the Chair and seat (in
respect of their doctrine) of the whore of Babylon. But by that you afterward
remember of Caiphas and Balaams prophecies, it should seem you were of
opinion, that to preach and to hold the truth, is inseparable from your Popes
Chair and office: and that therefore it may not be imagined, but that, how
lewd soever they were, they could not but prophecy, and teach the truth,
because these in the places by you mentioned (notwithstanding they were lewd
men) did. Indeed very fitly might your Popes these many years be compared unto
these two, they resemble the one so fitly, in crucifying Christ again in his
members: and ye other, in seeking to curse the people of God for filthy lucre.
But that upon these particular facts of theirs it should follow (as thereupon
you would seem to infer) that least the Harmony of the mystical body of
Christ should be broken, God always has guided ye mouths of your Popes so,
that they could not err in judgment, I see no reason at al. For out of
particular facts rare and uncertain, you conclude a general and constant rule.
Does it follow, think you, Pilates wife learned by her dream, that Christ was
innocent: therefore wome^s dreams are always true? Daniel a young child found
out the unrighteous judgment of the judges: therefore young children always
shall be able to do the like? Or to come to your own examples, does it follow,
that because Caiphas, and Balaa^, prophesied right, therefore neither they
themselves at other times could err, nor any of that office? The Scripture
testifies ye contrary. For ye same Caiphas iudicially pronounced our savior
to be a blasphemer, Mat. 26. and Paul. Act. 23. charge Ananias, sitting there
iudicially as hie priest (as he had just cause) to give judgment contrary to ye
law, in co^ma^ding him to be smitte^. And howsoever Balaa^ the false prophet,
prophesied there well, it is evident by ye text, that it was sore against his
will, and that it came to pass by Gods especial power, in guiding and bridling
his tongue. And yet it appears after, that the same Balaa^ by his wicked
counsel was cause of that trespass concerning Peor. Nu^b. 31. and you may
read. 1. King. 22. that 400. false prophets prophesied untruly to Ahab. I doubt
not but God, when it pleases him, can cause your Popes, as he caused these
(how wicked soever) to speak the truth. For Judas, after he had betrayed his
master, yet before he hanged himself, justified his master: and the Devils
themselves oftentimes in the Gospel acknowledge Christ aright to be the son of
God: but thereupon it follows not, because he can do it, that therefore he
will do it, and always has: nay rather that which is prophesied 2 Thessalonians. 2.
is verified in your Popes, because they received not the love of the truth,
therefore God sent the^ strong delusio^s, that they should believe lies: for
according to this faith, they have spoken.

O what horrible and intolerable blasphemy did your heart conceive, and your
pen (to your perpetual infamy) utter, when upon occasion of Caiphas prophecy,
uttered by him, either not woting what he said, or rather (as Cyril in his 8.
book upon John, Chap. 3. notes) having a malicious purpose thereby to
persuade the Jews, that it was expedient to put Christ to death, least the
whole nation should be destroyed by the Romans: you do set down these words,
that Christ did confirm his pontificate with the gift of prophecy, with the
which he was as fully inspired, as David, Esaias, or any of the rest? O what
injury in these words have you done to those holy prophets, and to the Spirit
of God in them, as thus to match them with this cursed hell-hounde? We must
hold, that they were endued with the Spirit in such measure, as that in their
writings and sayings we must be sure, they did not err, or else the ground of
our faith (which is their writings) is shaken: whereas this wretch even the
same year (as I have showed you) pronounced Christ to be a blasphemer: and
therefore most deuilishly erred. And indeed he was wholly destitute of the
Spirit of God, not only then, but even in this also: for (as I noted before
out of Cyrill) he, in uttering of those words, had a deuilish meaning and
intent, though God by his secret power so ordered his speech, as that his
words might also carry this sense, that it was expedient that Christ should die
for the salvation of man, as there also the same Cyrill observes. And
therefore for this he is no more to be said, to have had the Spirit of truth
to direct him, then you may say, the devils and Judas had, that I spoke of
before. Why then does S. John upon these words of his give this note, that he
was high Priest that year? because it pleased God so to te^per his words
(unware to him) that whereas he spoke to hasten the death of our savior, his
word sounded, that the people should utterly perish without the death of
Christ: which was most true, but not his meaning. By this monstrous comparison
of yours, we may learn, that it is no marvel that you that durst make this
beastly comparison, dare compare your pastors and Bishops (how wicked soever
both for life, and judgment in Religion) wc the ancient true pastors of
Christ's Church. Yet hereby you have taught us to trust your lofty and swelling
comparisons, the worse as long as we live. You strive with your own shadow in
laboring to prove, that the effect or fruit of the ministry of the word and
sacraments, depends not upon the life of the minister. For it is a thing that
we hold, teach, and preach as much as you. You do therefore but abuse your
reader, in going about to make him believe that we reject your Bishops only
for their lewd lives: whereas the thing especially that we condemn both you
and them for, is your Antichristian doctrine. It is well, that when you have
said what you can for your line of Popes, yet the consideration of the often
interruptio^s of their succession by schisms, and otherwise, you are glad in
the end to give us this note, that when you talk of succession of Bishops and
pastors, you mean not only them, but all other Bishops and pastors of your
Church, in whom the succession has been continued, whenever it was
interrupted in the other. For hereby in effect you do acknowledge, that you
mean not, nor think it wisdom, to lean too much to the succession of them,
least they let your building fall. Wherein I prefer you yet before Stapleton,
in that herein the truth of the manifold interruptions of their succession
seems to have prevailed more with you, then with him. For he writing against
Doctor Fulke of this matter of succession, though he says he will not hold
succession in the same places, and sees to have continued generally, yet in
this particular line of Popes only, he thinks that safely he may. You are
also to be commended for acknowledging dissentions to have been betwixt your
Popes, and Antipopes themselves, and in leaving them without defense for their
lewd lives, ambition, and negligence, even to answer for themselves. For
indeed as it cannot be denied, but that these things most monstrously have
been found in very many of them, so you could not have had any honesty in
smothing of their faults. Yet you go some thing to far in saying, that their
dissentio^s were not prejudicial to the unity of faith, held before. For how
could it be, that one part of the world joining with the Pope, the rest with
his Antipope, or Antipopes (it being an article now of your Catholic faith,
Boniface 8. de maioritate and obed. Cap. 1. under pain of damnation to be
believed, that al souls must submit themselves to your Pope, as to the
Supreme head of the Church) but that these for many years together banning
and cursing each others faction, thereby the unity of faith was not only
troubled, but maruellously broken.

The IX. Chapter
NOw seeing that we have yielded you a full account of our vocation to the
ministry: if we may be so bold, I think it is no great presumption to demand
the like of yours. Calvin never thus reasoned, and therefore you play the
papist with him, that is you belly him.
For even as Calvin has heretofore called upon us to have us prove, that we
are the Children of God, or otherwise, he would absolutely affirm, that God
cannot be called the author of our vocation to the ministry. We say likewise,
that if you do not show the like of yours, you shall give us leave (although it
be against your wills) to say, that yours comes not from God, but from the
procurement of his adversary.

Tertullian, We know he spoke against such heretics as you Papists be.
who, as you know, above 1200 years agone, speaking against such as you are,
in his book de praescrip. haeret. does write these words. Edant origines
Ecclesiarum suarum, euoluent ordinem Episcoporum suorum, per successiones
abinitio decurre^tem. Hoc enim modo Ecclesiae Apostolicae cursus suos deferunt,
sicut Romanorum Clementem Episcopum a Petro ordinatum: id proinde, vtique and
coeteri, exhibeant, quos ab Apostolis in Episcopalibus constitutos, Apostolico
semine radices habeant.

Here either is ignorance or wilful corruption of this authors meaning and
dris^.
You see well, by these words, how that Tertullian does continue with the
succession of the Pastors, the which he does affirm to be necessary,
saying: that you, and such as you are, ought not to be received to the
ministry of the Church, nor to teach the people, contrary to the
ecclesiatical order, except that you show the antiquity of your table. And it
is necessary (says he) that you reckon your Pastors and Bishops by order,
and how they have succeeded one after another: for this is the way, that the
Churches do maintain their right. The said Tertullia^ does ground his
similitude upon the custom of the Civil governance. For when that these that
are Princes or Lords do suruaie their lands, the subjects are bound to show,
what lands they hold of them, setting it all forth by account, showing by
what tenure they hold their copy, and whether it be demean^ or free hold,
coming by inheritance or bought: they ought likewise to name him that had it
before, and by their own title to overthrow all other persons, that may make
claim unto it. Not yet, nor ever will you be able.
According to this pattern and order we have given you account of our
inheritance, although we were not bound to it, setting before your eyes the
similitude of Solomon, by whom our Savior Jesus Christ is represented. That
same Solomon does give the sheep that runs astraie counsel, to set his
Tabernacle by the Tabernacle of the Shepherds, and to follow their flock,
until he come to the place where Christ was nailed on the Cross at noon
days. The which counsel, as the most certain (according to Tertullian his
opinion) we do follow, thinking it sufficient, to keep us firmly in the
right and ancient Catholic faith. For we that are the sheep of Christ, do
follow, as touching our religion, the steps that our fathers led before us,
and, as it were, going up upon the ladder of Jacob. Genesis 28. Whatsoever you
mean: you can never deduce your religion so high, for it has been a patching
together long, even till of very late days.
we mount by degree and degree, I mean, from year to year, and from age to
age, until that we come to S. Saturim, S. Denice, S. Marcial, and S Gratian,
which were those that did first teach the Catholic faith in Tholose, in
Paris, and to those of Guyenna and Lorayne, and so consequently to all the rest
of the Saints, that first did teach the Catholic faith through all
Christendom, whom we do call in judgment before God, to defend that faith
which they have given us, from hand to hand; they may call upon the Apostles
which sent them, and the Apostles may direct themselves to Christ, who by the
mouth of his most loving Apostle does command us, to continue in that that was
taught us at the beginning. 1. John. 2. And so we shall continue and rest with
the Father, the Son and the holy Ghost. And if any body does come to teach
us any other doctrine, then that which has been taught us at the beginning: I
do not say, No take heed of that, for the book of the Scriptures is your
bane.
written in book, but printed in our hearts, that he be holden as an Galat. 1.
Anathema, or an excommunicate person: yea, although it were an Angel of
heaven. The which does persuade us, not to receive your Ours is new to you, as
the doctrine of Christ and the Apostles was to the Jews in that time, that
understood not the Scriptures.
new doctrine or Gospel, but to keep our selves under the governance of our
old Pastors and Bishops, without having any respect to their evil or good
lives: for as touching our faith and salvation, that does import nothing. This
is hardly and boldly said, for any thing that you know, some take occasion the
rather thereby to have them and so to be converted.
The good and holy lives of Jesus Christ and his Apostles, has profited
nothing, neither to the obstinate Jews, nor to the unbelieving Gentiles: Open
confession, would have open punishment.
Nor in the like case, the depraved life of many evil Bishops that have been
at Rome, and in other places have not shut the doors of heaven, against those
that are true Catholics, and lead particular lives; the which are two
principal points that do quiet our consciences: The first is talk and the
la^ter i^ little been seeing how many of you have learned to be l^^d^ of them.
I mean, the one, that we believe that, that our Pastors and the universal
Church have believed these thousand and five hundred years: and the other,
that their evil lives cannot hurt us. For as the Apostle does say, every man
shall bear his own bundell.

The IX. Chapter.
NOw persuading your self, that you have yielded us a sufficient account of
your ministry, when as only you have countenanced it with a show of personal
succession, and a bare brag without any proof at all of succession also in
the Apostolic truth (as it may appear by that which has been said) you
call us to a reckoning for ours, and will us to show, that God is the author
of it, or else to give you leave to say, it comes from his adversary. We
answer you, that our calling is of God; first, because orderly, according to
the order of the Church, wherein we live, we are by them that are deputed by
the Church for that business, tried and examined, and then with imposition of
hands, and special prayer unto God, fit for that purpose, admitted and
ordained ministers of his word, and Sacraments. Secondly, because our office
of the ministry it self is the same that Christ gave unto his Church, under
the names of pastors and Doctors, whose office and properties are set down
and described. Acts. 20. 2. Corinthians. 4. 1. Timothy. 3. Titus. 1. 1. Peter.
5. And thirdly, because we are able to prove by the written word, that we feed
Gods people committed unto us with that only food, which God has allowed for
his children, and minister the Sacraments according to Christ's institution.
Lastly, God himself has sealed and ratified our ministry to be of him, in
the effectual vocation and conversion of many thereby. Let us now therefore
hear what you can say, either to weaken this our assertion, that our calling
is of God, or any of these reasons, that we use to prove the same by. First in
Tertullians words de Praescrip. aduersus haereticos, you bid us show the
beginning of our Churches, and reckon up the succession of bishops down to us
from the beginning etc. you have heard that the same Tertullian in the very
same place, yea even in the words immediately following yours, adds, Be it
that heretics devise thus to do, for what is not lawful for them, being
once fallen into blasphemy? But though they shall devise so (says he) they
shall gain nothing. For their doctrine compared with the Apostolic doctrine,
by the diversity and contrariety thereof, will pronounce that their Churches
have neither Apostle, nor Apostolic man for the author thereof. Whereof when
he had given a reason, he adds, that those Churches, which cannot show any
Apostle, or Apostolic man to be the founder thereof, in that they were
founded long after, as many are yet, in eadem fide conspirantes non minus
Apostolicae de putantur pro consanguinitate doctrinae: that is, they are no
less to be reputed for Apostolic agreeing with them in the same faith, even
for the affinity thereof. You thought it good to stop before you came to these
words. For these words indeed take away all the force of ye objection grounded
upon the former, in that hereby it is evident, that howsoever Tertullian in his
time could show the original of the Catholic Church, by deducing it, and the
doctrine therein professed, even from the Apostles to his time; yet he thought
it was possible for heretics to make show of the like succession of persons;
but secondly and especially, because thereby it is most clear, that to prove a
Church to be Apostolic, it is not necessary for it always to be able, to
deduce such a line of personal succession down from the Apostles, but it is
sufficient to be able to make it appear, that the doctrine thereof agrees
with the doctrine of the Apostles. Which unless we be able to do by the
Scriptures (whereby we most cartainly may know, what their doctrine was) let
not our Churches be accounted Apostolic. But if this we be able to do (which
we doubt not of) and yours compared and conferred with the Apostolic doctrine
therein expressed, shall prove both diverse and contrary; then for all your
fiction of succession, we say unto you in Tertullians word, that so your
Churches shall be proved to be founded neither by Apostle, nor Apostolic man.
For as the Apostles taught not contraries amongst themselves, so neither did
the Apostolic men (says he) unless it were they, that departed from the
Apostles: and ours shall prove themselves (though they were not able to deduce
their Succession from the Apostles) by their affinity of doctrine, with that of
the Apostles, to be Apostolic; and so to have their original and beginning
from Sion: and so also in the end it will fall out, that Tertullian spoke
rather against such as you are, the^ against us. And thus you see Tertullian
has sufficiently answered himself, and also, has given us weapons against
you, and to defend our selves withal. You gain even as little by your
similitude taken from tenants, who to prove their title good, must show their
Land-lordes, how by succession they came to their lands. For if all Landlords
should thrust all their tenants from their possessions, which are not able to
deduce the descent of their tenime^ts from one to one, even from the first that
held it, and purchased it; the 10 tenant in the world should not long quietly
enjoy his own. Yet you for your parts (if your bare brag were a proof) are
such tena^ts to the inheritance of ye church of Christ, and the Catholic
truth, that you have not only proved your title thereunto to be good, by
showing by all lineal succession, how you came to it from Christ, and his
Apostles; but thereby also you have quite ouerthrown our claim. This is easily
said, and well bragged of you, but it is more, then either you can or mean to
prove. O yes, say you, we can, as it were, going up upon the ladder of Jacob
mount from step to step, until in the top we come to those that first taught
the Catholic faith in Tholossa, Paris, and Guienna, as to S. Saturim, Denice,
Martial, and Gratian, and to the rest of the Saints. It may be these were
Saints, you speak of (and yet you have not showed us that) yea, it may be also
you can from age to age, even from that time to ours, now, name us the persons,
that have succeeded one another, from those men you speak of: but you shall
never be able to prove, that all these persons, which have succeeded, have
continued in the sound Apostolic faith, and so have derived it down from the
first to you that be the last: which unless you prove, this climing upon this
ladder you talk of, will do you small pleasure. But you are so confidently
persuaded, that the religion, that you are in possession of now, is the very
same, that was taught the Church of Christ in the beginning, that you denounce
him anathema, be he man or angel, that preaches against it. Yet this is no
proof, that it is the very same. For you may be deceived: and if God would
give you grace to read, and rightly to understand the Scriptures, sure I am,
that even in thus saying, you would find, that you have as far, as your
authority reaches, cursed and excommunicated your own selves, and your whole
Church. So far of are we (though it please you still to call our religion a new
Gospel) from being afraid to join with you in anathematizing them, that preach
any other Gospel, then Christ and his Apostles preached at the first, that
withal our hearts we say Amen thereunto. And therefore for all your supposed
newnes of our religion, we wish with all our hearts, according to John's
counsel 1. Epist. 2. that that might abide which we have heard from the
beginning We think Tertullian says most truly, that comes from the Lord,
and is true, that is first delivered; and that is strange and false, which is
brought in after. De praescrip. aduersus haereticos. Wherefore we say also most
willingly with him in an other place, in his 4 book against Marcion: Id est
verius, quod est prius: etc. That is truer, that is former: that is former,
that is from the beginning: and that is from the beginning, which is from the
Apostles. But then we conclude with him, De praescriptione aduersus haereticos;
Vnde autem extranei and inimici Apostolis haeretici, nisi ex diuersitate
doctrinae etc. How are strangers and enemies to the Apostles known, but by the
diversity of doctrine, which every one of his own mind, has brough forth
and received against the Apostles: therefore let deprauation of Scriptures, and
their exposition be accounted to be, where the diversity of doctrine is
found: hitherto Tertullian, and we with him; and therefore do not charge us
any more with newness, nor make your bragges any more (to deceive the simple)
of antiquity, unless by the Scriptures (wherein the simpliest know the
Apostolic doctrine is contained indeed) you can prove your doctrine to agree
with theirs, and ours to disagree. For you may not think, that you can cause
them, that have any wit or discretion at al left them, to believe that your
doctrine is the same, yt was taught at the first by the Apostles, because you
can say so, or because you can tell them, their father, grandfather, and great
grandfather took it so: as long as they see, you are loath to come to the
trial with the learned, whither it be so, or no, by Gods written word. Even
herein thundering out your Anathema (though you would seem therein stout and
resolute in your religion) yet if your words be well marked, it may evidently be
perceived, that like a dastard you shun the trial of your doctrine by the
written word. For you say, If any body come to teach us any other doctrine, then
that which has been taught us at the beginning, I do not say, written in book
(no, take heed o^ yt but printed in our hearts, let him be Anathema etc. whereby
you bewray your mind, namely to be this, that when it shall come in trial, what
that religion is, that was preached at the beginning, you would not have the
Canonical books of the old and new Testament to determine the matter, but that
which was then written in men's hearts, whereby you mean your unwritten
traditions. But I pray you, how shall we know what was written in men's hearts, by
the ministry of the Apostles better, or more safely; then by that which they
wrote? Especially seeing (as Irenaeus has told us) that which they preached at
the first, after by the will of God, they committed unto writing, to be the
foundation, and pillar of our faith: in his 3 book Chap. 1. As for your
unwritten word (to speak most moderately) you know the credit thereof is
suspected: and certain it is, it must agree with the word written: for God is
one and selfsame both in writing and speaking: or else worthily may it not be
suspected only, but flatly also rejected, as a false and counterfeit word:
which but that you know it does not, you would without any such correction or
explanation of your meaning have said simply, yt you would have him held
Anathema, that preaches any other doctrine, the^ that wc is written in the
books of the scripture. But your own conscience telling you, yt yours was
another doctrine, then had warrant fro thence before the curse should drop out
of your pen, you thought it wisdom (least in your own knowledge you should
have cursed you selves) to tell us that you directed your sentence, not against
those, that teach another doctrine, then those books will warrant (for of such
you allow well enough, or else you should disallowe your selves) but against
those that teach another doctrine from that which was written in our hearts: so
leaving to your selves liberty, to make the poor people believe, that that was
whatsoever you would devise.

O this is too too gross and paltry dealing in matters yt so much concern ye
souls of me^, as this does, especially in this so great light, that shines now
every where amongst us. As for your lives, and the lives of your pastors and
great bishops (though they be such as worthily you may be ashamed of) yet if
they had continued in the profession of the truth, therein we would have held
(for all the other) communion with them. But seeing their lives have been such a
long time, as there were never worse in Sodom, nor any where else (witness your
own stories Benno Cardin: Platina, Sabellicus, Abbas Vsperg: and others) but
especially their doctrine has been directly contrary in a multitude of most
material points of Christian religion, to the doctrine taught us in the
Scripture (as I show in diverse places of this book) we have (as we are
counseled Apocal. 18.) separated our selves from you and them, least by
holding society with you in these your sins, we should in the justice of God
have been driven also in the end to be partakers with you in your plagues.
And therefore to conclude this chapter, though you brag, that you have two
things to quiet your consciences withal, that you believe a doctrine, that your
pastors and the universal Church have taught you 1500. years; and that their
ill lives cannot hurt you: yet in deed and truth you have neither of both:
for your ill lives being joined with ill doctrine has bereaved you of both:
and so you have had nether the universal Church of Christ, but a particular
Synagogue of your own: nor any sound or good pastor either for life or
religion, these 600, or 700 years to teach you your faith.

The X. Chapter.
NOw to turn unto the taking of your accounts, may it please you to show us,
how you have followed the steps of the flock of Christ, according to the
counsel, that we gave to his reasonable sheep, as we have said before; who
has taught you the way that you do follow? what doctors were your first
tutors? who has taught you, that the precious body of our Savior is not
really in the Sacrament of the Altar? who has taught the doctrine (or, if it
be not grief unto you, heresy) which you would have us to receive as a
Gospel? I know before hand, that you will allege me Jesus Christ, and his
holy Apostles, whose steps you do profess to follow, preaching every
where, that there is no difference between your Church (or, to say truth,
Synagogue) and the church of the Apostles. But I pray, let me understand by
what means you can join your selves unto the Church of the Apostles, seeing
that This is an impudent untruth
you condemn and cut off all the Christians that have been and are between
you and them. For to verify this, I will allege no other but your own
works: for Calvin in his Institutions at the Treatise of the Supper of the
Lord, speaking of the oblation of the body of our Savior Christ, as it was
offered in old time, he does write punctuallie these words: Caluinus, in sua
institutione tradita de Coena Domini. I find (says he) that those of old
time have changed this fashion, otherwise then the Institution of our Savior
did require, seeing that their supper did represe^t a certain spectacle of a
strange invention, or at the least, of a new manner. There is nothing more sure
unto the faithful, the^ for the^ to hold themselves unto the pure ordinance of
the Lord, by who^ it was called a supper, to the end, that only his authority
may be our rule. Yet it is true, that when I consider their good meaning, and
that their intent was, never to derogate from the only sacrifice of Christ, I
dare not condemn the^ of folly, and yet I think, that one cannot excuse the^,
that they have not somewhat failed in the exterior form: for they have
followed more the Ceremonies of the Jews, the^ the order of Jesus Christ did
permit. And this is the point, in which they ought to be resisted: for they
have conformed to much unto the old Testament, not contenting themselves with
the simple institution of Christ, they have to much inclined themselves unto
the shadowed Ceremonies of the Jews law.

These are Caluins words. The Reader may by them see well, how this noble
Reformer of the Gospel, does correct al ages and Churches, be they of
Martyrs, Co^fessours, Doctors, Interpreters, Preachers, or any others, from
the Apostles time unto our age, yet does he not deny, but that having some
regard of their simple ignorance, he is content to be so good to the^, as for
this time not to condemn their error or impiety, because that which they
did, was with a good intent: but yet fearing, that the bearing them to much
favor would trouble his conscience, he gives sentence against them, saying,
that Yet this proue^h not that, for the which you alleged him.
they ought to be resisted, because they were not content with the only
institution of Christ, but rather, that in this case they have followed the
shadows of the Jews. Now, for my part, I think Calvin and his fellows so
scrupulous, that they would not join themselves unto persons, that are spotted
with Jewish Ceremonies. Are you not ashamed thus to belly him, is it not euid^nt
in his words, that he speaks, but only of some in old time?
And because that all manner of people, how wise soever they were, from the
Apostles time until our days, have fallen into this error, he does counsel,
my masters, his deformed followers (according to his sentence) to follow none
of them at al, but only the pure word of the Lord, preached by Jesus Christ,
and by his above mentioned Apostles.

The X. Chapter.
IN that by the Scriptures we are able to justify our doctrine, and therefore
diverse times have called upon you to come to that trial, and yet cannot by any
means bring you unto it, and that we are sure, that that doctrine therein
warranted, has always by God by the means he has appointed for that
purpose, been preserved and continued in his Church. You returning now again
to take accounts of us, how we have followed the flock of Christ's sheep that
went before us, and fed by the tents of his shepherds, are answered. And yet
for your better and more plain satisfying, who has taught us the way that we
follow, and who were the Doctors, that were ou^ first tutors, we answer you,
that Christ, his Apostles, and Eua^gelists in the new Testament were our first
tutors, and since them in the principal points of our religion, the aucient
Fathers, whose names and momuments are known unto the Church, that lived for
1000. years after Christ, and those that I named unto you before in my answer
to your 4 Chapter. But particulerly you would know of us, who has taught us to
deny the real presence of Christ's body in the Sacrament of the altar? Here I
suppose, you mean by real presence that real presence, which is in this case
now taught, and received in your Church, under the forms of bread and wine, to
the mouths of al receivers, be they faithful or faithless: for otherwise none
of us do deny a true and most certain presence of Christ to the faith of the
right receiver. This the^ being your meaning, we do not only (as you suppose)
answer you, that we have learned of Christ and his Apostles to deny it, but
also of al ye ancient writers of credit, and account in ye Church for 700, or
800, years together, and since we have been continued in the same by Bertra^,
and others before named, and their followers, as we have made it most evident
in many books written to that purpose, and namely of late in a great book
called Orthodoxus co^se^sus, the true catholic consent of ye holy Scriptures
and ancient Church, of ye truth of ye words of the Lords supper, and of all the
controversy thereabout, printed at Tygure 1578: which book al ye swarm of
you will never be sou^dly able to answer and confute as long as you live. And
therefore all the rest of this Chapter is needles, wherein you suppose, yt
betwixt Christ and his Apostles, and us, there is none yt we ca^ produce of our
judgment, or otherwise against you. But you take upon you to prove, yt we cut
of the^ al, that have been between the^ and us, because Calvin has written
(ha^dling this matter of the sacrament) that he did find, that they of old time
had changed the fashion of the administration thereof otherwise, the^ Christ's
institution would bear etc. wheru^o^ your conclusion follows not, for diverse
causes. For an argument from one to al holds not: as Calvin has done so;
ergo it is all out opion, and we al do so. For though we account of him as of a
rare and singular minister of the Lord, yet we do not bind our selves to do
and say whatsoever he did, and said. For we know him to have been a man
subject to error and infirmity for all his gifts: neither will you be contented,
yt such an argument should hold always drawn from any one of your greatest,
and most famous learned writers, to press al ye rest. And a second reason of
ye weakness of your argument is, that there is more in your conclusion, then is
in ye antecedent given you by him. For you would conclude (for those are your
words, to the proof whereof you cite Calvin) yt we condemn and cut of all the
Christians, that have been and are betwixt Christ, his Apostles, and us: whereas
Calvin speaks not of al, but of some of old time. The 3 reason Calvin
himself gives you, in ye eue^ in the words set down by you, he shows
plainly, that though in the^ that he spoke of, he noted some aberration from
the simplicity of Christ's institution, yet he did not therefore cut the^ of from
the Church, nor co^de^ne the^. What? are you such a cutter, yt you straight cut
of al those from communion with you, in who^ you ca^ justly find any fault or
error in opinion, or practice of life? Surely then you must cut of most of
your best friends. That which we can foundly prove to be a fault in brethren,
either ancient or of later time, we may safely note, tell them of, and labor to
reform; and yet as long as they join together with us in one God, faith, and
Baptism; otherwise, we can, and ought to hold peace and Christian communion
with them: or else where ca^ there at any time be any true concord or peace kept
in the church? For some differences of opinions, and vsages, there have always
yet been, and will be betwixt one particular Church and another, and betwixt
some members of the true church, or other. You needed not therefore (I warrant
you) one whit have been afraid, that Calvin and his fellows were so
scrupulous, that they would not join in fellow ship with some such as he
speaks of there: and yet ye lets not, but yt he should counsel his
readers, to prefer Christ's own simple institution before the usage of them, or
any other differing from it.

The XI. Chapter.
YOu do^ very well, that S. Paul does compare many times the mistical body of
the church unto a natural body, seeing that Jesus Christ is the head, unto who^
the body is joined by ioints, bones, and sinews. If one should then demand of
you, how the feet are joined to the head, you will answer me, by the legs,
which are next unto the feet. And if I ask you how the legs are joined to the
head, you will answer, by the ioints, and by the (...) of the back, and so
consequently from member to member. I do believe, that we are all of one
accord, 1 Cor. 10.
that the end of the world is at hand, and so consequently, that we are the
lower most part of the body, so that (...) the feet or the legs. Then, my
masters, you that have made so f^ne a^ Anotomie of the Mass, at my request
make another of the ministry of your congregation. You were a very pleasant
man be like, that could thus play your self a fit of mirth, and when you had
done, dance after your own pipe, and it seems, you thought that the sport
then would be so pleasant, that no beholder could forbear laughter.
If you should see such another as Apelles, that would paint a man, and that he
had drawn his head, and without painting the rest of his body, he had set his
feet under his ears, what would you sa^^ to such a Table? (Spectatum admissi
risum teneatis amici?) Would you not think, that he was a simple painter, or
else a great Iester? Even so do you deserve, that one should laugh at your
ministry: This is untrue and a gross sla^der, for we hold and teach, that
ever since Christ to our days, there have been both shepherds and sheep
joining with us in the unity of faith, and therefore you laugh at your own
shadow and vain fancy.
For you will join your Church (if it may be so called) unto the church of
the Apostles, without setting forth any members between them. You take but
scant measure, when you will cut of all the Bishops, Pastors and doctors,
that have been from the Apostles time till our days, they being the members
that follow the head of the church. This may well be called a new Religion,
or, to say the truth, it is a mere presumption, to fly without wings, or to
climb without a ladder. And I say to you again, that this is not the way to
follow the counsel of the great Shepherd, that I mentioned before, who
does say unto us, that if we will not miss the way of the Catholics, we
ought to follow the flock of those sheep, that have gone before us, that is
to say, that we should reckon But th^s in truth yours cannot do, therefore
yours is not the Catholic Church by your own reason.
by succession, the Pastors that have succeeded in continuance of one kind of
doctrine, the which, as we have showed, the Catholic church does, and has
ever done.

The XI. Chapter.
As though you had most substa^tially proved by Caluins words, that we cut of
all Christians betwixt the Apostles and us, in this Chapter you urge the
metaphor of a body, whereunto usually the church of Christ is compared:
whereupon you gather, that as there is an orderly connection and situation of
members in a body, so there must be in the church; and that therefore our
church must needs be a monstrous misshapen thing, in joining the Christians of
these later days, with the Apostles, without any betwixt, and fos^^ating, as
it were, the feet of the body hard to the ears, without any other members
betwixt the one and the other. And thus having framed this merry conceit in your
own head, you call upon your friends to laugh at it with you, and so you
proceed in telling us, that whiles we take this course, we fly without wings,
and climb without a ladder, and despise the counsel of Solomon: which after
your manner you interpret that we should reckon by succession the pastors, that
have succeeded in continuance of one kind of doctrine, the which (you say) you
have showed you have done. To what purpose now is all this, seeing in truth
neither we do thus cut of all Christians betwixt them and us, neither have you
showed any such succession of pastors down from them to you, continuing in
your doctrine. Truly to no other purpose can they serve, but to express your
own ridiculous vanity. Howbeit, because you called in the former Chapter for
the names of those, that have caught us to deny your real presence in the
sacrament, and upon a conceit in your own fancy, that you have posed us, you
have grown to be thus full of these swelling words of vanity, and because I
fear, neither you, nor many of your disciples, will vouchsafe to peruse those
books that I sent you unto, for answer in that point, and yet have hope, that
for your sake some of you may chance vouchsafe to read this: I will not
stick with you, particulerly to satisfy your request a little further. First
therefore understand, that we have learned to deny your kind of real presence
of Christ himself, the institutour of this Sacrament, because he has flatly
and vehemently affirmed without exception, John. 6.54. that whosoever eats
his flesh, and drinks his blood has eternal life. Whereas by the means of
your doctrine it follows (because all that receive this sacrament have not
faith, but many lack it) that it shall be eaten of many that shall be never
the better by it, but the worse. We have also further learned it of him, in
that in the same Chapter, speaking of the eating of his body, and drinking of
his blood, he drew his hearers from a gross conceit of eating and drinking him
by their bodily mouths, by using of the word believes in stead of eats and
drinks, ver. 40.47. and cap. 7.38. by mentioning unto them his ascension,
John. 6.62. and lattly by saying unto the^, It is the Spirit that quickens,
the flesh profits nothing: the words that I speak unto you, are spirit and
life: ver. 63. This finally we have learned of him, saying, If any shall say
unto you, Lo here is Christ, there is Christ, believe it not. Math. 24.23. and
by his continuing at the table, when he first instituted and ministered it unto
his Apostles, without alteration either of his place, or form. Mat. 26. Mar.
12. Luke. 22.1. Cor. 11. The Apostles and eua^gelists have also taught us to
deny it, in yt they teach us, that he visibly ascended into heaven, and that he
shall so also come again, when he comes from thence etc. Act. 1.11.
especially seeing his coming to judgment is called his second coming, Heb,
9.28. and until the restitutio^ of all things, it is said by Peter, the
heavens must co^taine him. Act. 3.21. The Eua^gelists in laying down unto us
the story of his nativity, life and death, so proving unto us, yt he was and is
a true and perfect man, encourage us also (least we should with the
Marcionites, and other heretics deny the truth of his ma^hood) co^tantly to
^^^y your real presence; for ye maintenance whereof, you are driven to fansy a
number of things quite contrary to ye nature and truth of his ma^hood. And
lastly, in that reciting ye words of the institution, they tell us, that Christ
commanded that to be done in remembrance of him, Luke. 22.19. 1. Cor. 11.24.
and there Paul says ( v. 26.) As often as ye shall eat this bread, and drink
this cup, ye show the lords death till he come: wc words plainly argu, yt
though ye sacrament be both rightly ministres^ received, yet it infers not
any such real presence, as you there imag^^.

Now betwixt them and us we find infinite places, in writers of all ages, that
teach us still to deny your real presence: but amongst many, mark these for
example. Tertullia^ in his 4. book against Marcio^ interprets these words.
Hoc est corpus meum, thus, that is to say, This is a figure of my body.
Augustine against Adama^tus ye Manichee, c. 12. writes, that christ doubted
not to say, This is my body, when he gave a sign of his body: and upon ye 3.
Ps. he says, that Christ admitted Judas to a ba^quet, where he co^me^ded a
figure of his body to his disciples: and upon ye 98. Ps. he says, ye shall not
eat this body that ye see, neither shall ye drink that blood, which they
shall shed that crucify me: I have commended unto you a certain sacrament, it
being spiritually understood will give you life. In his 3. book therefore of
Christian doctrine he writes thus, This saying of Christ, Except ye eat the
flesh of the son of man etc. seems to command an heinous thing, and a wicked:
therefore it is a figure, co^ma^ding us to be partakers of Christ's passion,
keeping in our minds to our great profit and comfort, that his flesh was
crucified and wounded for us. c. 16. he says, It is a miserable slavery of the
soul to take the signs for the things signified, in ye same book, c. 5. And
therefore in his 23. epistle, he tells us, that the similitude betwixt the
sign and the thing signified is the cause, why the one bears the name of the
other in sacraments: and in his 57. question upon Leuitic. he gives us this
rule, The thing that signifies, is wo^t to bear the name of the thing which it
signifies; as Paul said, The rock was Christ, and not, it signified Christ,
but eue^ as it had been indeed, which nevertheless was not Christ by substance,
but by signification. So that his usual doctrine is, to teach us in this
sacrament, to seek christ in heaven by faith, and thereby to make him present,
wc otherwise is absent, as you may read in his 50. tract upon John, and else
where very often. And with Augustine ye rest of the fathers consent in this
matter, and therefore nothing is more common with them, then to call the outward
part in this sacrament a sign, figure, similitude, resemblance, or
representatio^, as it appears in these places. Chrysostom in his 83. Homil:
upon Mat. Hierom in his 2. book against Iouinia^, Ambr. in his 4. book of ye
sacraments, c. 5. Basil in his lyturgy: Ephr: in his 4. book against the
impugners of Christ's manhood by humane reason. And Origin upon Leuit: hom: 7.
teaches us, that the letter of those words, Except ye eat the flesh of the
son of man etc. kills: and therefore he teaches us there spiritually to
understand them. Who upon these words of Christ gathers, that no wicked man
can eat the flesh of christ, upon Mat. c. 15. as for ye other part, he
grants the wicked may eat, and that when it has been eaten, in the end it
is avoided into the place of easement, Hom: 15. upon Mat. Athanasius notes, ye
christ made mention of his ascension. John 6. to wtdraw the^ from corporal and
fleshly understanding of his words; upon these words, whosoever speaks a word
against the son etc. But Chrysostom. goes plainly to work and says in his 11. Hom:
upon Mat. that the very body of christ himself is not in the holy vessels, but
the mystery and sacrament thereof is therein contained. And therefore in his 46.
Hom. upon John, shows us, ye christ saying the flesh profits nothing John
6. thereby warned us to take heed of carnal and fleshly understanding of his
words: which is to understand them (says he) simply: and in his 4. Homil:
upon the 4. to the Corinth: he tells us, that the body of Christ is the
carrion, where the Eagles will be: he names eagles (says he) to show, that
who so will approach to his body, must mount aloft and have no dealing with the
earth, nor be drawn downward, but must evermore fly up etc. For this is a
table of Eagles (says he) that fly on high, and not of Iaies, that creep
beneath. Christ took bread which comforts ma^s heart, that he might represe^t
thereby his body and blood, says Hier. upon ye 26. of Mat. As thou have in
baptism receued the similitude of death so likewise do thou in this sacrament
dri^k the similitude of christ's blood, says Ambrose in his 4 book, and 4, c.
of the sacraments. Ciprian de unction chrismatis, writes thus, Christ in his
last supper gave unto his Apostles bread and wine, which he called his body and
blood but on the Cross he gave his very body to be wounded with the hands of
the soldiers, that the Apostles might declare unto the world, how and in what
manner, the bread may be the flesh and blood of Christ. And the manner straight
way he declares thus, that those things, which do signify, and those things
which be signified by the^, may be both called by one name. Fulge^tius in his
book to King Thrasimund has these words, This cup or chalice is the new
Testament, that is to say, does signify the new Testament. Theodoret in his
first Dialogue most plainly writes, that Christ honored the signs and
representatio^s, which are seen, with the name of his body and blood, not
changing their natures, but adding grace to nature: and yet more plainly in
the 2. Dialogue he writes thus: the mystical signs after sanctification go
not from their nature: for they tarry in their former substance, figure, and
form. Yea even Gelasius a Pope, about the year 500. against Eutiches, is as
plain, saying, in the Eucharist the substance and nature of bread and wine
cease not. For the image and similitude of the body and blood is celebrated in
those mysteries. And Bertram in his treatise of this matter, written in the time
of Carolus Caluus labors by many proofs and testimonies to show, that bread
and wine remain still, and that we are here to follow Christ in a figure and
mystery. And Bid upon Luke. 22. says, because bread does comfort man's heart,
and wine does make good blood in his body: therefore the bread is mystically
compared to Christ's body, and the wine to Christ's blood. The like saying has
Haymo in his 5. book De sermonum proprietate. Emissenus de consecrat. Did. 2.
cap. Quia corpus; compares the conversion in the Sacrament to the conversion
in a man regenerated, which we all know is in quality, and not in substance.
There are two Epistles yet extant in the Saxon tongue, made by one Alfricke in
King Etheldreds time; about the year of the Lord 996, being then (as some
write) Bishop of Canterbury, wherein he teaches the bread and wine to be no
otherwise the body and blood of Christ, then manna, and the water of the rock
was Christ: who also translated 80 sermons out of latin into the Saxon tongue,
whereof 24. were appointed to be read for homilies: and in that which was to be
read on Easter day, there is much direct matter against Transubstantiation, and
your real presence. And since these times you know well enough we have had
many from time to time (yea, mo the^ you well like of) that have been as flat
and direct against your kind of real presence, as we are now. This Master
Foxes book of Acts and Monuments has made evident to all the world. And it
is famously known, that before your Lateran Council, under Innocent the 3. in
the year 1215. it was not decreed to be as you now hold. It appears also by
the last session of the council of Florence (which is not much above 140.
years ago) that the Greek Church until then stood against your doctrine of
transubstantiation, which is the ground of your real presence. And Tonstall
(though otherwise a great man on your side) yet in his book of this sacrament,
says, perhaps it had been better to leave every man that would be curious
concerning this matter, of the manner how Christ is present, to his own
conjecture; as by his confession, before the council of Lateran, it was left at
liberty. And John Duns, a friend of yours, upon the 4. book of the sentences
says, that the words might have been expounded more plainly, then by
Transubstantiation, if it had pleased the Church. Gabriel Biell another great
doctor, upon the canon of the mass in his 40. reading plainly confesses,
that it is not expressed in the canon of the Bible, how the body of Christ is
there, whither by Tra^substantiatio^ or Consubstantiation. Even so your great
Bishop John Fisher writing against Luthers book of the captivity of Babylon,
is enforced to confess, that he finds not in Matthew, nor any where else in
the scripture, any thing to prove, that there is thereby the real presence of
Christ in your mass: nor that whenever a Priest shall go about that matter,
he makes the bread and wine the body and blood of Christ: and so concludes,
that he thinks, that every man understands, that the certainty of that
matter depends not so much of the Gospel, as it does upon the use,
tradition and custom of the Church. These testimonies forasmuch as directly
they are against your literal exposition of Christ's words, your new devise of
transubstantiation, the only pillar and buttresse of your real presence, and
against your gross and carnal eating of him with the bodily mouths of all
receivers good and bad, they may not be denied to be forcible against your
real presence. For the cause thereof denied and taken away, the effect must
cease: and if the consequent thereof, which is eating of Christ's precious
body with the filthy mouths of unbelievers be absurd, the antecedent thereof
must also be absurd.

Howbeit, because you shall not say, that we are unwilling to yield you
thoroughly an account, why we deny your real presence; understand you yet
further, we are moved so to do, because your doctrine of tra^substantiation
(the only vpholder thereof) and the doctrine it self (as you hold it)
brings in, without all reason, such an interpretation and construction of the
words of the instruction of this Sacrament, as takes away the analogy
between the signs, and the things whereof they are signs, overthrows the
nature of a Sacrament, in anihilating or otherwise abandoning the outward part;
which scripture, and al antiquity necessarily require to continue, to the
constitution of a Sacrament: as brings in many monstrous absurdities and
needelesse miracles, contrary both to the true faith of Christ's manhood, and
good manners; abhorring, both by nature and express warrant of the scripture,
from eating and drinking of man's flesh and blood covered or uncovered: and as
lastly infers an eating, and drinking of Christ by the mouths of the wicked
and unbelievers, as well as of believers. Which eating of Christ with the bodily
mouth, neither stands with the doctrine of the word (which teaches no such
bodily commition of our bo^ies with Christ's, and therefore (seeing the sacraments
are but confirmations of that which is taught in the word) cannot, or may not
be taught herein) nor yet with the nature of the covenant and communion with
christ, which is spiritual, and belongs only to the faithful, and therefore
only m^st be offered, sealed and ratified in this sacrament to them. And yet
for al^^^s, I would not have you to imagine, yt we deny al kind of real
presence in this sacrament of Christ's body and blood. For we do most
consta^tly teach with the ancient fathers, that in this sacrament though by means
thereof there be a change in name, use, honor, and estimation in the outward
elements; yet they remain still to be fed on with ye mouth of the body, and that
when by occasion of that which is done by the outward elements, the communica^t
calls thankfully to remembrance christ's death, and believes that his body
was as certainly broken for him ^ his blood shed, as there he sees the bread
broken, wine poured out, and both delivered unto him; and that thereby his full
and perfect salvation was absolutely wrought: the^ by this mouth of his soul,
faith, he as certainly, though after a spiritual, and unspeakable manner,
feeds upon christ's very broken body, and bloodshed, and grows through the
working of the spirit to a communion therwt, as by the mouth of his body he
feeds upon the outward elements, and so by the force of nature has them
united with his nature. And marueil not, that faith can and does make ye body
broken and blood shed of Christ (which was now done 1500. years ago) yet
lively and truly present. For it can make things spoken and taught in the word
(though done never so long ago) and things absent to be present. And therefore
when Paul wrote to the Galat: though christ long before had been crucified,
and was ascended, yet by the means of the word and sacraments on the one side
ministered amongst the^, and of their faith on the other side, he says, that
Christ was eue^ crucified amongst the^. Gal. 3. wherein (as Chrysostom notes
upon that place) his meaning was, to show the strength of faith, which is able
to see things though far away, and that by the eyes of faith, Christ's death was
more clearly and perfectly seen, then it was of many, that were present at it,
and saw all that was done. You seem in this your doctrine, and for the defense
thereof, to be great aduancers of Gods omnipotency. But in Christ's time, I
pray you tell me, whither they that believed that Christ could fulfill their
desire though absent; or they that thought, he must be locally present, or else
it would not be, had the greater faith in his omnipotency? I am sure you will
say, the faith of the former was the stronger, and that they therein showed
themselves better persuaded of Christ's almightinesse, then the later, for the
evidence of the matter will enforce you to confess thus much. Then to apply
this to this present matter, the thing, that both you and we desire, is,
truly to be fed with the body and blood of Christ to eternal life:
whither then do we or you indeed believe his omnipotency better: we, that
say and believe, that he can and does feed us herewith, and unite us and
himself together in the use of this sacrament, he tarrying still in heaven
according to the Scriptures; or you, that imagine, that he cannot do it,
unless he creep into your mouths, under the forms of bread and wine? Nay,
whatsoever you talk of his omnipotency, this argues, that your faith is too
too weak therein, in that you must have such a real presence of him, as you
imagine, or else you think it will not serve your turn. You will grant, that
distance of place betwixt head and feet, betwixt man and wife, father and
son breaks not, nor hinders the union, that nature has made between
them: what weakness of faith then were it, to think, that Christ our head, our
husband, our father must be locally conioined with us, or else the union betwixt
him and us cannot be perfected? Assure your selves, if being at this table,
you will secke him by faith, where he is in heaven, and not, as you do, in
the forms of bread and wine (whereunto only your own fancy has tied him) by
your faith you shall so reach, and apprehend him, and he by his spirit will so
embrace you, that there was never head more surely by vienes, sinews, arteries
and other helps of nature tied unto the inferior parts, nor husband to wife,
nor father to son more fast and surely linked and knit, by the bonds of
natural union, then he will unite himself unto you. For the defense of your
real presence, and for the avoiding of many absurdities concerning Christ's
manhood, that thereby you are fallen into, you talk much of the state of
Christ's glorified body. But alas, do you not see, that whatsoever you talk
thereof, is quite besides the purpose? For this is not a Sacrament of his
glorified body, but of his crucified body: not of the conjunction of his
body and blood, but of the separation of the one from the other: and therefore
Christ in the institution, called not bread and wine simply his body and
blood, but his body broken and blood shed, and gave the bread a sacrament of
the one, and the wine, a part from the bread, a Sacrament of the other.
Whereupon it is evident, that here we have to do with his passible body, with
his body broken, and his blood shed upon the cross, and not with the state of
his glorified and impassible body; and therefore unless the state of his
passible body dying upon the cross, will stand with your real presence, it
has no place here. For by the very words of the institution (which you would
seem otherwhiles most carefully and literally to urge) it is the body broken
and the blood shed, that must here be really present: which otherwise then by
faith, how can it be? seeing it is so long since his body was broken, and blood
shed; and since it has not been really at any time iterated, nor can be, for
he died once for all, and so, that since he is not to die any more, as the
scripture teaches, Romans 6. Which if you and your fellows would seriously
mark, the naked and bare words of the institution, would drive you from your
kind of real presence (which cannot be of the body broken, and bloodshed of
Christ now) to embrace our real presence thereof, through faith and effectual
remembrance, that they were once so used to our redemption, which is possible
and effectual unto salvation. Thus much to answer your demand concerning
this matter.

The XII. Chapter.
AS touching the rest, What need then this long dispute, to disprove our
calling, for want of it.
you have accustomed in your ministry, to use the imposition, or laying on of
hands, and you say, that it is an ancient and honest Ceremony, Exodus 29.
in this you say the truth. For as we read, of great antiquity this
ceremony has been used, as well in the old law, as in the law of grace.
And unto that did redounde the imposition of hands, laid upon the Leuit. 4.
Wether that was brought to the immolation of the sacrifice of Number. 8. and 17
Moises law: to declare, that those that are ordained unto the service of God,
and unto the ministry of the church, Number. 17. There is nothing concerning
imposition of hands.
ought to retain the like ceremony: and so the Israelites did lay their
hands upon the Levites, and Moises likewise did lay his hands upon Joshua, when
he was made a captain of the Israelites, who did represent the church of
Christ. The Apostles have used the like, as we find, where we read, that Act.
8.19. and 13
S. Peter and S. John did lay their hands upon the Christian people of
Samaria, and S. Paul upon the Ephesians, and likewise the Apostles upon the
seven Deacons, and upon S. Paul and Barnabas. Timot. 2.
S. Paul does admonish Timothy, not to despise the grace that he had received
by the imposition of hands, The places of Paul to Timothy are clarkely quoted,
but yet according to your manner, that is, not one of them right.
and that he should set forth the gift of God, that he had received with the
imposition of the hands of S. Paul upon him. He does likewise command him,
not to use this imposition of hands without discretion, to the end that he do
not communicate with the sin of another. Calvin according to these
authorities in his institution book (Ar. 8. cap. 50.) of faith, does co^mande
the like to be used in his church. It does appear (says he) that the
Apostles have used no other ceremony in the vocation to the ministry, but this
imposition of hands. Now I think, that they took this custom of the Jews,
who did present unto God by imposition of hands that, that they would bless
and co^secrat. After this sort Jacob (Genesis 48.) when he would bless Ephraim
and Manasses, he laid his hands upon their heads. Our savior did the like
upon the little children, when he did pray. Mat. 19. And as I think, it was
all to one end or deined in the law: and therefore, the Apostles, by the
imposition of hands, did signify, that they did offer unto God him, that they
did receive into the ministry, although they did use it likewise with those,
unto whom they did distribute the visible gifts of the holy Ghost. How so ever
it be, they have used this solemnity as many times, as they did ordeine any
body to the ministry of the church, as we see by example, as well touching
the pastors and doctors, as the Deacons. Now, although there be no special
commandment, as touching the imposition of hands: yet notwithstanding, seeing
that we read, that the Apostles did use it continually, that which they did
use so diligently, ought to be unto us as a precept. And surely, it is a
profitable thing, to set forth to the people the dignity of the Ministry by
such a Ceremony, and to make him know, that is thus or deined minister, that
he apperteineth no more to himself, but that he is dedicated to the service of
God and of his church. etc. To what purpose is all this long discourse of
imposition of hands, seeing we do use it. And it is notoriously known, that
all these had imposition of hands, and had an outward ordinary calling
according to the times and places when and wherein they lived.
Thus, seeing that Calvin does confess the imposition of hands to be so
necessary for the ministry of the church, and that it is approved, as well by
the law of nature, as by the law of Moises or of the Gospel: Answer us
then, who was he, that laid his hands upon Calvin, to safe co^duict the charge
of his conscience? You will answer me, Zuinglius, or Oecola^padius, or the
others of his time. And if by chance one would be so curious, as to pursue this
demand, mounting a little higher: I mean, to know of whom these above named
have received their blessing and imposition of hands, I think you will not
name the Apostles, if you will not have every man to laugh at your folly: for
there is none so simple, but does know, that they died above. 1500. years
agone. And seeing that your Patriarch has made us so goodly an oratum, as
touching this impositio^ of hands, affirming it to be necessary, both by the
law of Nature, the law of Moses, and the law of Grace, how does it come to
pass, that Zuinglius has not used it, to confirm his ministry.

The XII. Chapter
SEeing you know and confess yt we allow and retain in our vocation this
ceremony of impositio^ of hands, what needed you to have made so much ado
therabout? But having justified ye use thereof by Caluins testimony, and
otherwise, you demand of whom Calvin Zuinglius and Oecola^padius had this
impositio^ of hands? I answer, yt not only these, but many other, who^ god
first stirred up in these later days to detect Antichrist, and so to bring him
to consu^ption, of whom ye rest yt have followed in that course have descended,
and had theirs, had ye same vocation and succession, whereof you your selves
brag. For most of the^ were priests (as you call the^) ordered by your selves,
and doctors of divinity allowed in their times by the universities, wherein
they were brought up. But ye same vocation, wc you abused, our me^ have
labored to use well and to ye vain succession of persons, wherwt you decked
yourselues, they have added the succession of true doctrine, with you had
corrupted. So yt what good soever was in your vocation, ours had it also, and
besides, since they have had confirmation of their ministry amongst themselves,
and by the consent and approbation of ye people amongst who^ they have
ministered.

The XIII. Chapter.
IF that the good doctor Cip. 1. epist. c. 6.
S. Cyprian had been in these our days, might he not well have said against
your scholars, that which he did write against Cipria^ calls him that he
speaks against Nouatianus, who was a Roman, and the disciple of Nouatus of
Afric. That Nouatus and Nouatianus were two several persons, it appears in
Ciprian lib. 2. ep st. 8. and. 9.
Nouatus? there needed no other, but insteede of Nouatus to put in Caluinus or
Zuinglius; and nomine mutato, de vobis fabula narrabitur. Seeing that the said
S. Ciprian does hold and affirm, that Nouatus ought to be accounted as no
Bishop, because he succeeded no body, but rather that he did make himself a
Bishop, These words you add, for they are not in Ciprian.
without any imposition of hands. Then to what purpose,, I pray you, are ye of
the opinion, that This is but your slader and saying: for both these were and
so are we able to prove that they had sufficient warrant for their calling.
Calvin and Zuinglius are such faithful ministers, considering that they are
as far from proving the confirmation of their ministry, as ever was Nouatus.
You will answer me, that you have no need of the imposition of hands of the
Papists, superstitious Idolaters and infidels. But this makes your cause never
the better: for if you are so scrupulous by nature, that it goes against your
consciences to come to kneel to our Bishops, you should (I say in tunes past)
have required your ancient ministers to have given you a warrant for the
confirmation of your estate, when one does demand of you, since when your
Religion began you are not content, to claim the beginning from the Apostles,
but rather, stepping hardly forward, ye are not content to stay at David or
Abraham, but you must needs fetch it from Abel, Yea even from that doctrine,
that God taught Adam and Eve in Paradise, though it grieve you.
yea, from Adam. And if one should spur you forward, you would go, I know
not whether. Then seeing that your church is so ancient, and that it has
endured till our days (if we will believe you) it is not like to be true, that
it has been destitute altogether of ministers: for although it be so, that
God did greatly afflict the Israelites with the captivity of Babylon, yet did
he never leave them without comfort of good doctors, such as Daniel, Ezechias,
Whence prove you, that they had there a pro^^er then named Abdias? Or that
there was then any Prop. ^^named Ez^chias: but it may be you would have said
Ezechiel.
Abdias, and many others: Even so you, that think in your own heads, to be
the people of God, I cannot think (if it be so) he would so have given you
over, as to want ministers to comfort you in your afflictions, and to ordeine
your ministry, by the in position of hands: These 2. whiles they were yours,
and so others, as Luther, Lucer, Capito, Carolstadius, Oecola^padius and the
rest, had calling either to be priests, or to be ordered by your own Bishops,
or at least to be doctors of Divinity by the university, wherein they were
brought up. And after these two were ours, the one had an ordinary calling by
the presbytery, magistrate and people of Geneuae the other of Zurich, and so
had the rest in the places where they taught.
What stays you, that you do not go to them, seeing that you have nothing to
do with ours? And if you say, that you have done so, do us so much pleasure,
as to let us hear their na^es, and in what time they did flourish, or otherwise
you may pardon us, if we give no credit to your fained imaginations.

The XIII. Chapter.
YOU boldly add unto Cyprians words, these words, without any impositio^ of
hands, for neither where the other words of his with you recite are, nor yet any
where in that epistle does he once mention ye ceremony of imposition of hands.
Neither can Cyprians saying against Nouatianus (whom you call wrongfully and
ignorantly Nouatus) truly be applied either to Calvin or Zuinglius, seeing they
had (as I have read) the ordinary calling and vocation of the times, wherein
they lived even from your selves. For as for Calvin, his father got him a
prebend or benefice in a Cathedral church, and a curateship in a town hard
by, of a Bishop of yours, where he was borne, wc would not have been given
him, unless he had been within orders, I think. And Zwinglius, it is well
known, was a Cano^ in the cathedral church of Zurich, 2. or 3. years there
living and preaching, before he was ours. And so I read the other preached also
in his cure, before he was ours: whereby it should seem, yt the one had
imposition of hands to holy orders (as you term them) of some Bishop of
France, and the other of some Bishop likewise of Germany. Now after, when as by
force of the truth, they grew to be of our Religion, and so came out of
Babylon to us, they both were according to the order of those churches where
they served, called orderly to the ministry of the Gospel, where also they
both succeeded others, that went before them. Neither of which could Nouatianus
truly allege for himself, and therefore Ciprian says, that he was neither
in the church nor Bishop. But seeing we account our church so ancient, as that
when we are asked, when our Religion began, we will say, it has been even
from Ada^, and also that ever since it has endured, and continued; you say, it
is not likely that it has at any time been altogether destitute of ministers.
For though God did afflict the Israelites for their sins with the captivity
of Babylon, yet he did never leave them without comfort of good doctors, as
Daniel, Ezechiel, Abdias, and others: and therefore seeing we have nothing to do
with yours, we either have, or should have sought them out, and have taken
imposition of hands of them, which if we have done, you wish us to tell you
their names, when and where they flourished. To answer you indeed for the
substance of our Religion, we say it is the same with God himself first taught
Ada^ in paradise. For first, he was taught to serve God, not according to his
own will, but according to the law that God gave him. Secondly, he being found
a tra^sgressour of that holy will of God, after he was brought to see his sin,
and the danger thereof, he is sent for recovery by Gods promise, only to ye
promised seed: and then is he taught, how to live in his vocation: wherein
lies the sum of that Religion, wc we now teach and preach. For first, we
teach men, how to serve God according to his own revealed will, and not
according to their own fancy, as you do. Secondly, finding men many ways to
decline from this rule, we labor to make them see their sins, and the danger
thereof, which when we have done, we send the^ only to Jesus Christ for help
and comfort. In both with you also offend; first, whiles you keep men from
seeing ye multitude and grieuousnes of their sins, by extenuating the power
of original sin, by making man believe, yt the fulfilling of the law is now
possible unto him, that many sins of their own nature, for their littlenes are
venial: and that the first motions of sin arising from the corruption of our
own hearts not consented unto are no sin: and then you go from this most
ancient order of God, in that you send men for their recovery not only to
Jesus Christ, but to their own freewill, merits and satisfaction, and to a
number of things very trifling and ridiculous: by use and doing whereof, you
would persuade them, they shall purchase to themselves remission of their
sins. In the 3. point also, we follow the pattern of our heavenly father,
calling upon every man according to his calling, to get his living in an honest
vocation, with the sweat of his brows; and showing woman, that in lawful
wedlock (if by nature or otherwise she have not the gift of continency)
though to her pain and sorrow, she is for the increasing of Gods kingdom, and
the common weal, wherein she lives, to conceive, and bear children; whereas
you draw both the one and the other herefrom, into Hermitages, Cloisters, and
Nunries, there to live an idle life, out of all vocation profitable to the
Church, or common weal. And we are persuaded, that this Religion, and
consequently a Church to hold and embrace it has ever since unto these days
continued. And we grant you also, that though God for the sins of his people
do afflict his Church diverse times, and that grievously; as he did the
Isralites with the 70. years captivity: yet then he does not leave them
without teachers to comfort them, and therefore in all ages and times do
constantly believe in one place or other, that this our Religion and Church
has had some such. Yet you must take this with you, that in such times of the
affliction of the Church the ordinary state of the ministry thereof has often
failed. For you have heard Azariah the prophet tell king Asa, in respect of such
times as were before his time, that Israel a long season had been without the
true God, without prophet to teach, and without law, 2. Chron. 15. And in the
3 of Hosea you may read prophesied, that the children of Israel shall remain
many days without a King, without a Prince, without an offering, without an
image, without an Ephod, and without Teraphim: by which words, the Prophet
plainly foresheweth, an interruption should be of their outward ordinary
visible ministry. And even in respect of the time that you mention, it
appears in the 2. of the Im^^^ntat. that the like was fulfilled in the
Church, in respect of that time of their captivity in Babylon. For there
Jeremy lamenting the state of the Church then, says, The Lord has caused
the feasts and Sabbothes to be forgotten in Sion, and has despised in the
indignation of his wrath, the King and the Priests, the Lord has forsaken his
altar, and has abhorred his sanctuary. And when those prophecies of the
flourishing of Antichrist: 2. These. 2. and Revel: 17. and that of the Churches
being driued into the wilderness, and there remaining for a time, Revel. 12.
should be fulfilled, who sees not, that it is no strange thing, but a thing
plainly foreshewed, should be, yt neither the church herself nor her teachers
should be very visible and apparent. And therefore speaking of those times,
when indeed those prophesies were verified, as you do, you do our church and
her ministers great and double wrong: first, in thus chasing the^ into the
wilderness, there to save themselves from your fury: and then, yet in exacting
at our hands the names of them, whom God by thus hiding of them, preserved to
continue his church. And yet (as I have showed you before cap. 4.) in the
mercy of God, when your Antichristian Synagogue flourished most, in Bohemia,
and other places, ye Christians called Walde^ses, were many, and has diverse
assemblies, schools, churches and ministers. Why the^ (say you) have you not,
or do you not, run to the^, that by the^ you may have your ministers ordained
or confirmed, and if you have, tell us their names, that did it. I answer you,
we have thought it needles, seeing (as I have showed) otherwise both our former
and later ministers, nearer home had both ordinatio^, and confirmation, that
well enough served their turns. Besides, I am sure you cannot be ignorant, but
it has been an ordinary thing with God, when the ordinary ministers of ye church,
and consequently ye outward face and countenance thereof has been corrupted,
and gone from y truth, and ways of the lord, to raise extraordinarily prophets
and others to seek and procure ye reformation thereof, as it appears by
raising up from time to time Prophets amongst ye Israelites, in ye ruins and
corruptions of his church, who should have had wrong offered, if they should not
have been received as the Lords ministers, until either they could get
ordinary admission of the Prelates then, to reform whose corruptions they were
sent, or until they could show ye names of some other prophets, that had
ordinarily succeeded others, and also ordained them. Which is ye very case of
the Lords faithful ministers, whom he has used first in any nation without the
ordinary calling of the days immediately going before, to detect and lay open
ye horrible corruptions thrust upon the Church by the papacy. For they found,
that the word of God was concealed and hid from the people, and yt insteede
thereof, they were fed with the inventions and traditions of men; y the honor yt
was due to God alone was turned unto me^ and unto images; yt ye blood of Christ
was ineffect trode^ underfoot, in yt so many by ways were sought to atteine to
heaven by, besides Christ: yt the sacrament of his body and blood was turned
into gross Idolatry, and the use quite perverted. To be short, they found all the holy scripture profaned and poisoned wc the Popes glosses, and false
interpretatio^s. These things therefore being thus, and the lord reueling unto
the^ his truth, because ye time was come, that Antichrist must be detected, ye
lord gave unto the^ the spirit of courage and boldness, first to notify these
corruptions to the Prelates of your church, and to crave at their hands the
reformation thereof: but finding that that would not be, because satan will
not be against himself. Ma. 12. what were they to do else, but according to yt
ye God gave the^, and the places they had in universities and in ye church, to
proceed to call the people yet from those errors to the truth. When fire shall
take hold of a city, or the enemy scale the wall in the night, if ye least
burgess shall give an alaru^, yea if it be but a stranger (the watchma^
sleeping yt should give warning) no man would stand trifling in demanding by
what title he did it, but straight he will run to the water and to ye walls, and
lay to his hands to prevent the mischief, and thank him yt gave the warning.
And yet when ye me^, we speak of, give notice of a greater danger, though it
be as necessary to listen unto them, and to be warned by them, as the salvation
of men's souls is: yet they cannot find this wisdom and thankfulness in men.
It should seem by your standing thus precisely upon the necessity of visible
succession, and ordinary impositio^ of hands in the^, ye god shall send to teach
men, or else they may not be heard: yt either you have not red, or else yt you
greatly disse^ble your knowledge, that God has used ye ministry of diverse
persons, yt have wanted those, to convert nations, to lay the fou^datio^ of
churches, and to do very much good. For Ruffinus in his Eccl. Hist. 1. book,
and c. 10. and Theodoret in his 1. book, c. 23. report, that a captive maiden
did first kindle ye light of ye Gospel amongst the Iberia^s: who being ye
means first to convert the Queen, the Queen converted the King, and he without
any orders (as you call them) taught his people ye Christian faith and so began
the church there. It is also written by Ruff. lib. 1^. c. 9. by Theodoret, in
the 22. c. of his said book, by Nicep in his 8. book, c. 35, that AEdesius
and Frumentius brought thither being ^^yes, by Meropius a philosoper, and there
taken and preserved alive when he and the rest of his company were slain,
growing after into good credit and authority there, were the first means of the
sowing of ye seed of the Gospel amongst the Barbarians in the further India,
to the profession and exercises whereof, especially Frumentius, and that not
only after that by Athanasius he was ordained there bishop, but before ever by
any he was ordained either minister or bishop, was a notable and effectual
means both to excite marchantes that came thither, and to draw the people of
that country it self. Moreover Eusebius in his ecclesiastical history
reports, in his sixte book and 19. Chapter, that Origin taught publicly
before he had ordination, certain bishops being present: which when Demetrius
Alexandrinus objected as a fault, to Alexander bishop of Jerusalem, and to
Theoclistus bishop of Caesarea, they defended themselves by alleging diverse
such famous examples, as namely of Euelpis, Paulinus and Theodorus, which in
like sort had preached without the ordinary ordination. Yea, read Nicephorus 2
book and 25. Chapter, and he will tell you, that under Constantius, Antonie
the heremite taught at Alexandria, and that under Valens at Antioch Aphraatis
Flauianus and Iulianus being then but monks (who in those days were not
reckoned amongst Clerks at all, for unto Gregory's time they were not
accounted Clerks) did publickely preach and confute heretics. And yet these
examples I allege not, that I would be author to any, when an ordinary
calling may be had, to despise that, and to take upon them that function of the
Ministry without that lawful ordinary calling: for that were to disturb the
peace of the Church, and to open a gap to much disorder and inconvenience: but
to this end, to make it appear, that the Church of God in former ancient times,
has not so precisely and curiously stood upon these points, of visible
succession and ordination, for the justifying of ones preaching the Gospel at
al times, and in all places, as you do. For (doubtless) there have been times
and yet may be, as after that great apostasy spoken of 2. These. 2. and in
other great ruins of the Church, when it has and may please the Lord to call
men extraordinarily to this work, without either immediate, local or
personal succession going before; who (as long as they preach but the truth,
and otherwise the times be so corrupt, that of them that have authority
ordinarily to call men to that business, such rather should be shut out
generally, then let into the ministry) are to be received, heard, and listened
unto, as such whom the Lord of his mercy has extraordinarily called himself.

The XIIII. Chapter.
Calvin does allege to us, that the Apostles do say, that no body ought
to take upon him the honor of the high priesthood, except he be called to it
as Aaron was, meaning by that to conclude, that of our own authority we have
usurped the dignity of Priesthood. And ^et to no purpose.
We have answered him at large of our vocation, by the succession of Pastors
joined with the imposition of hands. I do demand of him, or of his, if they
can make any true answer to the like objection. You do lay to our charge the
all lives of our Popes and Bishops, and the naughtiness that you pretend to
find in our Preachers: but all those inuectiues serve to no other purpose, but
to show how you keep Nay you shall have the bell, both for that, and for
profane iering and scoffing.
a learned school of railing, the which pre-eminence we do yield to you
without any debate or process, for ye may attribute that unto your selves as
your own by right, insteede of the imposition of hands, which ye want. But in
one thing to my judgment you are greatly ouerseene, and that is this: When you
observe this law your selves, we will learn of you.
Why do ye not fill both sides of your book, in the one, you set forth at
large without omitting any point of their ill doings, all the naughty lives of
our Pastors and Bishops: but the other sides of the leaves are empty; you
should have written on them the holy lives of your Ministers, succeeding one
after an other this thousand and five hundred years. When the Popes Bonifacius
and Gregorius did govern ill their Seats at Rome, I have sufficiently answered
this, cap. 4.
which were the good and holy ministers that did their duty at Geneua? When
our Doctors did preach against God in times past, in what part or under what
sign were your Ministers lodged, that did then preach the pure word of the
Lord? Reasoned like your selves, as though the Apostles never lawfully hid
themselves, from the fury of the persecuters.
if they did hide themselves, they did not follow the pure word of the Lord, the
which you say is necessary to know the true and faithful believers. For Christ
does say, Mat. 10. that he that shall deny him before men, him will he deny
before his father in heaven. And S. Paul does say: To. 10. And so have ours
all ways in due time and place, though to the loss of thousands of their
lives, done.
that with the heart one does believe to justice, and with the mouth one must
co^fes to salvation. This is but your cuckowes song, containing neither truth,
nor honesty.
But to say the truth, your religion was not the^ found out, and the
Gra^dfathers, and great Grandfathers of Calvin had never drea^pt of the
heresies, that now their reformed child has set so newly abroach. And
therefore think it not strange, if that those people that are not light
headed, send you to preach in new found lands, as one that has here at home,
given manifestly judgment against himself, Are you not ashamed to ly so
impudently, and to reason so foolishly?
confessing, as we have alleged above, that the Church of God has used the
imposition of hands, yours has not done so: and therefore it does follow,
that it is not of God, and that, that does follow consequently, is, that it
is of the devil. For we know, that you allow Neither would you, but that your
belly is your God, and that you mind earthly things: unto which purposes that
doctrine serves you fitly.
no purgatory, I mean, no mean between the^ both.

The XIIII. Chapter.
HOw you have answered Calvin, and proved your vocation to be of God, by that
which now the reader has heard both parts say, let him judge. Our answer to
the like demand I have given you Chap. 9. when you first called for it. But
having demanded this now again of us, instead of pursuing your dema^d (as one
that had straight forgotten what you said) you are in hand again with our
saying to your charge, your popes and bishops il lives, with twice or thrice you
were in hand wtal before, where you have your full answer. Herein (you say) in
railing you give us the preemine^ce: but you do so, but in words; for indeed
and truth (as al your late books, fraught with nothing more, then this kind of
Rhetoric, to bring the servants of God unjustly into hatred, do prove) none
ca^ go beyond you herein. And as for that which we say of your Popes and
bishops, your own storie-writers, and manifest experience do justify to be
true, and therefore cannot justly be counted railing. But you find fault with us,
that having written the lewd lives of your bishops and Popes on the one side of
the leaf, we set not down on the other side in the mean time the succession
of those good ones, that we had. This law you nether have, nor ca^ always
observe your self. For though you have had many good Popes and bishops, yet a
great while your good ones have been as hard to find as cole-black swans. And
yet you please your self, and your friends, that take pleasure in your giving,
and scoffing, in asking us, when your Popes behaved themselves il at Rome, who
were the holy doctors at Geneua, and when your doctors preached against God,
under what sign our ministers lodged? all this kind of Rhetoric of yours is
grounded upon a false principle, namely, that the Church and ministers thereof
have been, and always must be so visible, as that in all times demonstration
may be made thereof, contrary to these often alleged prophecies, 2 Thessalonians. 2.
Reu. 12. and 17. And the thing that deceives you, and nourishes in you this
error is, that you expound the places of scripture, wc are uttered concerning
the continuance and spiritual beauty of ye church of the elect, the true
heavenly Jerusalem and spouse of Christ: as spoken of the continuance of
particular Churches, or of the outward order and state of the Church militant
only: and that you either wilfully, or otherwise cannot distinguish, betwixt
the being and continuing of the Church and her pastors, and the manner of their
being and continuing; and so you construe those places, that prove her being,
and their continuing, as though thereupon followed your manner of visible and
apparent being also, as though there were no being or continuing of the Church:
but in your manner. Whereas in Israel in Ahabs time, you have heard, both the
Church and ministers thereof there continued, in that, even in that kingdom
Obadiah had hid 100 prophets, and God had reserved unto himself 7000. that had
not bowed their knees to Baal, and yet not in your manner. For Eliah was not
able to make such demonstration thereof, who they were, and where they were, as
you require of us, for he thought himself alone. 1. King. 18. and 19.

O but you, very like a divine, prove out of Mat. 10. and To. 10. because
Christ has said, him that denies me before me^, will I deny before my
heavenly father: and Paul requires as well confession with the mouth to salvation,
as belief with the heart to justification; that therefore they could not be
faithful believers, because they did hide themselves. As though every one were
a denier of Christ, that hides himself from the fury of the persecutour? Or
as though none confess with their mouth to salvation, that so hide themselves?
What think you then of the 100 prophets before named? And of Eliah himself,
who (as it appears in those places) hid themselves from Ahab and Iesebels
fury? Have you forgotten, that the same Christ says in the same Chap: to his
Apostles, If they persecute you in one City, fly to another? And that the same
Paul himself did sundry times by hiding himself from the hands of his
persecutours, save his life? As you may read Act. 17. and elsewhere. Who though
he were assured in a vision by revelation from God, that with safety of life
he should come to testify of Christ and his Gospel at Rome, yet refused not
al good and lawful means to have himself conveyed away, and so to escape the
hands of his bloody persecutors, the Jews; which had solemnly bound themselves
with an oath, that they would neither eat nor drink, til they had killed him.
Act. 23.11.12. Your divinity is not so simple, I think, but that you
understand, that as long as a Christian carries that mind and purpose, that
wheresoever he is, he will be ready boldly to yield a sound confession of his
faith, and therefore when he is called thereunto, and justly occasioned, is
ready to perform that purpose of his, and does it indeed; that man cannot
be said to deny Christ, or not to confess him with his mouth, though by
flying and hiding himself, as long as he may lawfully, he seek to keep
himself for the further good of Gods Church, out of the hands of his
persecutours. And therefore you were much to blame by thus wresting of these
places of Scriptures to seek to abuse your Reader.

But our Religion (you say) was not found out then, and Caluins great
grandfather had not once dreamed of his Religion: and therefore no marvel,
though they could not be found, that were the ministers of our Church and
Religion: and no marvel, that they that are not light headed, send us to
preach in new found lands etc. This in effect you have often said, and (if
that will serve) you will not stick with us to say it in every Chapter. But
this being indeed the question, whereupon the determination of the whole
controversy betwixt you and us depends, namely, whither our Religion be not
the true ancient Religion, taught by Christ and his Apostles: for you to pass
it over thus with bare words, and never to go about soundly to prove, that it
is not, is but too too childish and ridiculous. Well may you in your own
conceit, and in the opinion of the simple silly reader, seem herein to have
done a great act, but in the judgment of any of mean wit and capacity,
howsoever you may be counted a wordy man, yet you shall never be accounted a
worthy champion, to fight in this greatest question, only with bare words.

The XV. Chapter.
YOU will say to me, that this argument ought to take place in an ordinary
commission, but Though in such times and estates of the Church, wherein Luther
and some others lived, there were just occasion why God should stir up men
extraordinarily to serve him, yet you know well enough, that both he and
others, whose calling you most call in question, were not without an ordinary
outward calling of men.
yours is extraordinary, as that was of the Prophets of the old Testament,
whom God did send to correct the Scribes and Pharisees: and that even so God
has inspired you and others, of your sect to the like effect, that is to say,
to correct the superstitious lives and doctrine of the Papists Idolaters: and
by this, as far as I can see, ye are co^missaries of God in his behalf: and
ye may say well with S. Paul (although ye have not been ravished unto the
third heaven) Gal. 1.
that ye are not sent by man or of man, but by the authority of our Savior
Christ. But what would you say, if we should speak against it, as a number
do, and that to revenge this quarrel, we should write against your commission,
we might well aid our selves with a Sillogisme of our Savior Christ, if we
would come to plead the matter, which is this: This argument, the contrariety
betwixt your religion and Christ's, being as it is, proves neither your Church
nor Priests to be of God.
He that is of God, does obey Joh. 6.
John the eight you would have said.
the word of God: but you do not obey the word of God; therefore ye are not
of God. I know that you will deny the Minor, and therefore it does
appertain to us to prove it. Christ does say: Mat. 22.
In this particular respect, witness your Popes usurping over Christian Princes,
none were ever more ^uil^y in denying to Caesar that which is Cesars, then you.
Give unto Caesar that, that appertains to Caesar: and to God that, that
appertains to God. That is to say, to speak familiarly, give Geneua unto
his Lord, and the Bishopric unto his Bishop. Now, you do not obeie this
commandment, and therefore, as one that does not appertain unto God, you
have provided your self a new master. And because we would not have some to
think, that we that are not of the cuntrie do bear false witness against you,
or, that we do it without having any interest unto the matter: Nay the
evidence of the matter shows, that your own savage dealings, contrary to the
public edicts of that country, has caused the st^rs there: and now of late
you have revived them, by open treason and rebellion.
I am sure, that all the world does know, that ye have set all France in as
ill an estate, as ye have done the Dukedom of Sauoy: In that that appertains
to the Church, is there any Bishopric or Dioces left, where ye have not
sought with all your power to preach your holy doctrine? where have ye
forgotten that, that Saint Paul does say, which is: Romans 10.
how shall they preach if they are not sent? What right have you, to come to
reap other men's corn? Do not you remember that, that Tertullian does write
against your elders, that did persecute the catholic Church, against whom he
says in his This Tertullia^ would surely have said of you, ^ he had lived in
these days.
book de praescriptione haereticorum: What are ye, and from whence do ye
come? By what right, O Marcian, do thou cut down my wood? Why do thou,
O Appelles, remove my lands? And a little after he says: the place is mine,
I have been thus long time in possession, and before thee I have good title
and evidence, to maintain my right, of those, to whom it did appertain which
left it me by inheritance from the Apostles. etc. Our church of France, which
is one of the principal members of all the Catholic Church, might with good
cause say unto you the like. And I pray, what would you answer? You cannot
deny, but that If this were true, as it is false that your religion were a
thousand years old, yet being no elder, it is too young by five hundredth
years at the least, to be the true religion.
above a thousand years before ye were borne, that the faith in which ye were
baptized, and the which you have falselie denied, was planted, I do not say,
in this only kingdom of France, but over all Christendom. If you pretend
any right to the contrary, show the reason of your possession by the evidence
of the This we can, and have often done already.
ancient doctors, and after come to demand it, as I have said before: I
mean, that you should yield the ecclesiastical government, which you have
usurped in many places, with too great liberty of conscience, and license to
do evil, which is the very death of the soul, S. Augustines words are
these, quae est pejor mors anima, quam libertas erro^is?
as Saint Austine does say. Epist. 166. And after that ye have restored
France to his old estate, then there will be more appearance of the matter,
that ye are sent to preach the true word of God, then there is now. But is this
estate that ye are, although that God had given you commission (the which he
never thought) he would have called it back, because of your noble acts.
Theodosius and Areadius I think you meant.
Arcades, which in old time were Emperors of Rome (L. si quis in tantam. cod.
vnde vi.) did establish or make al Edict, that if the true owner or lord of a
thing should use any force, or to seek by the way of violence (without
staying for the sentence of the Judge) Even thus you, and your predecessors
got possession of your places, and therefore by this law, you have but right to
be thrust out, as you have been.
to get possession of his own from another man, yea, although the other had no
right to it, he should not only lose the possession, but likewise the
property: but if it were found, that he that did enter by force, had no right
to the Manor, he should not only be deprived of it, but moreover he should
be condemned to give as much more of his own unto him, against whom he had used
the force, as the thing was valued at, that he sought to usurp. If one should
call you, my masters the new reformed Gospellers, to such a reckoning, ye might
well pack up your pipes, and transport your fidelie into another countreie, for
you should have no other remedy, but to run away with the goods, and preach
poverty.

The XV. Chapter.
WHat argument you speak of, it is hard to tell seeing as yet (for any thing
that I ca^ perceive) you uttered nothing since you entered into this matter, to
call us to an account of our vocation, worthy the name of an argument. Indeed
that which losely you have uttered here and there against it, of the necessity
of succession of persons, and of imposition of hands (as you imagine) we must
say indeed, take place in an ordinary calling, and not always in an
extraordinary. But by your speech it should seem, you had relation to some
thing, which you took to be an argument, set down in the last Chapter before
this; where in effect you have said nothing, but only in your scoffing manner
found fault with us, because in setting down the ill lives of your prelates,
on the one side of the leaf, we set not down on the other side the good lives
the^ of our own: which how it should seem to contain an argument, either
against ordinary, or extraordinary vocation, I see not. For neither they that
are called the one way or the other; are always bound to observe that order.
But to let your pitiful logic go, and to pass over your scoffing in calling
us Gods Commissaries not worthy an answer, let us see, if you have hit of any
better argument here to prove our ministers not to have been extraordinarily
by God stirred, up to correct the superstitious lives, and doctrine of the
papists Idolaters (as you say, we term the^) then as yet you have brought
to disprove their ordinary calling. If we would come to plead this matter with
you (you say) you would aid your selves herein against us with a Syllogism of
Christ, John. 8. which is this. He that is of God does obey the word of God:
but you do not obey the word of God, therefore ye are not of God. You suppose
that we will deny your minor, and therefore in that God commands Matthew.
22. to give unto Caesar, that which is Cesars, and unto God that which is Gods:
and our ministers do neither of these, but the contrary, in deteyning Geneua
from the Duke of Sauoy, and in being the causes of the stirs in France, and
spoiling your bishops and Priests of their livings, you think that proves so
against them, that the conclusion must needs follow. Do you think in earnest,
that whosoever can be proved in any one thing to disobey God, straight
thereupon it follows, that his commission or calling is not of God? What man
ever was there either ordinarily or extraordinarily called to any office
(except the man Christ Jesus) but in some one thing or other, at one time or
other, one way or other he did not obey God? Seeing that all men are sinners,
and there is not one that can truly say, his heart and hands have always
been free from sin, and transgression of the law of God. Take Christ's words
in this sense, and so none, no not he amongst you, that is fullest of his
works of Supererogation shall ever escape this conclusion. If you had viewed
the text, you should have perceived, that Christ uses that speech against the
Scribes and Pharisees, who blasphemed the doctrine of the Messiah, and would
abide neither to hear, nor to obey it, and not generally against all that in
any thing are found at any time disobedient to God of ignorance, or
infirmity. And yet though he had meant so, and it were granted, that every man
in that he offends, or sins, is not therein of God: yet thereupon it
follows not, that the same man therefore cannot be a man, that has his
commission or calling of God. David was not of God, in that he committed
adultery with Bershebah, and murdered Vrias, yet even then he had a commission
of God, and a calling to be King over his people. And therefore though you
could prove these things to be true that you charge our ministers withal, and
though also it were granted, that therein they have done ill: yet thereupon
necessarily it does not follow, that therefore they were not extraordinarily
stirred up by God, to correct your sins, and abominations, For Iehu, whom God
undoubtedly stirred up to chastise the house of Ahab, and to correct the
Idolatrous priests of Baal, even with an extraordinary zeal 2. King. 9. and
10. yet he departed not from the sins of Jeroboam, the son of Nebat, which made
Israel to sin, as there it appears. Again, it is strange that you should
lay these as faults, yea as such faults to our ministers charge, as that
therefore they cannot be sent of God, when as not only it is a received,
taught and printed doctrine amongst you in the 5. Chapter of D. Allines defense
of catholics, but also such as has from time to time been, and yet is most
monstrously practiced even amongst your Popes (which pretend to have the best,
highest, and largest commission from God of all other ministers) not only that
they may deteine dukedomes from the right owners, but also depose Princes, and
Emperors, translate their kingdoms and crowns to whom they please, and make
war against them both by forreiners, and their own subjects, for the
advancement of their religion, when and how it pleases them. For this your
doctrine and practice considered, if your argument for the causes by you
alleged (supposing that they were true) have any force against our ministers,
it has ten times as much force against yours, whose chiefest mean of late to
establish and continue your kingdom, has been (as the stories of all
countries for this 600. or 700. years at the least do make it most manifest)
by force and subtlety to bend and frame Kings and their kingdoms, either to be
at your devotion, or else to make a spoil of them, and their kingdoms for your
selves and your friends. If therefore there had been either shame or common
discretion in you, you would never have used this argument against us, which
makes more strongly against your selves.

But in deed and truth, the things, that you ground your argument upon against
us, are partly untrue, and partly maliciously wrested only against our
ministers. For never shall any of you be able to prove, that our ministers
either are the authors of any wrong to the Duke of Sauoy, or that either they
or their followers were the cause of the civil wars and troubles in France.
If the Duke of Sauoy have any such right to Geneua, as you pretend, and that it
be withholden from him, it being a civil quarrel betwixt him and the states
civil of those parts, why should it be laid to the charge of the ministers,
who you cannot prove have had any intermedling therein? And as for the troubles
in France, it appears by the stories thereof, that they have proceeded first
from your own side, and that the doings of the protestant Princes there, have
oftentimes been justified, even by the Kings own edictes, and proclamations
to have been done in all loialty: and that their wars have been but
defensive against the oppressions offered them (contrary both to the ancient
laws, and present edictes of the Land) by certain ambitious persons, and not
offensive either to the Kings person, or dignity. And as for your Bishops and
Priests (of whose being driven from their lyuings by our men, you complain so
much) in some sort I confess, through their occasion indeed, they have been
dispossessed thereof, but that seditiously or tumultuously, by force they have
been driven there from by them, we utterly deny. For in most places, they have
been dispossessed thereof by mature deliberation, and consideration of the
badnes of their titles thereunto, in solemn and lawful assemblyes of the
estates of the countries, by the lawful authority of the same estats: as
namely here with us, in England, in Scotland, and in other kingdoms, where the
Gospel is received and established by public authority: and by the same
authority orderly our men (whose right thereunto in those assemblyes and
Parliamentes have been found to be the better) have been put into possession
thereof. And in other places, your Bishops and Priests, as not able to stand
in the presence of the light of the Gospel, when, will they, nill they, they
saw it would take place in their territories, forsook their places, and left
them to those that had more right thereunto, as for example, they did in
Geneua, when the Gospel was first established there. And no marvel, though
upon the bare preaching of Gods truth, and the entertainment thereof, many of
your proud Bishops, and superstitious Priests can stand no longer in their
places. For when the Ark of God came in presence, Dagon could stand no longer,
though his friends set him up again never so often; yea the more they strove,
to have him stand, the more dangerous fall got he, as you may read, 1. Sam. 5.
And it cannot be le^ted, but Christ's saying will take place, and be verified
one time or other, Every plant, that my heavenly father has not planted, shall
be plucked up by the roots, Matthew. 15.13. whereupon it comes indeed, that
the proud prelates, of your Antichristian Hierarchy, having gotten unto
themselves titles and offices, through the ambitious and fond devise of men's
heads, which God never allowed to be for his house, must needs (when God
means to reform his house, and to establish his own orders therein) auaunte
their rooms, and leave their liuinges, for the Lords true officers, and
allowed servants indeed. Blame therefore the badnesse of your foundation and
title, for leesing of your livings, and nothing else.

You bid us show our evidence, that our right to them is better then yours, out
of the ancient doctors. In the mean time you apply Tertullians words, in his
book of Prescription against heretics against us, and that of Paul, How
shall they preach, unless they be sent? Romans. 10. I answer you: not only
out of the ancient doctors, but out of the Canonical Scriptures also, our
ministers long ago have made evident demonstration unto the Princes and
estates, that have driven you out of possession, and put them in, that their
title to your livings was good, and yours stark naught; in that thereby they
proved unto them, their religion to be ancient, sound, and Apostolic, and
yours to be but of a later Antichristian stamp: though you (according to your
manner) say we cannot deny, but that your religion was planted throughout
Christendom 1000. years, before we were borne: which you shall never be able
to prove true: for we most constantly deny, both that antiquity, and
universality of it. And whenever you will, we are ready again by the same
Scriptures, and Doctors, to prove our right by the same argument to be good
and sound, and yours to be of no force: come to the trial of it, when, and as
often as you will. And therefore, seeing it is a thing most evident, that the
reason why either you or we should pretend any right to these, or any other
liuinges of the Church, is, that we feed the Church with wholesome and sound
doctrine; we having often proved ours so to be, by the grounds aforesaied, and
you being never able to do the like for yours, both Paul's saying, and
Tertullians must rather take place against you, then us. For I trust you will
confess, that there Paul accounts none sent of God to preach, but those that
preach the truth; and questionles Tertullian uses those words of his (as by
the words themselves, as they are set down by you, it is evident) not against
those, that were able to prove their doctrine sound by the Apostles writings,
but against fantastical heretics, such as had taught, and did teach doctrine
dissonant from the Scriptures, devised upon their own heads. Against whom he
being to prescribe, both by the Scriptures, and by the sound testimony of
those, that succeeded the Apostles until his time, he might lawfully and to
good purpose say, what are ye, and from whence do you come etc. And truly,
when any man shall enter into a consideration of the state of the Church in
Tertullians time, both in respect of doctrine and government: and on the one
side weigh the simplicity of the pastors and teachers then, and the agreement
that their doctrine had with the written word, and then therewith on the other
side, compares the more then princely prelacy and Hierarchy, that has been
these many years, and yet is in yours, joined with doctrine not only
manifoldly differing, but in a number of points, directly contrarying the word
written: he shall be enforced to think, that if Tertullian were alive again,
and saw notwithstanding how confidently you ruffle, as though all were yours,
and no man had any right to any thing, but your selves; he would more
vehemently use these words here recited by you, against your prelates, then
ever he did against Marcion, Apelles, or any other heretic in his time.

But you are so liberal unto us, as to tell us, that though we had commission
from God, yet he would have called it back, even for our noble acts and
deeds, in driving you out of possession, and taking possession, though of our
own, before the sentence of the judge was given. Which you prove by a law of
Theodosius and Arcades Emperors of Rome, made to forbid men, under pain of
leesing their right, not to seek to recover possession of their own, by
violence and force. Whereunto I answer you, that grant us so much (which of
right you must) and for all your tale and penal Statute of Theodosius and
Arcades, we shall be to good for you. For first, what other Judges sentence
were we to expect, but theirs, that we had on our side already? Secondly,
there has been no such tumultuous, or disorderly violence used by us (as I
have showed before) as their law forbids, to recover our own from you: and
then you must understand, that these Emperors prescribe their law, to bridle
men, and not to bind God from recovering his inheritance to the use of his
servants, from the hands of Antichristian usurpers, even by force and violence,
if otherwise they will not yield. To prove therefore, that God would have
called in our commission, though he had granted it, rather then he would have
suffered us to execute it, in violent driving you out of possession, to recover
our own right, you had need to have used a stronger reason, then taken from
the edict of Emperors. If these things had been well considered before of
you, you might have spared your jest, wherewith you conclude this Chapter well
enough, and so rather have stayed your pipes your self, then in such sort, as
you have, blown so joyfully in token of triumph, before any likelihoode of
victory. The vanity and falshoode of your brag, for the continuance of your
religion above one thousand years, before we were borne, not only throughout
France, but also throughout all Christendom, I have fully and at large
discovered in the later end of the preface, and in my answer to your 4.16. and
39. ca. and therefore in this place I have said no more then I have, referring
the reader for a full answer thereu^to both here, and wheresoever else it is
repeated by you, unto these places. And though S. Augustine say, as you write,
that liberty and license of conscience to do evil, is the death of the soul:
yet that touches us nothing at al, for doing what we may, by lawful and
ordinary means, to dispossess your Antichristian prelates of the places of
government over Christ's Church, and of the maintenance due to his true and
faithful pastors. For so to deal, is but orderly to recover Gods inheritance
out of the hands of his enemies, and to possess them thereof, to whom it is
due, and therefore in so doing, there is neither liberty nor license to do
evil practiced. But rather you, in craving the restoring of you thereunto, and
quiet continuance therein still, crave both liberty and license, without
controlement to go on in sacrilegious enjoying that, which at no hand
appertains to such as you be.

The XVI. Chapter.
FOR This is untrue, for we allege both our lawful calling, and show the
right that we and not you, have to those places and maintenance, for they were
appointed for true Pastors, and not for wolves and foxes, as your Prelates
have been a great while.
your defense you allege no other reason, but your good zeal, and your ardent
Apostolical affection, the which has moved you, to sow this seed of
sedition. You say, that the field is great, and there are few good reapers,
but if you mark that, that does follow afterward, and to take the counsel
of the wise: Christ does not command therefore, that every one should take
his sickle, and go, and cut down other men's corn. But he says: Mat. 15.
Mat. 9. It is but your ill luck, scarce to quote one of ten rightly.
Pray the master of the work, to the end, that he send more workmen to his
vine. He does teach us, that if we see any estate out of order, we should
pray to God to redress it: And in the mean time we ought to correct and
amend our own lives: for if every man were for himself, God would be for us
all. That is a good means, but does it thereupo^ follow, that no other means
is good and lawful to that end, and in that case?
Yet, notwithstanding this, it is not reasonable, that under the color of a
good zeal, a servant should take in hand an act of so great importance,
without express commandment of his master, as it is said. But now that we
are come to talk of your good zeal (if it please you) let us know, Neither
have we.
if those ardent flames of charity have so inflamed you, that you have
overthrown the chaires of the negligent Pastors and Bishops, and in their
rooms ye have collocated your ministers in every place, where ye could bear
any swaie, as it does appear in many towns and Cities in this Realm. I
do not doubt, but that you will do the best that ye can to do the like
with the rest, This is but a malicious surmise enforced to make us odious,
contrary both to your conscience and experience: but indeed it is plain by
proof, that thus you dea^e with Kings and Queens, if they be ^o^ of your sect
and humor.
I mean as well temporal as spiritual. For even as God (of whom ye speak
so often) does make no exception of persons: even so you, that call your
selves his Lieutenants will make no difference between the evil estates and
the good. Every one does know, that the administration of justice is very
honorable before God, and that there be many in this vocation, that would not
for any thing do any wrong, unto the widow and fatherless child: and yet
we see and know by experience, that there are many others that without any
conscience, do take bribes and offer wrong, both to the fatherless and to the
widow, the which crimes are no less in that estate, then the careless living
of the Bishops and Pastors. So that I think by this, that he that has given
you charge and power to turn the Bishops out of their seats, the Curats out of
their benefices, and the Monks and Abbots out of their Abbeys, because of
their evil livings: would likewise extend your commission, to put down
Lords, Knights, Judges and Gentlemen, because of the corrupt lives of many
of them. And to make an end of the reformation, your holy Ghost, and those
zealous flames of the spirit, would move you to go a little higher: for there
is nothing done, but the spirit may amend it. Against the great trees, strive
the great winds; and against great dignities great abuses. It is not unknown
to al me^, that there are good and godly Catholic Princes and Kings, which are
surely to the people the great gifts of God: but likewise one cannot deny,
but that there has been and are diverse ill Princes, that do govern their
people carelessly and without justice. And if by chance your Gospel should
fall into some kingdom, where the Prince were not so sage nor so wise, as you
would have him: in your conscience, what would you do to him? I think, that
that very zeal (if you could) that has moved you, under the color of a
reformed Gospel, to trouble so much This you attempt and practice flatly, all
the world knows. Look else to the course that your legers now in France take
against their king.
our state, would likewise command you, to dispossess those Kings, that do
abuse there own kingdoms, even asvvell as to deprive those Bishops, that
do abuse their bishoprics. But, O Lord, what a Gospel is this, if it be
permitted, that the people shall call their Princes to account, or, that they
may correct their superiors, under the color of a reformed Gospel, what
seditions, troubles and vvarres shall we see over all Christendom? We shall
see fulfilled, to our great harm, the prophecy of Cap. 3.
Esaias, who says: The people shall seek to raise one against another, and
every one against his neighbor, the young man shall disdain the old, and the
ignoble the noble etc: But what color soever ye cloak your new Gospel withal,
ye run far wide from him, that does command us Romans 13.
to If this lesson had been remembered of your Romish prelates, they neither
could nor would have been so terrible to Kings and Emperors, as they have
been of late.
obeie al creatures for the love of God. He does not regard, whether they do
acquit their charge or no, for the obedience of the inferiors is not limited
by the duty of the superiors. Romans 13.
Al power does come of God, says the Apostle, and he that resists that
power, does resist the ordinance of God, and they that do with say it,
acquire for themselves damnation for ever. The Lord in his word prescribes
obedience to civil magistrates, and to all such ministers and Chu ch officers,
as are according to his ordinance, but if they be contrary to that, as your
Popes be, he says never a word for them, but many against them.
He does make no distinction of persons, whither it be a Magistrate
Ecclesiastical or temporal, whither it be a King or a Pope, a Bishop or a Lord,
he does talk generally of al powers that are established by God, to make us
live in peace and tranquillity. God had not chosen of his good will Caesar the
Emperor of Rome to be king of Jerusalem, as he did choose Saul, David, Solomon
and the rest, for of his own ambition and insatiable cupidity, he had usurped
the kingdom appertaining to the house of David: yet our Savior did command,
that they should pay him tribute. Math. 22. The which commandment he himself
did fulfill, to teach others obedience. God did likewise permit, that the
wicked king Nabuchodonozor should destroy the kingdom of Jerusalem, to
punish the wickedness of those, that dwelt in it. And although he had invaded
the kingdom of Judah, to the which he had no title nor right, yet does God
protest, that he gave it him, and he wills and does command, that they
should obey him, even as if he were the best Prince of the world. Behold
(says God by the Prophet Jeremy, Cap. 27.) you shall tell your Lords, that I
make the earth, the men, and the beasts that walk on the face of the earth,
through my great strength and mighty arm, and I have given it to whom it
pleases me: And so now I have given all these Lands and countries to
Nabuchodonozor my servant, king of Babylon. Besides this, I have given him the
beasts and the fields to serve him, his son, and his sons son, until
the time of his earth come: also of him many people and great kings shall come,
and shall ordain, that the kingdom, or the people that shall not serve
Nabuchodonozor king of Babylon, I will visit that people (says the Lord) with
the sword, pestilence, and hunger, until that I consume them in his hands. etc.
But if you, my masters the new reformers of the Gospel, had been in those
days, what would have bridled your burning zeal? No^ for your Popes place and
office that he challenges, is far more unlawful then Nabuchodonozors was.
Could ye not with a little better cause report of Nobuchodonozor that, that
ye report of the Pope: for who is that Nabuchodonozor, that we should submit
our selves unto him? He is not a king, he is not a tirant, he is not an
Emperor, but a robber, a cutthrote, more cruel then any kind of wild beast.
Is it not by him, that the Prophets have represented the spoiler of nations?
For God, when he would cause Cap. 14.
Esaias Cujus contrarium verum est.
to talk of the fall of Lucifer, he does discrie it under the person of
Nabuchodonozor: then how will you have us to submit our selves to be subject
unto him, whom God does liken, not only to a devil, but to the captain of
all the devils of hell? Many causes do persuade us, not to obey him. First,
his wicked and abominable life. Secondly, our religion, for we believe in God,
that created heaven and earth: but as for him, he is more the^ a worshipper of
Idols, for he is one that called himself a God. Thirdly, he is not of the
line of David, by whom God had promised to establish his kingdom, for he was
a stranger, and such a one, as got into the kingdom by force, making himself
a king, not by righteous election, but by violent compulsion, so that,
considering althese things, ye might well, according to your zeal, have found
fault with his reign: but God would have stopped your mouths, saying, as I
have written above, I have created all things, and I give the^ to who^ it
pleases me. Or as he says in Cap. 34.
Job, It is I, that cause Hypocrites to reign to punish the sins of the people.
Or as he says in the.4. of Daniel, I have the prehemine^ce over the kingdoms
of men, and I give the^ to who^ it pleases me. True, the authority being of it
self lawful^, as Nabuchodonosors was, though he abused it, but it is not so
when the office it self is utterly unlawful, as your Pope is.
And he that speaks against him that is put in authority, although he be as
evil as Nabuchodonozor, he shall perish thorough the sword, famine, or
pestilence, or that that is worse, through eternal death. These are the very
words that God spoke by the Prophet, and therefore says Christ, Come unto me,
and learn in my school, for I am humble and mild of heart, I have obeyed
Pylate, and Annas, and Cayphas, I have suffered the sentence of death and have
been nailed between two thieves, Math. 12.
and I took it patiently for your sakes. Learn of me to be my disciples in
the school of humility, and you shall find rest in your spirits. The which
true rest indeed is, for every man to examine diligently his own conscience,
and to commit to God the consciences of his superiors.

The XVI. Chapter.
NOT we, but your Romish Jesuits and seminary Priests, are the sowers of that
seed of sedition, that you speak of; neither is it we, but they and such like
of your side, which when they have so done, allege only for their defense,
their ardent and Apostolic zeal and affection to win souls. This, in
England and Ireland these late years, has notoriously and very often been
found true in these, and questionless other kingdoms, where the Gospel is
preached and established, have and do find the like. For they go up and down
secretly, under the pretense of reconciling men and women, into the bosom of
their mother Church, to alienate their hearts from their natural sovereign,
to the obedience of a foreign potentate, and so prepare them against the time
when opportunity shall best serve, to procure the death or deposition of their
lawful Prince. And that thus without any offense to God they may do, they
persuade themselves by virtue of the Popes bull, in that therein they be
absolved from their allegiance unto their home supreme magistrate, and are
thereby also taught, that in furthering either his deprivation or death, they
shall do honorable, acceptable and meritorious service to the mother church of
Rome. These things (I say) have of late years too too often here in England,
in open places of judgment been manifestly proved against your Jesuits and
Popish Priests, and therefore as traitors a number of them and their
followers, have been most worthily executed. Which things being so evident as
they are, great shame is it, that yet you should not blush to charge us with
these things, whereof yours are most famously guilty, and whereof truly you
cannot convict any of ours. You tell us we should have prayed to the Lord of
the harvest, to thrust forth more laborers thereinto (as Christ has commanded
us Math. 9. and not as you quote it Math. 15.) and that in the mean time we
should have reformed our selves, and not have taken upon us without some
express commandment from God, a matter of such importance, as the
reformation of your estate is. According to this counsel of Christ, we have
prayed to the Lord of the harvest, and he, in his mercy toward his Church,
has heard our prayers, and we hope will every day more and more, to the full
overthrow of yours, and perfect consummation of ours. But that in the mean
time, they, whose eyes God has opened to see the Babylonish confusion of
yours, should there have stayed (as you would have had them) until they had a
further commission from God then already they had (for so you must needs mean
by that further commission or express commandment, that you would have had
them first to have had) you can never prove. For they, whose ministry it
pleased God to use to detect your Antichristian doings according to his word
2. Thessal. 2. in these later days were such, as namely, Wickliffe, John Hus,
and Luther, that had not only the ordinary calling of those times to feed
Gods people as pastors and doctors, but also they were such as God had
blessed with rare and extraordinary gifts of knowledge and zeal, and
therefore if they seeing the abominations of your Synagogue, and the gross
blindness and errors that you still labored to hold Gods people in, had
contented themselves only with praying unto God for the redress thereof, and
with reforming of themselves, and had not said their hands and shoulders to
the work, using the talents that God had bestowed upon them, to his best
advantage, without a further new and express commandment, then they had
already received in the written word, should not they with the unprofitable
servant Math. 25. have had their wages? They took not in hand to do as they
did (as you would make your Reader believe) only under the color of zeal,
without express warrant from God their Lord and master For beside their zeal
and knowledge, by their callinges in that they were famous doctors and
pastors in their times, they were bound by Gods express word Esaias 58.1.
Ezech. 33.6. and 7. and in sundry other places to do, as they did. But to
bring us and our ministers into hatred, in this Chapter you labor to persuade
your reader, that as of burning zeal they have in many places dispossessed
your Bishops and Priests of their places, so as Gods Lieutenants, and as men
void of all partiality (for thus tauntingly it pleases you to write) they will
proceed against civil magistrates, both higher and lower in like manner,
because many of them have been and be (as you say) as ill livers and rather
worse, then your Popish Prelates have been. Which to be an unlawful thing
and the cause of all confusion and horrible disorder, you bestow a great deal
of needelesse pains to prove, for it is a thing that we teach and urge in
earnest, and you (your practice to the contrary being so usual as it is
considered) only in jest, and for a fashion teach it. But indeed this is the
way, which the malicious and ancient enemies of Gods Church have always used,
to disgrace the true servants of God by, with the Kings and Princes of the
world, and therefore you do well in that you are nothing behind them, in
malice and enmity against Gods people, in that you study also to be like them
in this. We read (you know) after the return of Gods people out of their
captivity in Babylon, when they began once to build and to go forward,
either with Gods house in Jerusalem, or the walls of that City, always this
was one of the practices of their enemies to labor their discredit, to the
hinderance of their work, to accuse them to the Persian Kings, to intend
therein sedition and rebellion against them. Ezr. 4. Nehem. 6. And it appears
John 19. it was the principallest means, whereby the high Priest and the Jews
provoked Pilate, to give sentence against our Savior, that they told him,
that he was not Caesar's friend, if he delivered him, thereby insinuating (though
in truth he had both paid tribute unto Caesar, and had taught others both by
example and word publicly, to yield unto Caesar whatsoever was due unto him
Math. 16. and 22. and they of all other did most repine at Caesar's jurisdiction
over them and their country) that he was one whose doings and doctrine tended
to the suppla^ting of Caesar. In like manner Act. 17. and 24. we find it one
of the usual means, that the unbelieving Jews and other lewd people (then
when none in their hearts regarded Caesar and his authority less) used to
discredit the Apostles and their doctrine, to accuse them to be seditious and
such as cared not for Caesar's decrees. Neither did this practice die, when the
common weal of the Jews ceased, for it appears in Eusebius. lib. 5. cap. 1. and
in Tertullians Apology in sundry places, that there was nothing more common in
the primative Church, then to lay to the charge of the Christians, that they
conspired amongst themselves against the state of ye common weal, and the
civil and supreme magistrates thereof. And therefore we can the more patiently
abide this your dealing with us, in that herein we see we are no otherwise
dealt withal by you, then Gods people, Christ his Apostles, and other his
faithful servants have been dealt withal in ancient time, by your
predecessors. But the Lords name be praised for it, howsoever it has pleased
you, in thus charging us to intend the deposition and displacing of civil
magistrates, to conform your selves to the ancient enemies of Gods people, our
doings in those places where our Religion has been longest settled, does
evidently in the eyes of the world acquit us hereof. For in such places who
seeeth not, that the civil magistrates together with it have always, and yet
do honorably and quietly enjoy their places and dignities? Yea this we dare
be bold to say, that the Christian Kings, Princes and magistrates, that have
given best entertainment unto it, find by most manifest experience, that both
it and the professors thereof, have better established them in their thrones,
and more advanced them in their dignities, then ever they were or could be by
yours. For now they are absolute Kings and Princes according to their right,
where as yours made the^ to hold their kingdoms, as the Popes vassals, and so
but at the courtesy and devotion of a forrainer, and of an intolerable proud
and insatiable usurping Prelate: and now their treasure is kept at home to the
strengthening greatly of their kingdoms and dominions, which by your Romish
Religion and government, was wont a 1000. ways most insatiably in infinite
quantity yearly, to the wonderful weakening thereof, to be conveyed to Rome.
And whereas then by means of your auricular confession, the secrets of every
Prince where that was used, was often to the great peril of their states made
known, to many and indiscreet blabs and by them and their means to their
foreign head the Pope, and so he was thereby always the better enabled for
the furtherance of his own devises, to prevent and cross theirs: by the
banishing of that Romish stratageme Princes counsels and secrets, are kept at
home in secret as they should, to the great good of the^ and their cuntries.
And lastly, by our Religion, according to the examples of David, Salomo^, Asa,
Iehosaphat, Ezechias, Josiah, Constantine and Theodosius, they are in
possession of their full authority, to co^ma^de for Religion and in matters
ecclesiastical, as well their subjects of the clergy as the rest; whereas by your
Religion they were supreme gouerners under God for matters civil only, and had
their clergy so exe^pted from them and their jurisdiction, that howsoever they
had their bodies in their kingdoms to enjoy the promotions thereof, they had
neither their bodies nor souls in further subjection, then would stand with
the pleasure and profit of the foreign potentate the Pope. By means whereof,
Anselme, Stephen Lanckton, Thomas Becket and sundry other proud prelates of
this land, have so stuck to the Pope, against their sovereign kings at home
here in England, that in comparison of the Pope, they have set their King at
naught, to the wonderful trouble and disquiet of the whole land, as
notoriously appears in our Cronicles. Which things considered, I think you
may long tell Princes, that you and your religion is friendly to them, and that
we and ours is hurtful unto them, before any of them, that be wise, believe
you. Truly I cannot but wonder at your gross hypocrisy in this Chapter, in
that you are so earnest and busy, not only to prove it unlawful and
monstrous, how bad soever they that be in authority be, to refuse to yield
duty and submission unto them, but also to lay to our charge, that we have an
intention, to place and displace civil magistrates at our pleasure. For I
cannot persuade my self, that your skill in divinity was so small, but you
were resolved for all this, that the obedience and subjection taught in these
places here quoted by you, or any where else in the scriptures, is not so
infinite and absolute, as that thereby subjects are bound to do whatsoever by
higher powers, be it good or bad, they are commanded to do. For how could it
be possible, that a man of your place should forget the usual limitation, in
the Lord, or that you should not remember that God must be obeyed before man.
Neither yet can I think, that you were ignorant, but that the very same thing
which here you charge us with, as with a grievous fault, has been and yet is
openly practiced, and taught publicly, to be very lawful in your Church of
Rome. Hereof I am sure D. Allen, a great man of your side, in his 5 Chapter of
his defense of English catholics, recko^s up in a great bravery and brag,
sundry Kings and Emperors by force deposed by the Pope. And indeed it appears
most evidently in sundry Chronicles, that at their pleasure, a long time they
have most shamefully misused Christian Princes and potentates of the world. For
though they were and are beholden to the Christian Roman Emperors, for their
first advancement, from the state of poor persecuted bishops, to the state of
patriarchs in these western parts, yet in process of time, when the seat of
the empire was removed to Constantinople, and these western parts were
governed by an exarch at Rauenna, they through the help of certain Kings of
the Lombards and others, in toke^ of thankfulness to the ancient Emperors of
Rome, quite extinguished their Empire and authority in these west parts. And in
the end, not contented with that, which they had incroched by the ruin of the
Empire, through the help of the Goths, Vandals, Lombards and others (seeking
thereby their further adua^cement) Pope Zachary, about the year 743. found the
means to cause Childericke then King of France, to be deposed, and he set up
Pipine in his room, whom he and his successor Stephen the 2. advanced to the
Empire, and therefore this Pipine, Charles the great and Lodouicke his son
(which three immediately succeeded one another, in the new Empire, thus
translated unto them by the Pope) to gratify the Pope for the same, they
brought the Lombards and others, that before began to be somewhat to sausie
with the Popes, under, and bestowed upon his see, as Blondus and Volateran
note, very many rich and great Islands, cities, countries, shires, towns and
provinces, whereby he was mightily advanced. Yet for all these great benefits
received by the line of Pipine, when his successors began not to be pliable
enough (as they thought) to their beck, in making war against the Princes of
Italy, which began to pinch them for their wrong-gotten goods, Gregory the
fifth about the year 1002. practices with the Germans, to bring the Empire to
them, from the line of France, and so Otho was set up Emperor. But when these
German Emperors began to abridge them of their will, and to resist their
tyrannical oppressions, then they labored and practiced by all means, to
hamper them also: in so much that certain it is, that Gregory the 7.
excommunicated Henry the 4. or as some write 3. about the year 1078. and gave
his empire to Rodolph, who missing of it and being slain, the Emperor yet to
be reconciled with the Pope, waited 3. days and 3. nights in the winter, with
his wife and child at the gates of Canossus, and within the suburbs thereof,
barefoote and barelegged, before he could come to the speech of the Pope, when
he had obtained that, then he was feign to kiss his foot, and to yield up
his crown into his hands, and to take it again upon such conditions, as it
pleased him to prescribe, and yet his successor Pascalis raged against the
same Emperor again, and set up his own natural son Henry, to deprive his
father of his Empire. Who when he had got it, yet he was in the end accursed
and excommunicated by that Romish see, as his father had been, and not
prevailing sufficiently that way, the Saxons at last were set up to war
against him and depose him. And thus they having hampered these two He^ries,
unto Frederick Barbarossa came, which was about the year 1155. they did what
they listed, who began somewhat again to abridge them of their usurped
supremacy, and so did his sons son Frederick the 2. but in the end Alexander
the third, brought the neck of the first under his feet in S. Marks church in
Venice, and Pope Adrian controlde him from holding his wrong stirrup, and
excommunicated him for being so saucy, as to set his name in writing before
his; and the other was miserably vexed, by Honorius the 3. Gregory the 9. and
Innocent the 4. For the first of these interdicted him, the second
excommunicated him twice, and raised the Venetians against him; and the third
did in the end spoil him of his Empire, caused him to be poisoned, and at
length strangled by one Ma^fredus. Innocent the 3. in the minority of Frederick
the second, and before he was chosen Emperor, dealt in like sort with Philip
and Otho the 4. placing them and displacing them at his pleasure. Frederick the
seconds son called Conrade, and the next of his line also called Conradine
were amongst the^ miserably abused: for the first of them was soon dispatched,
they stirring up against him the La^tgraue of Turing, who drove him into his
kingdom of Naples, where he died of poiso^ given him, as some write; and the
other claiming but the kingdom of Naples, after his death the matter was so
handled (they stirring up Charles the French Kings brother against him) that
both he and Frederick, Duke of Austria, were taken, imprisoned and in the end
beheaded. Henry the 6. Frederick the firsts son, Pope Celestine the 3. crowned
at Rome, but in such sort, that with his foot he put the croune upon his head,
and therewith he spurned it of again. And the like yt happened to Frederick
had almost befalle^ Philip the French king, by Pope Boniface the 8. who because
he could not have whatsoever commodities he demanded out of France, by his
bull denou^ced sentence of deposition against the said King Philip, and gave
the title thereof to one Albertus king of the Romans: ^^t for all the roaring
of that bull, Philip kept his place still. Alexander the 3. that trod upon
Frederick the firsts neck at Venice, even here in England so far abused King
Henry the 2. about Thomas Beckets death, that he caused him to go for penance
barefoote in winter, with bleeding feet to his tomb. And Innocent the third
caused King John his son, after that 7. years he had resisted their
supremacy and tyranny, by the means of his excommunicatio^s, indicements of
his land, and encouraging of his subjects against him, to surrender his croune
to the hands of his Legate Pandelphus, and so he continued five days, before
he received it again, and then was glad to take it in farm of him for a rent
by indenture. Infinite be the villainies, that have been offered and done by that
see to Emperors and Kings. For did not Gregory the 7. to the great injury of
the Empire, set up Robert Wisard, and made him King of Sicilia and Duke of
Capua? Did not Pope Vrbane the second put down Hugo an Earl in Italy,
discharging his subjects from their oath and obedience unto him? Did not Pope
Clement the fifth, most despitefully cause Franciscus Dandalus, the Venetia^
ambassador, suing but for absolution of Venice from the Popes curse, to lie a
long time first tied by the neck in a chain under his table, like a dog,
before he would harken to his request. Furthermore Gelasius the second, brought
the noble captain Cintius so under, that he was glad lying prostrate before
him, to kiss his feet, and by the year 1237, the Pope Gregory the 9. had so
cursed king Henry the 3: king here of England, that he was glad (to currie
favor with him) to receive a Legate of his, called Cardinal Otho, meeting him at
ye sea side, and that in most lowly manner, bowing down his head in low
courtesy toward his knees. And though he yielded wonderful submission to the
next Pope Innocent the 4. yet he took of one David Prince of Northwales 500.
marks by the year, to set him against ye King of England, and exempted him and
his welshmen, from their fealty which they had sworn unto him before. Most
intolerable were the exactio^s and commodities, that one way and other the
Popes for themselves and their friends, had out of England in Henry the 2. king
John's and Henry the thirds time: they exceeded often (as it appears in ye
stories) the ancient revenues of the crown, and wonderfully empouerished ye
land, and yet when these kings (though in never so humble manner) at any time,
never so little sought to stay these pillages and oppressio^s of the la^d, the
Popes raged most extremely against the^: and did the^ what despite they could,
until they had their will. Yea so intolerable has been their pride and
insole^cy against kings and Emperors, yt they have brought the^ to lead their
horses by ye bridle, and to wait on the^ on foot like lackies, they riding
like high and mighty princes over the^, and they have made the^ feign to please
the^ withal, to hold the^ water and to serve at their table. And though their
power be not as it has been, yet (...) ^lice and will, to trample Princes
under their feet, is as (...) as ever it was, and therefore not only have
Pius 5. and Gregory the 13. by their cursed bulls, roared against our gracious
sovereign Lady Queen Elizabeth that now is, thereby laboring her deposition,
but also both secretly and openly, a number of ways they and their fauourits
have gone about both by open hostility and privy conspiracies, to bring that
their wicked purpose to pass, yea though it were, by the shedding of her
innocent blood. And so far are they of yet in this great light to be ashamed of
murdring treacherously Christian Princes, whom otherwise they cannot frame to
their fancies, that of very late years, by a most wicked varlet, whom they had
persuaded, that therein he should do a meritorious deed, they so dispatched
the noble Prince of Orange; and since by the like persuasions, have sought by
one Parrie and others to effect the like against our sovereign; whom the Lord
for his Christ's sake so long preserve, that she may see either the happy
conversion, or effectual confusion of all her enemies. Now these things
considered, and they being most true (as from point to point, they are
testified by your own Cronicles) if there had been any shame in you, you
would never have gone about as you have, to charge us with your surmised
intention to displace civil magistrates. Whereas you would seem to strengthen
this your malicious accusation, in that we have displaced some of your Popish
Bishops, Priests, Monks, and Friars, and refuse obedience and submission to
your Popes: you must understand that herein you commit two great and foul
faults; the first is, that you stretch the places here quoted by you, which
teach indeed only obedience and submission to civil magistrates, and to
lawful ecclesiastical persons, in the Lord, as though therein and thereby
God had as well tied and bound al persons, to obedience and subjection, to your
unlawful and Antichristian Prelates and clergy, yea and that in such strict
manner, as though it were unlawful how bad and wicked soever they and their
commandments be, either to refuse to obey them, or to speak any hard word
against them: your second fault is, that you take it, that there is no
difference to be put betwixt your ecclesiastical Prelacies, and the higher
powers, that the scriptures in these places teach obedience and submission
unto: whereas indeed there is as great difference, as there is betwixt heaven
and earth, and the ordinances of God and the unlawful devises of man, betwixt
the higher powers there spoken for, and the higher powers that you plead so
much for. For the higher powers there spoken for, be such as though sometimes
for just causes known unto God, they light in the hands of wicked and profane
persons, yet of themselves are the lawful ordinances of God, whereas the
authority of your Popes and of other your Romish Prelates, whom we have
displaced, and refuse to submit our selves unto, is utterly unlawful, and not
only without warrant from the lord in his word, but directly contrary to the
same. For whereas Romans 12. and Ephesia^s 4. the spirit of God has reckoned up
all the ecclesiastical officers, which Christ the master of the house has
appointed, for the full and perfect ordering thereof, none of these of yours,
who^ we have displaced and refuse to obey, are once remembered, and besides both
contrary to Christ our saviors express commandment, and Peter's also Luke
22.1. Pet. 5. they take upon them, as tyrannially as ever did any Princes of
the nations, Lordship over Gods inheritance, and therefore by their proceedings
we finding them to be very antichristian, both S. Paul's prophecy, that
Antichrist shall be consumed by the spirit of Gods mouth 2 Thessalonians. 2. and that
flat commandment given us from heaven Apoc. 18. to come out from Babylon, and
to separate our selves from her, do assure us, that lawfully we may speak
against them and their enormities, and not only refuse submission unto them,
but also to do what we can to root out such plants, which our heavenly father
never planted, out of the earth. Wherefore fondly do you go about to teach,
out of the Prophet Jeremy, that as the Jews were taught submission and
obedience to Nabuchadnezzar, so we should learn thereby, to chamber our
tongues against your Pope and other Prelates, and also quietly to submit our
selves unto them. For though he were a wicked tyrant, yet his authority it
self was lawful, and ye ordinance of God; and he came unto his authority over
the Jews, by force of arms and conquest, which is an ordinary way, that God
uses to inuest Kings and Emperors, with such civil authority over nations
and cuntries by, whereas the very authority it self of your Popes and other
Prelates (howsouer you co^fidently, and yet untruly aduouch that S. Paul Romans
13. is to be understood, as well to have spoken that which he there speaks
of them, as of Kings and other lawful magistracies and offices) is as I have
proved utterly unlawful, and the means whereby they have come thereunto, has
been shameless wresting of the scriptures, fraud, deceit, treachery and maine
force, wc all are abominable steps, for clergy me^ to attain unto their
offices by: neither would we, if we had lived under the persecuting Emperors
of Rome, or under Nabuchadnezzar (as you here insinuate) have refused to yield
so far obedience and submission unto them, in all quietness, as we might, not
disobeying the Lord to obey them; and further, neither the Jews under the
one, nor the Christians under the other, were bound: which obedience and
submission to your Popes and Prelates will not serve your turn, for you would
have it yielded unto them without limitation, for otherwise they should not be
obeyed, wherein you would fainest have the^ obeyed. And therefore in your Canon
law did. 40. cap. Sipapa: it is enacted, that though your Popes should deal
never so lewdly, both in respect of themselves, and in carrying others by heaps
unto hell, yet none must be so presumptuous, as to ask them, why they do so.
Howbeit for the more full satisfying the Reader, and clearing our selves of
this your slanderous accusation, of intending the displacing of civil
magistrates, for their wicked lives, this further is the common and received
doctrine amongst us, concerning that point: that though Christian subjects may
not disobey God, to obey their wicked commandments, yet they are rather
patiently to suffer the penalties that they shall inflict upon them, for their
choosing rather to obey God then them, then to use or to consent to the using of
any forcible means to depose them. And this our practice has plentifully made
to appear, to be the common and received opinion in this case amongst us. But
whereas you would have us so humble and meek (by abusing and wresting Christ's
counsel given us Mat. 11.) as that we should obey Pilate, Annas and Caiphas,
even to the suffering of death, without once opening our lips, to speak any
word of disgrace against them: I see the only mark you shoot at is, that we
should obey your Popes and Prelates in whatsoever they command us, or else
that we should suffer them, without once muting against them, to make what
havoc of us they list. For though you would seem to plead for our obedience
and submission to the civil magistrates, yet plainly you bewray, that so your
Popes and Prelates might get this submission at our hands, you have the thing
you shoot at and care for. But to return to your persuasion of us to be meek
and humble etc. tell me in good earnest, did Christ at any time obey any of
them you speak of, in any thing that was ill? and was there not a necessity in
regard of our redemption to suffer those things which he suffered, and as he
suffered them at their hands? what makes this then, either to bind us to obey
the wicked and ungodly proceedings of your Popes and Prelates, wherein only we
refuse to listen unto them, or needelesly to suffer those things at your hand,
which lawfully we may avoid? And I trust you are persuaded, that Christ
himself that willed others to learn of him to be humble and meek, that he
never forgot that lesson himself. And yet if you read Mat. 23. and John the
8. you shall find, that he comprising the high Priests themselves within the
compass of his speech, as well as other his inferior malicious enemies,
calls them hypocrites, children of the Devil etc. And the Prophets though
they were not to learn of you, how to behave them selves to higher powers, yet
they did use often very sharp and bitter speeches, against the Princes and
other rulers of their times; an example whereof you have Esaias. 1.10. in these
words. Hear the word of the Lord O Princes of Sodom: hearken to the law of
our God, O people of Gomorrah. But Paul you will say Act. 23. having called a
wicked high Priest, that contrary to law tyrannously had commanded him to be
smitten, painted wall, being admonished thereof, corrects himself, remembering
that it is written, thou shall not rail or speak ill of the Prince, Ex. 22.
saying I knew not that he was the high Priest. Indeed one of the high Priests
clawbacks, who are always ready to justify their master, how unjustly soever
he deal, and to control Gods servants for saying never so little amiss of
the^, though thereunto they be never so justly provoked, gave him a check
therefore, whereupon it seems that Paul upon the reason aforesaied excused
himself, but indeed he did it in such sort, as that in truth he give, him a
greater blow, though somewhat more covertly, then he had done before, in
plainly showing that, (that dealing of his considered) he knew him not to be
the high Priest. But if this notwithstanding, you think still, that Paul would
not give any hard speech to such a Prelate, and justify it when he had done,
consider a little what reckoning you make of Saint Peter, and then call to
remembrance, what is written Gal. 2. and you shall find it clear, that not
only he rebuked Peter openly at Antioch, but that also he iustifies that his
own doing therein, saying, that he did so because he went not with the right
foot to the Gospel. And learn by these places not to be so dainty over your
Popes and Prelates hereafter, but yt if they do lewdly, think it may well
stand with that meekenes and humility, that Christ has taught us, that they be
plainly as they deserve, told of their doings by us. It is one thing to rafle
of them, that be in lawful authority, and to backbite and deprave them; and
another thing it is, by way of instruction, admonition and reprehensio^, by
plain, just and true terms, to let them see their faults, so it be done in
time and place convenient, and in manner beseeming such an action. This later
might the Jews do to Nabuchadnezzar notwithstanding Ieremies words, and ye
Christians under the heathen Emperors to them, and yet both keep within duty
and loialty, but the former is that which is unlawful to be used against any,
how bad soever he be, that is in place of lawful magistracy or office.
Finally, whereas you yet think scorn, that your Pope should be worse then
Nabuchadnezzar: and that therefore the Jews might have had far more just
exceptions against him, to free them from their obedience and submission to
him, then we have to free us from subjection to your Popes, in truth, therein
you are very much deceived. For first, his authority, as a King over them, was
a power in it self lawful, though abused by him; and yours (as I have showed)
is flatly unlawful: and the Jews were commanded subjection unto him; and we
are commanded (as I have said) Revel. 18. to forsake all communion with your
Popish Antichristian kingdom. Your Popes for lewdnes of life, for manifold
Idolatries, and blasphemies in Religion, and for want of right title to the
dignity and office which they claim, doubtless will thoroughly match him, and
by how much their knowledge, in respect of the means they have which he lackt,
should be more then his: by so much these things in them, make them more
intolerable, then the same could make him. And therefore these things
considered, the obedience and submission which the Jews were enjoined to yield
to Nabuchadnezzar, infers not the like to be due to your Popes and other
your Romish Prelates.

The XVII. Chapter.
ANy man may easily perceive by this discourse, that you have no great reason,
in saying that that you say, and much less to do that that you preach, I
mean, to begin the reformation of the church by the way of force, the which
is a thing contrary to all laws divine and humane, which defend Cod. vt nemo
in sua causa jud.
that This is your dealing flat, for your Pope is the party many ways most
justly charged by us, and yet he will be the supreme judge in his own cause.
one should be Judge in his own cause: and you will not only be a Judge,
but a party, resembling in this him that gave the blow to Christ, unto whom
the answer was made, b Job. 15.
Well hit again, 15. for 18.
If we have done ill, This always we are ready to do.
prove it before the Judge, seeing that you are our accusers. If you say, that
God has given you power, to know, to judge, and to exempt, that is to say,
to drive us out of our possession, and to cause the people to forsake that
Religion, which they have maintained It is a shame to repeat this brag so
often, and never to go about in all your book, once to prove it, which you
know is the maine question.
these 1500. years and upwards, show us your commission, with as sure a
warrant, as so great a matter does require, seeing that you say, that ye are
sent extraordinarily, as Moses was, to redeem the children of Israel out of
the captivity of Egypt, that is to say, according unto your interpretation, the
children of God, and the true faithful, out of the false Religion of the
Papists, of that which the Pope, Antichrist, and worse the^ Pharao, is the head
and master. Thus ye use to expound and moralizate the figures of the old
Testament, in favor of the Catholic Church: yet is it so, that when God
spoke unto you about so zealous a thing as this, ye forgate one thing, that
does hinder greatly your commission. You should have showed God, that the
commission which he gave you, was like to breed no less mischief amongst the
Papists, the^ Moses did among the Egyptians. For I And you know we have just
cause, so to think and say.
am sure (if any to try you, would take your oath) that you would swear,
that the Pope is as ill as Pharao, and we as hard hearted as the Egyptians.
Therefore, why did ye not demand of him, a rod to convert into a serpent,
and to pass dry foot over the red Sea? Our vocation is ordinary, the
message we have old and ancient, sufficiently confirmed by all the miracles
cronicled in the Scriptures, and therefore this was needelesse.
Why did ye not require at his hand, that it might please him to authorize
his word preached by your ministers with signs, miracles and tokens, as he
did, when he sent your fellows the Apostles: seeing that you are Prophets,
how comes it to pass, that you have not foreseen, that we would not
believe you: for who is he (although he were a Devil) that could not say as
much? But we have one disauowe, which God has given to many, which do
report, that they do come from him, which does greatly overthrow the
authority of your commission. These and many more such like, do so fitly paint
your Prelates, and therefore it is, that we shun the^ as we do.
He does say in the 14. of Hieremie, the Prophets preach falsely in my name,
I have not sent them, I have not commanded them, nor I have not spoken unto
them: but they prophecy unto you false visio^s, and naughty diuinations, to
deceive your hearts. And likewise in the 27. Chapter. I have not sent them
(says the Lord God) and they prophecy in my name falsely, to the intent I
should forsake you, and that as well you, as your prophets should perish. Item
in the 29. Let not your Prophets seduce you, that are amongst you, nor your
southsaiers, and do not mark the dreams that ye dream, for they do
prophecy falsely unto you in my name, seeing that I have not sent the^, says
the Lord. etc. So that, although it were true, that God has sent you (as it is
false) we might with a just cause, pretend an excuse of ignorance, and to say
with great assurance that, that Gen 20.
Abimilech said unto God, That you cannot, for you have the Scriptures of the
old and new Testament, if you had grace, to preserve you from such blindness as
ye show, in refusing our doctrine, which is so warranted as it is there.
where he threatened, that he would kill him, because he kept Abraham's wife. O
Lord God (said he) would you kill a poor simple nation? Shall it be said,
that we believe all those, that feign to come in your name? have not you
commanded us by the Apostle, 1. Ioh. 1.
And therefore we are so bold as to try your popish spirit, by the spirit that
speaks in the Scriptures.
That we should not believe every spirit: and that the Angel of darkness does
transform himself into an Angel of light? Have not you commanded to be
written, that we should beware which way we take, and that such a way does
seem good, the which notwithstanding does lead unto damnation and perdition.
If any, saying that he is our Princes servant, But we have both, and unless
we can prove we have, believe us not
should come to demand a sum of money in his masters name, and that he had
neither his hand nor his seal to warrant his demand, would not we send him
away like a false merchant, fearing that he would deceive us? then with
greater reason, ought we to fear the committing of our faith, and the hope of
our salvation into their hands, whom we know not, nor that cannot show any
miracles, You were deceived, these words be not there.
to confirm their preaching, as the Apostles did. k Mat. 28.
Qui confirmabant sermonem, sequentibus signis. That is, which did confirm
their preaching, with signs or miracles following: Because there is not like
reason and cause, as the^.
whi^ do not they say, as he said, whose successors they profess to be, the
signs of my commission and Apostleship have been accomplished among you, with
signs and miracles. 2. Cor. 12.

The XVII. Chapter.
YOu proceed, charging us to have begone reformation by force, but as yet you
have not proved it. Upon the beginning thereof, in these later days, or not
long after, we grant some stirs did arise in Germany, France and other
places, but therein it has fallen out no otherwise with the renewing and
reviving the Gospel of Christ, then it fell out with the Apostles when they
began first to preach it. For we read Act. 17.19. that then stirs and
tumults there were usually raised up, by the enemies thereof to hinder the
course thereof. And as long as it is not to be looked for, but that always it
will have some enemies, what else can be hoped for, but when it springs and
begins to flourish there will be some stirs and contentions betwixt, the
friends and enemies thereof? But as the Apostles when for these stirs sake they
were charged to be seditious persons, might truly clear them selves, in that
not they, nor the professors of the Gospel were at any time the authors
thereof, but rather the enemies thereof: so may we in this same case also do.
For either they have begun of your selves, who have thought by force to stop
the course of the Gospel, or if any have begone by others, as some did in
Germany by the Anabaptists, our men have been the forwardest, by their
writings and otherwise, to condemn their doings therein. And yet though it
should have fallen out, or it may be proved that in some one place or other
there have been since this late detection of Popish enormities, some
disorderly tumults, and in the same some unlawful force used, wherewith some
indiscreete persons of our side, may justly be charged, as long as it is a
thing which we neither like, allow, nor justify in them, what reason is there,
that that should be objected as matter of sufficient disgrace to all the rest
of us, and to our Religion also? Is it impossible for such things, to fall out
sometimes amongst them that profess Gods truth, even in well ordered commonweals? Then truly of al men in the world, the men of your profession will be
proved to have least acquaintance with Gods truth. For never were there more
broiles, hoate contentions and force more used to compass your wills, then have
been amongst you: every several order of Religious men, every abbey, every
Cathedral Church (if the stories were searched) ministers unto us infinite
demonstration, that there has nothing been more usual amongst you. O the
lamentable and most savage cruel dealing that has been used with great
approbation by men of your side, to bring the poor Indians by force in
subjection unto you. And what extreme force and cruelty has been used of
late years, to subdue the poor Christians of Cabriers Merindoll, and other
places thereabout, and to root out the professors of the Gospel, and their
favorers in France? I am persuaded yt the Turks never used more faithles,
tyrannical and monstrous dealings, then the stories and the evidence of the
thing, declares you have used against these. And therefore it being so usual a
thing with you, as it is, to promote your Religion by force, of all men you are
the unfittest to charge others with that, as with a fault, which you account so
laudable in your selves. And yet as though you had said so much against us for
this, as that thereupon it must needs appear to every man, that we have
neither reason of our saying or doing, you further charge us, that herein (in
seeking namely the reformation of your Church) we have taken upon us, contrary
to all laws both divine and humane, being also a party, to be our own judge;
wherein you say untruly of us, for we always have been contented, to submit
both our sayings and doings, to the judgment of the Lord himself, speaking
unto us in the written word, and by the same we have had our sayings and doings
often examined, and tried to be sound and lawful in national and provincial
Synodes, before we have attempted the reformation you speak of. And secondly,
herein you charge us as you did before, with that which you your selves are
openly guilty of. For though your Pope be the special party accused by us, yet
in all matters in question betwixt you and us, you will have him to be the
supreme judge, and so the question being betwixt you and us, whither you be the
church or we, and whither you hold the truth or we, no other trial will you
admit, but that we must be judged by him, whither it be so or no. Wherein you
deal, as if the felon at the bar, should refuse all other trial, but to be
tried by the principal in that felony, whither he be guilty or no. Now whereas
yet in this our dealing, you would resemble us to him, that gave Christ a blow
etc. Your error is manifold, and therein it seems either your negligence was
much, or that your wits were benu^med. For where the story you allude unto is.
Ioh. 18. it is quoted in your book John. 15. and neither do you hit of
Christ's words, in rehearsing the answer to him that smote him, nor yet is
there any reason or similitude made to appear, betwixt our dealing in seeking
to reform your Church, and that fellow. Christ's answer was this, if I have
evil spoken, bear witness if the evil, but if I have well spoken, why
smitest thou me? And you set down his answer thus, if we have done il, prove
it before the judge, seeing that you are our accusers: and as for the
resemblance betwixt him that smote Christ and us, you show not wherein it is,
neither can I guess wherein you meant it. But indeed your dealing with us
considered, he carries a lively resemblance of a number of you, whose property
it is, to bring us for our holy profession before your high priest, and his
chaplains, and then if we chance to answer boldly for our own defense as
Christ did (though never so directly to the purpose) to check us, and strike
us, as he did our savior, for your great prelates may not so be answered. But
perhaps you will say, that the words that you set down, contain your answer
to us, when we check you for your doings: why then set you them down, as the
answer made by Christ to him that smote him? And if the words be taken as your
answer to us (meaning therein such a judge, as either the Pope or one of his
sworn men) that we should be drawn before such judges by your own law here
alleged, is against reason, for they can be no competent judges, because they
themselves are principal parties. Our accusation of you we are always ready
to prove, before the Lord of heaven and earth, and before any other indifferent
judges, by such deponents and witnesses, as will not be corrupted either by
you or us, namely by the prophets and Apostles speaking without all partiality,
in the Canonical scriptures. Exemption from this judgment we never sought nor
will, and if your religion fly this kind of trial and judgment, God has
given us power even thereby to judge, that you are such as ought to be driven
from possession of such a corrupt religion, that dare not show the face in this
court of judgment, because then it knows, it should be foiled. But yet to
hold your Clyents in some lyking of your religion, you once again confidently
brag, that it is of one thousand five hundred years continuance and upwards,
and therefore you require us that would dissuade you therefrom, to show our
commission sealed and confirmed, as so great a matter does require, and as
Moses his was, by miracles: which in this case to be as necessary for us, as it
was for him, you strive to prove in the rest of this Chapter, and that
otherwise you are not to believe us. Wherefore because all this you require at
our hands, and think you may do it still only upon this supposition, that
your religion is thus ancient, as you brag. First, let us consider of that
point, and then proceed to the rest which you infer thereupon. Herein, that
which I have written already both in the later end of the preface and in my
answer to your 4 Chapter, does sufficiently discover the shameless folly and
vanity of this your brag: howbeit because I perceive what you lack in truth
in this matter, your purpose is to make up with the setting a stout countenance
upon it: once again, I will take the pains to strip your Church and religion
of this visard of antiquity, which done for all your lewd brags, I doubt not,
but that both the one and the other shall be found a you^gling and a new vpstart
in comparison of that, which you pretend. First therefore, to begin withal, in
that the greek Churches (which quite brake of communion with you, in the time
of Gregory the 9, in the year 1230, which is now not above 360. years ago)
have not yet allowed the mass, to be a propitiatory sacrifice for the quick
and dead, do minister no private masses either in the Church or else where,
reserve not after the ministration of this sacrament any part thereof, nor deny
the ministering thereof under both kinds to any communicant: in that also they
never yet could be brought, to allow of the supremacy of your Pope, nor of
your doctrines of transubstantiation, extreme unction, purgatory and of
forbidding their ministers the use of lawful marriage (in wc points now a great
part of your religion consists) even thereby it may be perceived, that none of
these points, as they are now taught by you, were received for catholic 360.
years ago. For if when they brake of communion from you, these had then been
so accounted and taken, doubtless they had then been acquainted with these, and
so by all likelihood, had held them, as they do other things which with you they
had learned before, unto this day. I am not ignorant that not long after in
Gregory the tenthes time, in a council at Lions, and after that again, in the
Florentine council, labor was made to bring them to communion and union with
you again, and that in the first, Michael Paleologus (so the better to
compass help to keep his kingdom, which with brutish murder he had got) and
some other of his friends, assented unto a decree to that end; and that in the
other likewise, Johannes Paleologus Emperor of Constantinople, and the
patriarch there, with some other greek bishops, amongst whom was Bessarion,
assented, in some sort to your Popes title and your doctrine of purgatory. But
withal, good reader, I must tell thee, that I find, the consenting of the
first, was so misliked of the rest of the bishops of Grecia, when they came
home, yt the stories report, that even therefore they held them, that so
assented, always after, as persons cut of from the communion of their Church,
and when they died, denied them the honor of burial. And that likewise the
same stories report, not only that in the later by no means they could be
brought to allow of transubstantiation, though there they were urged much
thereunto, but that for their yielding in the other they were so resisted, when
they came at home by one Marcus the bishop of Ephesus, and other bishops, that
they were brought to recant and to declare merely void all that they had done
there: yea moreover it is recorded in an ancient register, of ye church of
Herford, yt in 29. articles there also set down, the greek Church differs
quite from your Roman church. And therefore hereby it should seem, that these
points of popery which it has not yet received, were either not at all, or at
least not universally received, before the foresaied breach, and that therefore
these have not 400 years continuance on their backs, which comes far short of
your account of 1500. years. Further evident and apparent proofs there are to
make it utterly without all question, that both these and many other points of
the Roman religion, that now is, are far you^ger then your reckoning. For
before the counsel of Co^stance in the year 1414. we find not the ministering
the communion in both kinds publicly forbid to the common co^munica^t. And in
the council of Basil it was permitted again in the year 1431. to ye Bohemia^s
to receive under both kinds, and so there, from that day to this, many have
used to do. Certain it is (as it appears in the first Epistle of Cypria^)
that in his time, with was 260. years after christ, it was by him accounted
absurd to deny the cup to any communicant, and de consecratione did. 2. it is
recorded, that Gelasius who was a bishop of Rome about the year 500, made a
flat decree to bind al men to receive in both kinds, saying Either let him,
that receives receive both or neither, because the division of one mystery
cannot be without sacrilege, and yet now your Popes and their councels, which
you hold cannot err, condemn it for a cursed heresy, to hold it to be
needful, that this sacrament should be received of al communicants in both
kinds. And it appears in the same distinction, Cap. peracta; That Pope Calixt
(in the year 223) made a flat law contrary to your received use now, of your
priests receuing al alone. For there he decrees that co^secratio^ being done,
all that will not be shut from the church should communicate; for so (says he)
the apostles taught and the fashion the^ of the Roman church was. How is it
the^, that your Roman Church that now is, contrary to this ancient decree, thus
grounded both upon the authority of the Apostles, and the practice then of that
church, in this point now practices the quite contrary? Tra^substantiation the
very life of your mass, your own doctor Tonstal in his book of ye sacrament,
and diverse other of your friends as I have showed before Cap. 11. confess was
not enacted and decreed for a catholic truth amongst your selves, before
Innocent ye 3 time, 1215 in the Latera^ counsel, which was after the greek
church was gone from you, and so it was rather the decree of a particular
assembly, then of the Catholic Church, and therefore no marvel though the
Greeks reject this your council and decree. Your own schoolmen, Canonists
and Croniclers, as Durand, Albertus, Gabriel Biel, Innocentius, Vrspergensis
and others, show from point to point and from piece to piece, who invented and
devised your mass, withal the ceremonies thereof, as also Polidor in his 5.
book and 9. Chapter of the inuentours of things, and Platina in the lives of
the Popes, and namely, in the life of Pope Sixtus the first. It was so long a
licking before it came to the shape it now has, and was patched together, as
it appears in these and other your own writers, by so many Popes so long
distant one from an other in time, that it would require a good pretty long
treatise, to set down the several shreds and morselles thereof, with the
authors and deuisers of them. Which things considered, it is the likest a
beggars cloak, consisting of an infinite sort of patches, at sundry times and
of sundry colors sowed and cobled together, that can be. The mass now used in
your church, commonly called S. Gregory's mass was first received and
established in the time of Pope Adrian 780. years after Christ (at the least,
for others account it more) as witnesses Durand, Nauclere, and Iacobus de
voragine in the life of Gregory the first, for before that, S. Ambrose
Lyturgie was much in use. And the last of these authors reports, that when
with much a do, Adrian had got it to be decreede in a council, that S.
Gregory's mass should be universally used, and Charles the Emperor had
labored both by fair and foul means, to cause the same decree to be
executed, and yet many would hardly be drawn from the use of Saint Ambroses,
one Eugenius seeing this stir about it, gave the Pope this grave advise, that
the books of both the Lyturgies should be laid upon the altar of S. Peter,
and that the Church doors should carefully be shut and sealed with the signets
of sundry Bishops, and that then they should give themselves all that night to
earnest prayer, that God by some evident sign, might show which of the^ he
would have to be used: whose counsel being in every point followed, in the
next morning, when they went into the church, they found (as says the story)
only S. Ambrose book opened and lying upon the altar, and the leaves of the
other scattered all over the church, whereupon Adrian the Pope, like a profound
interpreter of visions, gathers that it was the Lords meaning thereby to show,
that S. Ambroses Lyturgy might well be used upon his own altar at Millan, but
the other should be used generally over all churches, and thus the credit of
Saint Gregory's mass was first established. Howbeit before transubstantiation
came in, which was not, as I have said, before the year 1215, it was nothing
the minion that it has been since. And yet even then, it was not grown to
her highest credit, for about five years after it was, ere that adoration or
elevation of the host was decreed, for then first Honorius the 3 enacted that;
and the hosts holiday, commonly called Corpus Christi day, was not made before
Pope Vrbans time, in the year 1260. as witnesses Polydor in his 6 book and 8
Chapter of the inuentours of things. Whereupon it may evidently appear, that
the mass as it is now, is but a very youngling, and one of her father the
Popes youngest daughters. And as for latin service her companion, it was first
brought into England, by one Theodorus sent hither by Pope Vitellian, about the
year 657. And to proceed to other points of Popery (as it is well known) it
is an other most principal point of your religion, to attribute unto the Pope
that universal supremacy over al bishops and over the whole Church of Christ,
that you do, for you have made it an article under pain of damnation to be
received, that there is no salvation, but under his obedience and within his
communion, as it is set down by Boniface the 8, in his extrauagant de
maioritate and obedientia. And yet in the 6 Canon of the Nicene council,
holden about the year 330. (as some count) it appears, that then the Roman
bishop had his bounds and limits prescribed him, as well as the other
patriarchs. And the general council of Calcedon, and the 6. general
council, held at Constantinople, determined Can. 36. that the bishop of that
see should have equal priueledges with the bishop of old Rome, 680 years
after Christ. And appeals to Rome were forbidden, under pain of
excommunication, in the counsel of Mileuitan. Cap. 22. and of Afric Cap. 92.
Further yet your own proper and late councels of Constance and Basil, have not
long ago greatly curtolled the supremacy, that now the Pope chalength, for they
have decreed, that the authority of a general council is so far above him,
that thereby he may be condemned and deposed. And though now according to your
Canon Did. 40. cap. si papa, your popes will be lawles, and may not by any be
controled, though be lead people headlong by heaps to hell, as it is there set
down: yet I read that in Pope Symachus time, about the year 500. after
Christ, that many bishops did accuse him then to Theodoricus king of the
Goths, because he took upon him to be (...), that is, one whose will should be
a law. And in the counsel of Carthage the th^^, there was a decree made Cap.
26. against sundry ambitious (...) challenged even then, as it should seem, to
be due unto the bishop^ of Rome, as that they should not be called Prince of
Priests, (...) priest, but bishops of the first see. And howsoever now Ho^ius,
Belarmine and others, reckon the title of ecumenicall or universal bishop
amongst the due and just titles of the Pope, yet it is flatly set down, as a
thing unlawful, and is forbid in the 99. distinct^^^, (...) by the judgment of
Pelagius, bishop of Rome in the year 58^^ by Gregory the first his successor.
And it is well known, that Gregory very directly and often condemned this title
both in John bishop of Co^sta^tinople, and in all other bishops, himself and
the bishops of ye see of Rome not excepted, as it is evident, in his 4 book of
Epistles, Epi. 30, 38.88. and in his 9 book, Ep. 45. Your set days of fasting
you learned of Mo^tanus; and your placing so necessary a point of fasting in
abstine^ce from flesh, of the Manichees; as it appears in Aug. 74. Epist.
wherein you are as deep as either they or any other heretics ever were,
witness your own Dur. li. 6. c. de ieiuniis. For he there gives this as a
reason, why in fasting flesh is rather abstained from then fish, because al
flesh was accursed, and not al fish in the days of Noe. And compare Augustines
description of the Manichees fasts with yours, in his 2 book de moribus
Manicheoru^ Cap. 13. and you shall find the^ marvelous like. Further what
holiness soever you imagine to be in your forbidding your clergy marriage, and
how ancient soever you would persuade the simple and ignorant; that that order
is, any man may see that reads Augustines foresaied 74 Epistle, and his 18
Chapter of his second book de moribus Manicheorum, as the Manichees and
Tatimists learned to condemn marriage, as they did of the Ethnicks (as Clemens
Alexandrinus thinks they did Stromat. 3) so you have learned this your kind
of forbidding your clergy (as you call them) marriage of them. For there it
appears, that they allowed it amongst their ordinary hearers, and forbad it
only to those that studied perfection, and were the chosen ones to the
ministry amongst them, eue^ as you do. But whatsoever either you or they say,
or have said to the contrary, for the justifying of this your antichristian
devise, as it is most clear to any that reads but the old testament, that
marriage was as allowable to the Lords priests then, and as honorable accounted
both of God and good men, so (...) less clearly does it appear in the new 1.
Cor. 9. and 1. Tim. 3. that the like opinion was retained both of the
honorablenes and lawfulness thereof, for Apostles, Evangelists, and al other
ministers of the Lord, insomuch that Paul in the first of these places
(howsoever you papists seeking to hide his plain meaning, disorder his words
and read a woman, a sister; for a sister, a wife) shows not only, how the
brethren of the Lord and Cephas carried their Christian wives up and down with
the^, but that also it was lawful for them so to due, and to take maintenance
where they preached, for themselves and theirs, and that he and Barnabas if
they listed might lawfully even do so also. Insomuch that S. Paul. 1. Tim. 4,
does flatly aduouch the denial or forbidding thereof, not only as the Manichees
and some other heretics have forbidden it, as a filthy and unlawful estate in
it self (with yet if your own report be true) was Siritius opinion did. 82, and
is still Gregory Martins, discou. ca. 11.) but even as the wisest of you, defend
now the denying of it to your clergy, under the pretense of more holiness in
abstaining there from, for a plain doctrine of devils. For especially he
speaks of the^ there, that should in the later days do so, in hypocrisy.
And therefore the better altogether to preserve me^ from this vanity and
impiety, he pronou^ces marriage to be honorable and the marriage bed, to be
undefiled, He. 13. And therefore Ignatius in his Epist. to the Philadelphia^s
says flatly, yt to say the contrary comes of the devil, and upon this ground
Dionysius Corinthiacus labors to persuade Pynitus the bishop of the Gnosia^s
(as we read Eus. l. 4. ca. 22.) that he did not impose an unnecessary and too
heavy a burden of single life upon the brethren, yea eue^ your own Gratian
could not dissemble or deny, but that 300. years after Christ, ye counsel of
Ga^gra pronounced him accursed ye would or should more refuse ye ministry of
one that is married, the^ of one unmarried, and ye also there is an ancient Cano^
fathered upon ye Apostles to ye same end did. 28. Indeed it should seem yt in
Clement Alexa^drinus time wc was about 200 year after Christ, yt there were
some yt the^ began to urge ye single life of ye ministers, but he calls such
proud braggers and such as God will resist, showing the^ by many examples,
reasons and places of scripture ye lawfulnes both of ye marriage of such and of
ye use thereof, and yt ye denying it the^, was the plain doctrine of devils
spoken against by Paul 1. Tim. 4. Stro. 3. yet it was attempted again, as we
read it was often before that particulerly, so in the first council of Nice
generally, to be established, that men once entered into the ministry, might
neither marry, nor yet accompany with their wives married before: but there also
it was so withstoode by one Paplinutius, that they gave over that their
attempt. And consequently, by that (...) ^^^cel, that which (as some write) was
decreed before in the (...) councels of Elybert and Arles to the contrary, was
so repea^^^ (...) weakened, that thence forth it was thereby left free unto
ministers to accompany with their lawful wives, as to other men. (...) the
sixth general council held at Constantinople, whatsoever had any where before
that been attempted to the contrary, which was 680. years after Christ, we
find restraint of their marriage so condemned, that there it is decreed, that
it should be lawful for them to marry, and to enjoy the company of their
wives, and that whosoever would go about to debar them thereof, should be
deposed. And in making of this decree, the fathers in that council assembled,
do say, yt therein they have followed the Apostles sincere Canons, and the
constitutions of holy men (howsoever Epiphanius lib. 2. tom. 1. contrary to all
truth of the story, writes, that where such are admitted, the sincere Canons
be not kept) and indeed this decree stands in force, and ever since unto this
day has been observed in all ye Churches under the patriarchs of
Constantinople, Jerusalem, Alexandria, Antioch and under Presbyter Johannes in
AEthiopia, which are of far larger compass, then ever was the Roman Church in
these western parts. Indeed it seems by an Epistle written ^s some think, by
one Hulderick; as others suppose, by one Volusianus, unto Pope Nicolas, to
dissuade him from restraining the clergy of lawful marriage, that Gregory and
some others before him (as, if we may believe the popish reporters, Siricius)
in the Roman see had been busy in making decrees, to restrain them, but yet
that Gregory upon the finding on a time of 6000 infantes heads, in certain
ponds, repented thereof and revoked the same, saying, it is better they should
marry, the^ to give such occasion of murder; it should seem that the Epistle
was written rather to Nicolas the second, the^ to Nicolas the first, about the
year 867. for then they began to be somewhat busy about the restraining of
them. Howbeit they were so resisted herein, that before Pope Hildebrands time,
about the year 1070, or rather Pope Calixts time, in the year 1120, this
restraint of theirs took no great place. For Aventinus in historia Boiorum
lib. 5. speaking of a counsel of Hildebrand, says, that in that time priests
openly had wives, and begat children as other Christians, as appears, says
he, by sundry instruments, wherein their wives are specified as witnesses, and
that called, honesto vocabulo presbyterissae, that is, by an honest name
eldrisses. And the 9 Canon of the 2. counsel of Turon held in the time of Pope
Pelagius the first as witnesses Caranza, and the 14 as writes Surius tom. 2.
conc. And Henry Hu^tington in his 7 book writes that Anselme archbishop of
Canterbury in his time which was about the year 1106. forbad the priests of
England marriage (as he says) not forbid them before: whereupon as he notes
within short time such grievous complaints were brought unto him of their
Sodomitry, that he was enforced to make a law against that sin: yet in the
making of these laws he dealt so favorably, that whereas to live in marriage
with a lawful wife was punished with deprivation, one convict of Sodomitry was
only to be accursed with their ordinary excommunication, until he repented
and got absolution, which was easy enough to come by. And thus in the
judgment of God most justly, they forsaking like Hypocrites the natural and
lawful use of marriage, they were given over (as Paul speaks of the reprobate
gentiles Romans 1.) to their own filthy affections, in that there was nothing
more common then filthy fornication and adultery amongst them, or that in their
cloisters, they having left the natural use of the woman, one of them lusted
toward another, and man with man wrought filthiness, and so, as he there
says, received in themselves such recompense of their error as was meet.
These things considered, no marvel, though your gloser upon the 84 distinction
be enforced to confess that olim and tempore praeterito, that is, that in
ancient and former times they were married: For by these testimonies and by that
also which is set down in that distinction it sufficiently appears, that your
fashion herein is but of late devised and publicly received amongst your own
selves. Your doctrine also of free will, howsoever it was then favored of the
Pelagian heretics, yet it appears, that it was in S. Augustines time as much
misliked of him, and of the true church of Christ, as it is now of us. For he
says, what is there so much presumed of the power of nature, it is wounded,
maimed, vexed and lost, it sta^ds need of true confession, and not of a false
defense, de natura and gratia Cap. 53. Further, if you will take pains to read
him, de gratia and libero arbitro ca. 17. de dogmatibus ecclesiae cap 32. de
bono perseuerantiae ca. 6. and in his 11. sermon de verbis apostoli, you shall
find him most directly to teach, that of our own selves there is nothing but
sin, and that to do well, and will well, comes wholly of God, which he of his
free grace works in us, and that never any of us, did more plainly confute
and oppugn your doctrine herein, then he does. And you know, that he lived
400. years after Christ and more. In like sort your doctrine of iustyficatio^,
in part by man's own merits and satisfactions, howsoever of ancient time the
scribes and pharisees troubled the Apostolic Churches with the like doctrine,
yet was it a doctrine abhorred of ye Church of Christ, as blasphemous against
ye omnisufficient merits, and satisfaction of Christ Jesus, our Lord and
savior, and ours of justification freely and fully, soly and wholly by faith
only in Christ allowed and received, as sound truth, and doctrine in that
point, not only in the Apostles times (as it appears To. 3. Gal. 2. and 5.)
but also for many 100. years after, even unto very late days. For proof
whereof let any man read Orige^ upon the 3. and 6. of the Romans, Ambrose upon
the 3 of the Romans also. Hierom in his book against the Pelagia^s, upon the 4
to the Romans, and upon the first and 2. to the Gala. Aug. de fide and operibus
ca. 22. upon the 88 Psa. and in his 22 Chap. of his Manuell: and Hilary in his
8 Canon upon Matthew. See also Basils 51. hom. de humilitate, Paulinus 58.
Epistle to Saint August. amongst Augustines Epistles; Chrysostom upon the
third to the Romans; Theodoret upon the same Chapter; Gregory Nazianzens twenty
two oration, and Ruffinus his exposition of the Creed: and you shall not only
find al these fathers in all these places, as flatly to teach free and full
justification and salvation, to come by faith in Christ alone, without our works
at al co^curring, as any helping cause thereunto, as any of us now do: but also
further, I can and do assure you, that who so will vouchsafe to take the
pains, to read Bernards 23, 61 and 62 Sermons of the Canticles, and his Sermon
the 15 of the Psalm, Qui habitat, and his seventy seven Epistle, he shall
find, that he (though he were above 1100 years after Christ) was of the same
mind. For in these places he plainly confesses, that he for his salvation
rested only upon the merits of Christ, and not upon his own at all, counting
man's merit to be nothing else, but to trust only in Christ and in Gods
mercy, withal plainly testifiyng, that he hoped to have his, sola fide, by
faith only in Christ Jesus. Yea your own Thomas Aquine confessed with us,
that we are justified by faith instrumentally, and that no virtue inherent in
us, can be of the form or essence of our justification. Romans 4 Ephesians. 2,
and in sundry other places of his commentaries upon Paul's Epistles. And
Sadolet, upon the Epistle to the Romans acknowledged (doubtless forced thereunto
by the power of this truth) that Abraham attulit tantum fidem, non sua opera,
that Abraham brought only faith, and not his own works; and again he says,
qua^tum quisque affert de sua iustitia, tantum detrahit de diuina beneficentia,
that is, how much (in this respect) a man brings of his own righteousness,
so much he pulls from Gods bountifulness. How far likewise the strength of
this truth conquered your great Champion Piggius, with grief Ruard Tapper,
and others of your side have noted, and written against him for it. For in the
controversy of justification, fol. 61. he in plain terms with us co^fesses,
si formaliter and proprie loquamur, nec fide nec charitate nostra
iustificamur'sed vna Dei in Christo iustitia, vna Christi nobis co^municata
iustitia: yt is, if we speak formally and properly, we are justified neither by
faith nor by our charity, but by the only righteousness of God in Christ: by the
only righteousness of Christ communicated unto us. And having with us before in
ye controversy, proved and confessed fol. 46. y al men, even the most
righteous, if they should be judged of God, or esteemed according to their own
righteousness, by merit and desert, they were to be accursed and condemned, not
only for the imperfection of our best righteousness, but also for plain
unrighteousness to be found in ye best: he proceeds and concluds fol. 47. that
our righteousness and hope of salvation with God, consists in the free
forgiveness of our sins in Christ, and in that the perfect righteousness of
Christ is imputed unto us, having communion with him. And to make his meaning
more plain, that he means not by the righteousness of God or Christ, any
inhere^t righteousness of ours, wrought in us that believe, by ye spirit of
Christ, as our late Jesuits do, but ye righteousness that was and is inherent
in Christ: he says, yt ye righteousness of Christ, whereof he would be
understood in this case to speak, is his obedience whereby he fulfilled his
fathers will in all things, and he expounds or declares the nature of ye faith,
whereof the Apostle speaks, Romans 3. saying, We are justified freely by his
grace, by the redemption that is in Christ Jesus, who^ he has appointed to be
our atonement maker by his blood: to be fiducia^ and co^fidentia^ in sanguine
eius, fol. 48. to be a trust and confidence in his blood, thereby alone to be
saved: so still aduouching fol. 49. his only righteousness imputed unto us, to
be ye whereby we shall stand and be accounted righteous before God, and him
therefore to be vnicu^ and solidu^, ye alone and sound fou^datio^ of our
salvation. To conclude therefore this point, I say with Iunilius Aphricanus
(who lived Anno. 440.) lib. 3. (...), si quis in Christu^ crediderit remissis
peccatis, potest per solam fidem seruari, that is, if any believe in Christ,
his sins being forgiven him, he may by faith alone be saved: and with Augustine
upon the 31. Psalm. si vis esse alienus a gratia, iacta merita tua: if thou will be void of grace, the^ boast of thy merits. Your doctrine of auricular
confession, of praying to Saints, and for the dead, I have at large in my
answer to your thirty seven Chapter, showed to be but new doctrines, and of
far later stamp then you pretend, and in like manner elsewhere I have showed
diverse other points of your religion to be, in this answer of mine. And I
think you are not ignorant, that that worthy bishop, bishop Jewel, here in
England, bishop of Salisbury, has most co^fidently protested, that for 600.
years after Christ, you have no sound ground for 25. articles (whereof the most
of them, are about your mass, whereof you glory most) which protestation or
challenge of his, he has hitherto defended, sufficiently against all your
objections to the contrary. And therefore whatsoever you brag to the
contrary, so much of your religion, as we count it popish for, is and will
prove (when you have done what you can) but as the tares Math. 13 that were by
Satan subtly and secretly sown in the Lords field, long after the good seed
was sown. And yet we laboring only according to our callinges, and that
knowledge that God has given us of his truth out of his written word, to call
you from this new found pretended religion of yours, to the ancient and true
catholic faith, which we have learned out of the scriptures, and of alsound
antiquity: you not only burst out into this vain and monstrously false brags,
of the antiquity of yours, and nouelty of ours, but also knowing in your own
consciences, that your folly therein will soon be descried, you call then for
miracles to confirm and warrant this our commission by, which you would feign
prove, to be as necessary for us in this case, as it was for Moses in his
time, thereby to confirm his. Whereunto I say as upon the like occasion, S.
Augustine said in his time, de ciuitate Dei l. 22. c. 8. Whosoever yet seeks
after miracles, that so he may believe, he himself is a monstrous miracle, who
the world believing, yet believes not. For if our doctrine be the same, that
the Apostles taught (as we are always ready, and by GODS grace able to prove
it to be, by the undoubted word of God) then their miracles are so many seals
of this our doctrine, and so it being thereby sufficiently confirmed already
by miracles, needles is it to require any further confirmation thereof now, by
new miracles again. But you seem to take it for granted, that we stand either
very much, or altogether upon the extraordinarines of our vocation, and
therefore supposing that such a vocation must always be confirmed by miracles,
you call for them the rather, thus earnestly at our hands. Concerning which
point, I have told you already, yt though in such ruins of the church, as you
had brought it unto, it be no strange thing with God to stir up men
extraordinarily, to seek the reformation thereof, as he did many of the
Prophets: yet neither the first ministers, which in these later days, he has
used to this end amongst us, nor those that he has used since, to go on with
that which the others began, rely only upon an extraordinary calling, for as I
have showed, both the one and the other, have had outward ordinary calling.
Besides you must understand, that a man may have an extraordinary calling, as
had Nahu^, Abdia, and diverse other of the prophets, who yet you cannot show,
ever wrought any miracles to confirm their calling withal. And to use
Chrysostomes words, which he used against such as you, in that commentary upon
Matthew. Hom. 47. which you father upon him, what miracle wrought John Baptist,
which instructed so many and great Cities? For the Evangelist says he wrought
none John. 10. And yet who therefore may lawfully say, that he had no lawful
vocation or good commission. Again you know by that which is written Deuteronomy. 13.
and 2. These. 2. and elsewhere: that false prophets, yea Antichrist himself, may
and shall seek to seduce men, and to draw men from God by miracles, and
therefore there God forwarneth his people thereof, that if notwithstanding they
suffer themselves, the rather to be perverted thereby, they may be void of al
excuse. Wherefore, seeing there have been sundry true prophets extraordinarily
called, that yet have wrought no miracles, and also many false prophets, that
have wrought them, and may do again; to what purpose should you thus call for
miracles, as though they straight might lawfully be refused, that work them
not, and they safely always followed, that do them? Howsoever you seem to
pretend, that if we should work miracles you would believe us, yet certain it
is, that if we should work never so many, you would as little for all that
believe us, as the blind and superstitious Jews believed Christ and his
Apostles, for all the miracles wrought by them: but this is only a shift of
yours, as long as you may, to dazell the eyes of the simple. For questionles if
miracles would serve the turn, beside sundry miracles indeed which the
stories do testify, have been wrought by God, in the protection and
propagation of the religion, which we now profess, eue^ this is a miracle of
miracles, that Luther, living in such a time as he did, should do as he did,
and to so great effect without miracle, and yet in the end, maugre al his
enemies, which were many and mighty, to die quietly, as he did, in his bed. So
yt al these things considered, it appears (I hope) sufficiently to the
indifferent reader, that you have no such advantage against us for miracles,
and you pretend. But because your objection in this behalf is so egerly
prosecuted by you, I will not refuse to follow you from step to step and to
yield you a more particular answer, to whatsoever you have said in this
matter. First therefore, whereas you would insinuate to your reader, that we
do wrong, in comparing the misery that the poor people were in, under your
Popes, to the misery that the people of Israel were in, in Aegipt, under
Pharao; and their deliverance from the Romish yoke, to the deliverance of that
people, from the bondage of Egypt: we grant you, we make that comparison
sometimes, and we are sure, that therein there is offered no wrong at al unto
you. For both in universality, continuannce of time, and extremity both to
soul and body, the slavery under your proud antichristian Popes, has
exceeded theirs, under Pharao in Egypt: and consequently, the deliverance of
the people from that of yours, must needs (being as it is both more spiritual
and general, then that of theirs was) much exceed yt of theirs. But that
therefore, it is as necessary that we should anew work miracles, to confirm
our vocation, to do this; as it was for Moses to confirm his calling, to do
the other thereby: therein you are both deceived and seek also to deceive
others. For Moses by God was showed, that he should so confirm his, and so are
not we that we shall or ought so to confirm ours, and his calling thereunto was
not only extraordinary, whereas ours in great part at least (as I have showed)
has been to this ordinary, but also the thing it self and the means to bring
it to pass, both in the eyes of Pharao and al others, were strange and
miraculous, whereas in this our case in delyuering me^ from your antichristian
servitude, and bringing the^ to the liberty and freedom purchased for the^, by
the blood of Christ, by the preaching of ye word of God sincerely, and
ministering his sacraments accordingly, both are wo^ted and ordinary. For what
is more ordinary with God, then to bring me^ from error to truth, and yt by
these means in his church? The thing yt Moses was sent to do was a new and
strange thing: for a man of his quality without force of war and weapons to
deliver so great and gainful a people out of ye hands of such an hard hearted
tyra^t, it is wonderful, and therefore it was likewise necessary, that ye means
that he should effect that by, especially should be miracles. Finally there was
no certainer way for Moses, having to deal with such an one as he had, the^ to
approve his calling by miracles, whereas ours in this, is far more
substa^tiallie justified by the scriptures, from whence our doctrine has
warrant, yt has wrought this effect, then it could have by miracles. For as
when the law was first published with al ye ceremonies thereof, it was needful,
because the^ it was new, that Moses credit ye publisher thereof, and ye law it
self, should be confirmed by miracle, but when in ye reign of Josiah, Hilkiah
ye priest found ye book of the law, wc had lien hid before a long time, and so
did but revive or renew the same law, that was before sufficiently confirmed by
miracles, he wrought no miracles, neither was there any called for, or looked
for at his hands, for it was needles. Eue^ so, when the ceasing of the
ceremonial service of the law was to end, and the new priesthood of Christ to
come in place thereof, and so withal that then first it should be notified both
to Jew and gentile who was and is the very person of the Messiah, and what new
government and sacraments he would have in his house, it was necessary that
miracles should be wrought, to confirm the ministry of the^, yt should teach
these new and strange things first unto the world: but now these things having
been already then sufficiently confirmed by miracles, we coming in these later
days of the world, and not taking upon us, to preach any other doctrine then
the former, and so only renewing and reviving the knowledge of that, which by
the ignorance and wickedness of former times, had lain in great part hid, no
more at our hands ought miracles to be looked for. Indeed if it could be
proved but once, that we labor to set abroach a new doctrine (as you often in
words charge us) that never was before sufficiently confirmed by miracles, or
if the manner that we used to revive it by, were any other, but the ancient
ordinary way that God has always allowed in his Church, there were yet some
color of reason, why they should be thus called for at our hands. But seeing
we stand upon that point, and have always done, that our religion is the very
same, and no other that Christ and his Apostles taught, which by them in their
times was confirmed by miracles, and the manner of our dealing to spread the
same again, is but the ordinary ministry of the word and sacraments, by
them left for the same purpose unto the church, there is no reason at all, in
matching us, thus as you do, with Moses, and in requiring miracles of us, as
of him. And until you can prove by the scriptures, that the doctrine that we
preach is false, which you never shall be able to do, the three places which
you cite out of Jeremy 14.27. and 29. uttered by him, to admonish the people
in his time, to take heed of suffering of themselves to be seduced, with the
false and lying Prophets, that were in those days, make nothing at all against
us, nor yet appertain to the matter in hand: which was to prove, that seeing
we work no miracles, therefore our commission cannot be good, in taking upon
us to reform you. For in these places (eue^ by the words as they are set down
by your self) it most evidently appears, that he warned the people to take
heed only of such Prophets, as prophesied falsely in the name of God, having
no vocation from him, and laboring to seduce the people by false visions,
naughty diuinations, southsayings and their own dreams: whereas we have
ordinary vocation from God preach nothing but truth warranted by his word, and
never use, but always abhor the use, of all these means, that they used to
seduce the people by. But herein most certain it is, that the Lord most
plainly forewarneth his people of such as you be. For you be they indeed,
that were never sent of Christ, but of Antichrist, and that preach false
doctrine, as does appear not only by the dissenting, but by the contrariety
of your doctrine, in a number of points from the undoubted word of God (as I
have noted in sundry places in this my answer to you) and then whom never any
false Prophets in the world, more relied upon false visions, diuinations,
southsayings and fond dreams; for indeed they are the best and most usual
pillars, and grounds of your Popish doctrine. For what is more common with you,
then to the end these may have place, to complain, and by long rhetorical
discourses, to make what show you can, of the obscurity, insufficiency and
uncertainty of the word written; that so with some color, you may show the
trial of your doctrine, by that touchstone, and all because, in your own
consciences you know, that it cannot be justified thereby. And then, when thus
you have satisfied your selves in weakening, what you may, the credit of the
scriptures, to prepare a way for your selves to fly from them: then you break
out into commendation of the word unwritten, traditions, and lively practice of
the church, that so by that window, you may thrust in and out to the Church,
whatsoever pleases you, be it never so fond a vision, divination or dream of
your own drowsy heads. But yet once again, for lack of miracles howsoever
the case stand, whither we be sent of God or no, for your refusing to yield
unto us, you think you may plead simplicity, and ignorance, for your excuse,
as Abimelech did Genesis 20. especially (you say) seeing you are willed not to
believe every spirit, and seeing you read, that the Angel of darkness, will
sometime tra^sforme himself into the shape of an Angel of light etc. But
withal, you must remember, that you are willed to search the scriptures John
5. and so, to try the spirits, whither they be of God or no 1. Ioh. 4. For
they are able to make the man of God wise to salvation, and thoroughly to furnish
him, to all good works. 2. Tim. 3. which if you did as you ought, thereby you
shall be driven to perceive, that not only our calling is of God, but that also
we teach the truth according to the same, and that therefore, notwithstanding
we work no miracles; yet your ignorance cannot be simple ignorance, as
Abimelechs was, but either wilful, or of an idle peevish negligence, and
therefore such as cannot excuse you, in refusing to believe us. And as it is
written, that satan will so transform himself, as you write, and that we
should take heed what way we take, for there is a way that seems good, and
yet leads to destruction: so you must remember that still, the due
consideration of the written word, is the means to preserve us from the danger
of both. For thereby Christ has taught us to withstand him Mat. 4. even when
he would seem to fortify his temptations with the word written it self; and
whereby else shall a young man learn, to frame his ways aright, but by taking
heed thereunto according to the same. Psalm 119. you must also remember, that
it is written, Woe to him that calls good evil, Esa. 5. and strive to enter in
at the streite gate Luk, 13. All this notwithstanding, in your opinion we are
like to a false merchant, pretending to be the Princes servant, in his masters
name dema^ding money of his debtters, having neither his hand nor seal to
warrant his dema^d: and all this you say, and would persuade to be true,
because we work no miracles, as the Apostles did. I deny your argument, for we
have our Lord and masters hand and seal in his written word, in that thereby our
doctrine is taught, and as it appears, thereby is sealed both by miracles and with
the precious blood of our lord and savior: yea but say you, if ye be the
Apostles successors, in preaching this doctrine, why do ye not confirm your
doctrine with signs and wonders, and say with the Apostle Paul 2. Corinthians. 12.
the signs of our Apostleship have been accomplished amongst you, with signs
and miracles? Hereunto I answer, that then it was necessary for them so to
do, and yet now it is not likewise for us, because then for the newness and
strangenes of diverse things incident to their ministry, miracles for the
first confirmation thereof, for a time were necessary, whereas now, we taking
upon us only to preach the same doctrine, as we do, it being then thereby
sufficiently confirmed, it is needles now to confirm it again thereby.

The XVIII. Chapter.
YOu And so we may still, for any reason that you do show to the contrary.
do answer us, as the Jews were answered by Christ, when they did demand him
to show some miracles. Mat. 12.
The generation adulterous and perverse does demand signs, but no sign
shall be given them etc. But this comparison cannot be applied unto us, for we
are not so hard of belief as the Jews, nor you such faithful messengers of
God, as Christ was, of whom the Jews did demand some signs of obstinate
hatred, after they had seen so many lame healed, so many blind receive
their sight, so many deaf hear, and so many dispossessed that had spirits:
but as for you, The power of our commission has stretched so far, as to the
hearts grief of al your Synagogue, your Romish Babylon is so fallen, that ye
eue^ despair of ever recovering the glorious pomp, of your Babylonish harlot
again.
we have seen your commission not to have extended so far, as to restore a
fly to life again, or to heal a lame goose, although that greater matters
are required to confirm so strange and so new a reformed Gospel. These words
do make you mad, crying out and preaching in every place, that your church
ought We say and preach thus, and we are well able to stand to it.
not to be called new, but rather, that it is old and Apostolical, and that
your doctrine is the very same, that S. Peter and S. Paul did preach. And to
draw the simple people to believe that, that you say, you do declare your
faith, saying that you do believe, and do preach, that there is one God in
Trinity of persons, and the second, which is our savior became man from the
womb of the virgin, and that he suffered and did rise again, and to be
brief, you show, that you have profited in your Religion, for you have been
but forty years (which is the time since it began) in learning the great
creed, and the Pater noster, the which you could not learn in a thousand and
five hundred of ours. But in all this you say nothing to the purpose: for we
do not dema^de of you, whether you can well your Catechism, If we had had no
better catechisers then you, we should never aright have understood, either
Creed, the Lords prayer, or the commandments.
the which you having learned of us, you teach to others. And as Sampson said:
Iud. 15. If you had not labored with my cow, ye would never have hit my
riddle. That is to say, that if that our Church had not nursed or taught you,
which are her rebellious children, you would have known nothing: for it is of
our Church, that you have learned the principles of your faith. Howsoever these
had t^^ir bringing up and maintenance for a time amongst you, they had their
learning and true knowledge no more from you, then Paul had of the Pharisees.
She is the Cow that has nourished Calvin in a Canonrie of Noyon, and
Theodore de Beza in the Priorie of Louinnam hard by Paris: and consequently
all the other ministers, which have learned all that they know, at the convent
of S. Francis, S. Dominick, S. Augustine, and of S. Bennet, where ye were
nourished spirituallie, as touching your doctrine: and temporallie, as touching
the mainteining of your study, at the charge of that church, against the which
ye do now so strive, These and others have sought to be thankful to you for
these things, as Paul sought to be thankful for the like, to the Pharisees and
Jews, in seeking their reformation and conversion.
as the camels, which sometime reward their masters for their good keeping with
yerking and biting: so that color it how you list, ye cannot deny, but that ye
set forth new devises. For although it is so, that your heresies (which to
please the ears of the unlearned, ye call the reformed Gospel and pure word
of God) have been in times past, This is but your spiteful vain of popish
railing, without either truth, honesty or reason.
yet they were buried in the very depth of hell, and you have raised them
again, cloked with new colors. But although it were so, that your doctrine
were not new, but very old, If either our office or errand were
extraordinary, you say somewhat, but both being ordidinary, there is no like
reason, that miracles should be wrought by us as by them.
yet ought not you to be more privileged then Moses and the Prophets, whose
simple and plain words the world would not believe, although they preached no
new doctrine, no more then you say that you do. Moses did show many miracles
in Egypt, and why? was the principal cause to deliver the children of Israel
out of the captivity of Pharao? No surely: for to what purpose, I pray you,
should God show such great power and might against a simple worm of earth? Is
it like to be true, that he should move the whole heavens with such great
darkness, i Exodus 19.
to send so many notable plagues, to bring him to yield, which had confessed
his wickedness, for the torment that he suffered with the flies, the frogs,
and Grasshoppers? Surely no, he himself does show the cause, it is to the
end, that my name be known over all the earth: that is to say, that men
should know, that he is God. If we come to the Apostles, we shall find
likewise, that their doctrine was not new: for when they began to preach unto
the gentiles and Idolaters, For the 9.
they did not at the first preach Jesus Christ, but they did seek to blot out
of the minds of the simple people, the foolish opinion that they had in the
multitude of Gods, and to teach them, that there was but one God, who had
created the heaven and earth, who sends rain in time of need, and all
things else that are required for the sustena^ce of man. This he preached but
this was not al, and therefore he preaching somewhat that was new, both to Jew
and Gentile, namely, that Jesus was the Christ: therefore in that respect he
and his fellows had need to confirm their doctrine, by signs and wonders.
This is the doctrine that S. Paul did preach, as we read in the Act. 14.
Acts. This doctrine was not new among men, although it were so, that they were
Painims: And therefore you bestow much needelesse cost, to prove this point, no
new doctrine, touching the unity of the Godheade, and the verity thereof.
for not only in Moses law, nor in the law of Grace, but even by the law of
Nature, God has been known, even of those which were not of the family of
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, unto whom the promise of the incarnation of Christ
was made. Of this does Abimilech the King of Gerar bear witness, who did
excuse himself before God, for the wife of Abraham: he could never have
known, how to talk thus with God, if he had not known him. Genesis 20.
Besides this, he made Abraham to swear by the invocation of the said God,
that neither he, nor his heirs should suffer any damage by his posterity.
Genesis 24.
Bathuel did likewise know God, when he confessed, that he was the author of
the marriage of his daughter with Abraham's son: even so Abimilech the king of
the Palestines, and Phicol and Ochosath said unto Isaac: We hear that God is
with thee, and therefore we are come to make alliance together. m Judge. 2.
Adonibezeth, although he were a Gentile, did not he confess one God, Judge.
the first you would say.
when he said, that he had given him the selfsame punishment, that he had
given the.70. kings? Job and al his friends, although they were Gentiles, have
avouched one God to be the Creator of heaven and earth, even as well as the
Israelites, as it does appear by the discourse of the said Job. If we read
the histories of the Paynims, we shall find, that they bear witness of one God
among themselves. Diogenes Laertius, ^ the lives of the Philosophers, does
write, that the Emperor Adrian did demand of a Philosopher celled Secundus,
what God was? He answered: God is an immortal spirit, incomprehensible,
containing all the world, a light, and a sovereign goodness. True it is, that
this Secundus was bolder to speak of God, then another Philosopher called
Simonides; of whom Tullie does write in his first book De natura deorum, unto
whom, when the tyrant Hiero did demand of him, what God was, and that he had
given him diverse days of respuit to answer him, at the last he said, that he
did acknowledge in him an infinite of al things. Cicero himself in the first
question of his Tusculanes, does govern and give the being to all things. And
in diverse places of that work he does well express, that he knew well, that
there was one God, and that the Gods that the Gentiles did worship, were but
mortal men. And in the said book he says, that we know God by his works,
in the which he does not much differ from David, saying: Psalm. 18.
That the heavens declare the glory of God, and the firmament does anounce his
works. And in the 40. Chapter of Esaias, when God did talk with the Gentiles,
he did call his works to bear witness of his greatness. Lift up your eyes (says
he) and behold who has made this. And the Sap. 13:
Sage does say, that men through their vanity have not known God by his
works. And Romans 1.
Saint Paul does absolutely condemn them, saying, that they can procure no
excuse of ignorance, for the invisible things (such as is the divinity of God)
may be known by the visible things. And therefore they are inexcusable,
having hidden the truth of God to injustice: for after that they have known
him, they have not given him that thanks and honor, that they should have
done, but they have been deceived through their own subtilitie, and making a
profession of knowledge, they have been found foolish and ignorant. S.
Augustine. 8. lib. de Ciu. dei. cap. 24. does reckon Mercurius, called Hermes
Trimegistus, among these, forasmuch as he did continue in his own error,
although he knew by that (that one may see in his own writings) that his
auncetours did err greatly in the making and worshipping of so many Gods.

The XVIII. Chapter.
Indeed even as you suppose, in this case, we further answer you, as the
Jews were answered by Christ, telling you that you are an adulterous and
perverse generation, in thus demanding signs to confirm a doctrine, already
of ancient time sufficiently confirmed. But this answer (you say) cannot be
justly made to you, because neither we are faithful messengers from God as
Christ was, nor you so hard hearted as these Jews were. Truth it is, we dare
not compare in faithfulness with Christ, for such comparison were odious, but
with S. Paul we protest, that in serving the God of our fathers, according to
that Religion which you count heresy, believing all that is written in the law
and the Prophets, we have always endeavored to keep a good conscience both
before God and man Act. 24. and as for you, we see no cause to the contrary,
but that you may both for malice against the truth, and hard hartednes, be
compared with the Jews. For though we work no miracles, and they then had
seen Christ to work many, yet our doctrine being the same that he taught and
no other (as we are always ready and willing to prove it to be by the
scriptures) it has been confirmed not only by all the miracles that then
Christ had wrought, but also by all them that since were wrought by him or his
Apostles, to confirm the same: and therefore you yet refusing to believe it,
show as great hardness of heart, as they did and rather more. Indeed if we took
upon us, either any callings not warra^ted by the Lord in his word, or to
preach any doctrine which we could not warrant by the canonical scriptures,
you might with some reason call for some miracles of us: but seeing you ca^
prove neither of these against us, you may with more reason give over this
objection, then to pursue it any further. Indeed we are not ashamed to
confess, that these are two principal reasons, which are here remembered by
you, whereby we prove our Religion to be the true and ancient Catholic faith,
taught by the Apostles, and ever since continued in Christ's true Church:
namely first, for that by the Canonical scriptures, we can prove it to be the
same that they preached, seeing it cannot be denied, but their preaching and
writing agreed; and secondly, because our Religion in all points agrees with
the ancient grounds of the Catechism, the ten co^mandeme^ts, the articles of
the faith, the Lords prayer etc. And for these causes indeed, we most
confidently say and aduouch, that you do us extreme wrong, the truth and
soundnes of these two reasons notwithstanding, either to call our Church or
Religion new, or thus to call for miracles to confirm it now, as though it had
never been confirmed thereby before. But in all this, with you we say nothing
to the purpose: yet with the indifferent Reader (I hope) it is to good and
great purpose, seeing hereby we labor to prove, that our church and Religion
is not new, and but of 40. years continuance, as here most untruly you charge
it: but old and ancient, because it agrees in every point with the principles
of the ancient Christian Catechism. All you say to confute this argument of
ours, is, that we have learned our Catechism of you, and otherwise we should
not or could not have come by it. Whereunto I answer, that if we had had no
better Catechisers then you, we had yet been but badly Catechized: and this
further you may be sure of, your credit was by your long and manifold lewd
dealing so cracked with us, if we had not found these parts of the Catechism,
either flatly expressed or sufficiently confirmed, and grounded in the
Canonical scriptures, upon your credit we had not received them: besides, as I
have plentifully showed in the 4. Chapter, we have had in all ages, from Christ
down to our own, very many of our own Religion, that have continued, and
from hand to hand delivered unto us, these parts of the Catechism, more
soundly and faithfully then you have done, so that, if you had never been, we
should far better and sooner have learned these things. But in the most wise
providence of God, these were in some sort also continued amongst you, that so
you might be the more without excuse, in that, notwithstanding the light that
migh have shined unto you thereby, you yet chused rather to walk in gross and
palpable darkness, then in the light thereof. And therefore satan the Prince
of darkness, in your Synagogues, through the help of his vicar general your
Pope, and his Chaplains, never ceased until by one blind and hellish
persuasion or other (whatsoever Paul had taught to the contrary 1 Corint. 14.)
he brought to pass, not only, that all your Lyturgie and service should be
in Latin, and rather lying legends permitted to be read, in the Churches
publicly in the mother tongue, then the Scriptures of God: but also that these
portions of the Catechism should, either not be learned at all, or else only
in the Latin and unknown tongue, which he knew was all one in effect.
Otherwise then thus, by your good wills (how little soever we had understood
the latin tongue) we should not, nor could not be suffered to learn them,
and therefore this learning being altogether without edification, neither is
there any cause why you should brag yt we have learned our Catechismes of you,
nor why we should account our selves any thing in your debte for the same.
Further to make it yet more appear, how little beholden we are to you, for
teaching us the Catechism, let us but a little consider even your most
diligent Catechizing of men in these three parts thereof, here named by you,
the ten commandments, the creed, and the Lords prayer. First, concerning the
ten commandments, in steed of one God, which there we are commanded to have,
you in teaching us to worship Saints, Angels, your breaden God, and your
Pope, as you do, have taught us to worship so many more Gods then one; and
secondly, yt your images and idols might stand to the enritching of your
clergy with the idolatrous offerings unto the^, it was and is a common trick with
you, in setting down the commandments in your Catechismes and elsewhere, to
leave the second commandment quite out, which is directly both against the
making and worshipping of them, and yet least you should of every one be spied,
in finding them but 9. you divide the tenth into two. And as for the other 2.
commandments of the first table, by your ordinary and most common practice,
the people were taught (whatsoever is there to the contrary) that it very well
becomes them of your school, usually to swear by a number of things that
are no Gods, and to season all their common talk, with oaths of all sorts:
and to turn the day which should be kept holy to the Lord, to a day of the
greatest vanity and impiety of all the days of the week. And to proceed to
the second table, never did the Jews more make the 5. commandment of none
effect, for love of their Corban, then you have done to maintain your infinite
orders of monks, friars and nuns, in all contempt and neglect of duty to their
parents, if once you could entise them into those cloisters. How precious
soever blood be, yet so small a matter has it been with you, that your
Synagogue is drunk with the blood of Gods saints, and every varlet is not only
easily dispensed withal with you, but also often much commended if he can,
though never so traitorously embrue his hands, for the furtherance of your
kingdom in the blood of subject or Prince, brother, or of who^ soever else.
And as for adultery or fornication, yea for sins against nature not to be
named, your great Catechisers never have seemed to make reckoning of; in that
notwithstanding they know, that these have followed in such infinite measure
upon their enforced single life, in every corner, that ye stench thereof has
long ago reached up unto heaven to pull down Gods fearce vengeance against you,
yet rather then they would let go this trick of hypocrisy, they are contented
that this ^ench increase still. Your infinite and open sacriledges, in building
and founding your cloisters and Prelacies, in sp^^^ing the several parishes of
their ordinary maintenance for their ministers, and other your innumerable and
insatiable pillings and polings of Gods Church: your decree and practice in not
keeping any faith with those whom you count heretics, and your ordinary
doctrine, that bare concupiscence, ^s no sin, show, what Catechisers you are
for the rest. And whereas in the creed, we be taught indeed to believe only
in the Trinity, in that you usually teach us to trust, yea in the matter of
salvation, to a number of things besides, and to pray unto saints and Angels,
it being plainly taught us in the word that beside God, there is not savior
Esa. 43. and that Christ's name is the only name of salvation Act. 4. and that
none are to be called upon, in whom we believe, not) Romans 10. you teach us to
believe in many things and persons besides the Trinity, and so to be
apostataes from our creed and form of baptism. And besides, whiles you teach
us this doctrine of invocation of saints and Angels, contrary both to the
beginning and end of the Lords prayer: you also teach us to pray unto them, to
who^ we may neither begin nor end our prayer, as thereby we are taught. And
therefore you dealing with us in these points and diverse others, being so
gross as it is, and was (if we had had no better warrant to receive these
parts of the Catechism, then your word) we should have had small courage, to
have received them as from you. But Calvin, Beza, and other of our famous
ministers in the teeth, with having their education and maintenance at their
books first with you, comparing them in that now they set themselves against
your corruptions unto Camels, with reward their masters for their good keeping,
with yerking and biting. Whereas in truth (if you had grace to see it) they
could no way show themselves more thankful unto you for the same; then by
careful and diligent laboring your conversion, and reformation, as they have
done. S. Paul (you know) was brought up at the feet of Gamaliel, a notable
Pharisee, and was himself at the first by profession a Pharisee, and so had
his educatio^ and maintenance at the first, amongst such: what then? will you
resemble him to your yerking Camels, because after, when it pleased God to open
his eyes, and to convert him to Christ, he preached and wrote against the
errors of the Pharisees, and labored their reformation? why should you then
even for imitating of S. Paul, thus unmannerly compare these men, or any other,
whom it shall please God to stir up in like manner to seek your good.

Still you call our Religion new devises, and now further you add, that though
it have been in times past, yet it was buried in the very depth of hell, and
we have raised it up again, and given it new colors. All this cannot make us
ashamed of the Gospel of Christ, which we know to be the power of God to
salvation, to every one that believes, to the Jew first, and also to the
Grecia^: Romans 1.16. For these are but bare words, how spiteful and malicious
soever, and we know that when it was preached by Christ himself, and his
Apostles, it had as hard sentence often given of it, by the superstitious and
blind Scribes and Pharisees; and yet for all that, it mightily prevailed then,
and so does and will now. Yet it is well, yt in some sort now you will
confess, it has been before: for very confide^tly before in your 4. chapter
you set down, that none of us ca^ deny, but ye Luther 1517. began it first:
but as you did well in this, and spoke truly, so in adding, that it was yet
buried etc. you speak not only maliciously and blasphemously, as one day
(though I fear to late) you shall be driven to see; but also untruly. For you
cannot be ignorant, but as it was before Luthers time professed and taught by
Petrus Valdus, John Wickliffe, and John Hus; so therein they had their
followers, in Bohemia, Calabria, Angronia and diverse other places, and that in
great numbers even unto Luthers time, and long after. And as for colors, we
use none to countenance this truth, but ye native and natural colors, which
ye scriptures allow it: for we think it most sincerely preached, when it is
most simply set forth only in these colors: other colors we leave to you, to
deck up the garish whore of Babylon withal. At last (so earnest a procter, or
crier are you for miracles) yt you are contented to join with us upon this
point, yt though our doctrine were not new, but very old, yet we must and ought
to confirm it by miracles, And this you labor to prove, because ye doctrine
that Moses and the Apostles were sent to preach, was not new, but old, and yet
they were furnished with power to work miracles, to confirm that old and
ancient doctrine. For Moses wrought his miracles (you say) especially to this
end, ye Gods name might be known over all ye earth, that is to say, yt men
should know, yt he is God: and the Apostles (as you say) at their first
preaching, preached not Jesus Christ unto ye Ge^tils, but that there was but
one God: which by a number of testimonies you labor to prove was no new
doctrine to the heathen and Painims; but a thing, which by the light of nature
left in them, and by the view of Gods works, many of them atteined unto, and
all might in such sort, as that they are without excuse, for that they
worshipped not God, as God. This is (I confess) directly to the matter, and
some show these things carry (I grant) of proof of that, which you took in
hand thereby to prove. But if we examine well those things, and weigh the
weight of this argument, we shall find small, or rather no force at all
therein, to prove indeed the thing intended thereby. For though God say Exodus
9. not 19. (as your quotation is) that for this cause he had set Pharaoh up,
to show his power in him, and to declare his name throughout the whole world
(as in working of all miracles at all times, that is an especial end that the
Lord has.) And though that be no new doctrine, that he is God, and but one,
and that both Moses and the Apostles taught this: yet this proves not, but
that otherwise both Moses and they had new and strange matters given them in
commission, for confirmation and effecting whereof, it was necessary for them
to work miracles. For Moses especially was called, and appointed by God (as it
appears Exodus 3.4. and 5. Chapters) to this end, to signify unto Pharaoh,
that it was the pleasure of God, that he should dismiss his people. Which
because the Lord had purposed (notwithstanding the hard heart of Pharaoh) to
bring to pass, therefore Moses was by his direction to work the miracles, he
wrought. So that the next end of working of them, was to confirm this his
new and strange message to Pharaoh, and to cause it to take place, though
therein the Lord had another further end, namely thereby to get himself a
name for ever. So in like manner, though the Apostles preached the God that made
heaven and earth, to be the only true God (as it appears they did, Act. 14.
and 17.) which was no new doctrine indeed in it self considered, yet it
appears in the same places, that it was new there. For in the one place,
they worshipped Jupiter and Mercury for Gods; and in the other, an unknown
God. And besides it is evident, that not only their office was extraordinary,
in that immediately they had their calling from God, and their charge without
limitation: but also yt within ye compass of their commission they had to do
many new and strange things; namely, to call the Gentiles to ye fellowship of
the Church, to preach the abrogation of Moses ceremonies, to administer new
sacraments, to ordeine new officers in the Church, as Evangelists, pastors,
and doctors, and especially, to preach Jesus Christ to be the person of the
Messiah, god and man, the only and sole Savior of the world: for which things
sake, it was needful for them to work miracles, howsoever it was needeles in
respect of the other old doctrine concerning the one true God. And therefore to
make it appear, that their miracles were wrought especially for ye
confirmation of this point, that Jesus was the Christ, and the person of the
Messiah, always they work their miracles in his name, whereas we do not
preach some one point of old doctrine only, but altogether from point to
point our doctrine is old, and has been sufficiently by Christ and his
Apostles already confirmed by miracles: neither have we any new, but the old
ordinary offices of pastors and doctors to publish it: and indeed, we take
upon us no new or strange thing, but labor as nigh, as possibly we can, to
conform our selves every way to the pattern showed us of ancient time, by
Christ and his Apostles. Wherefore, unless as you have showed, that Moses and
the Apostles taught this one old lesson, that there is but one God, and yt he
is he yt made heaven and earth: so ye could have showed also yt they wrought al
their miracles to confirm that, and that otherwise besides yt they had no new
and strange things to do and teach, for confirmation whereof, miracles were
needeful, and therefore done by the^, this yt you say of the^ is nothing to
bind us to work miracles, doing nothing, or teaching nothing otherwise then
was done and taught 1500. years ago and more, by Christ and his Apostles: and
so you might have spared all that you have said, or can say, to prove, that
this is an old, and no new doctrine, that there is a God, and that he is but
one.

The XIX. Chapter.
LActantius Firmianus in his book of his divine institutions. cap. 5. vvriting
against the Gentiles, does prove, that there is but one God, and he does
allege as witnesses, all the old learned Philosophers, such as Thales
Milesius, Pythagoras, Anaxagoras, Cleanthus, Anaximeus, Crysippus, Heno, Plato,
Aristotle, Seneca, and others. Octauius likewise, a Christian Orator,
disputing against Cecilius, as the^ a Gentle, does allege likewise, to
confound these old Philosophers, and he does add more, Xenophon, Spensippus,
Demaritus, Strato, Theophrastus and many more. a Act. 12.
S. Paul likewise, preaching to the Athenians, does protest, Act. 17. you
should have said.
that he does teach them no new thing, but rather him whom they did worship,
and did not know. By the which it is plainly to be seen, that the Apostles
did not announce unto the people any new law, for it was very old, and
notwithstanding, they did confirm it with miracles. And if you say, that
although those learned Philosophers had aknowledge of God, as it does appear
by their works: yet there is found in them no mention of Jesus Christ, and
therefore, that it was necessary to approve that doctrine with signs and
miracles. But contrariwise, that you in your new reformed Gospel, do preach
the old Apostolical law, I do answer you to this, that the 9. Sybilles
Though it was foreseen that such a one should come, yet that Jesus the son of
Mary was he, was new, and needed such confirmation by miracles.
did speak of his coming and birth, even as plainly as any of the
Prophets: and amongst other Sybilla Erithrea did as fully Prophecy of the
coming of our Savior to judge the quick and the dead, as any other Prophet;
at S Augustine does testify. There is nothing once sounding that way. In other
places I grant he speaks hereof, but he no where th^s matcheth them with the
Prophets.
Lib. 1. de ciui. dei. cap. 23. Likewise of his death and passion, and of the
miracles he should do before his death. The Oracles of the false Gods have
likewise declared unto the Gentiles the coming of Christ, as Lactantius
Firmianus does write, Li^. 1. cap. 15.
li. 4. cap. 15. in his book of the divine institutions. Nicephorus in like
manner does write how Augustus Caesar sacrifising to the God Apollo Pithius in
his temple could get no other but a very brief answer, then Caesar did
demand why he could not make him then as fully answer as he did at other
times, Apollo was constrained to say the truth, the which was, that a young
Hebrewe child borne of late, did command him to retire himself into his
hell, You text and your margent agree ^o^y our margent is right and the other
wrong.
unto whom he was forced to yield obediently, forasmuch as he was God, and
governor of the other Gods, and therefore that he did counsel the said Caesar
quietly to retire himself, and to make no more ado: the verses are these. Me
puer Hebraeus, diuos deus ipse gubernans,
Cedere sede ^ubet, tristemque redire sub orcum:
Aris ergo dehinc tacitus abscedito nostris.


The XIX. Chapter.
YOur proofs in this Chapter, out of Lactantius and Octauius, that the
doctrine of one God is old and ancient, in that they induce the old learned
Philosophers as witnesses thereof: and that which you allege to the same
end, spoken by S. Paul Act. 17. and not (as your quotation is) Act. 12. might
well enough have been omitted. For as it is a thing not in question, so also
(as you may perceive, by that which I have said in mine answer to your former
Chapter) it proves not the thing you intend: for that both Moses and the
Apostles had other matters in their commission, that were new and strange, for
confirmation whereof they wrought their miracles, and not for this purpose
only. But foreseeing, that we would in some part answer (as I have showed)
that the doctrine of Jesus to be the person of the Messiah, yet was new, in
respect whereof it was necessary for them, to approve their doctrine by
miracles: you would prove, that that was not new neither, and so your meaning
is, yt the oldnes of our doctrine cannot prove miracles to be unnecessary. But
let us hear, how you prove this. In this Chapter you prove it, by the
testimony of the nine Sibils, especially of Sibilla Erithrea, the rather for
Augustines testimony of her, in his 1. book of the city of God, c. 23. though
indeed there be no mention at al of her in that place: who (you say) did
speak as plainly and fully of his coming, birth, miracles, death, and
coming to judgment, as any of the Prophets: out of Lactantius 1. book, and
15. c. of divine institutions: and out of Nicephorus, by the oracle yt Apollo
gave of him to the gentiles, and namely to Augustus Caesar: which profes though
they were granted to be of sufficient force, to prove that the gentiles had
thereby some knowledge of the coming, manner of coming, and office of such a
Messiah, yet they prove not, but that it was notwithstanding a thing new and
not understood to most of the^: neither do they at all prove, but that still
the doctrine concerning the particular person of that Messiah, namely that
Jesus the son of the virgin Mary, whom the Jews crucified, was he, and no
other, was a new doctrine both to Jew and gentile, and therefore in that
respect, it was necessary for the Apostles (for all these things) to confirm
that by miracle: whereas now amongst us, that bear any way the name of
Christians, that doctrine is not new, neither any thing else that we preach,
but to those to whom the ancient doctrine taught in the Scriptures is new, and
therefore as yet there remains cause sufficient, why the Apostles should
work miracles, and not we. This also I cannot but tell you of, that howsoever
the Sybilles are reported to have prophesied of Christ, your comparison is
very odious, when you say, they did it as fully, and as plainly as any of
the Prophets: and that you wrong Augustine too too much, in making your Reader
believe, that he either in the place quoted by you, or any where else joins
with you in that malaperte comparison. But these comparisons of yours argue the
profaneness of the spirit, that directs your pens.

The XX. Chapter.
THVS you see that Jesus Christ was anounced among the Gentiles, before the
coming of the Apostles, who notwithstanding this, did not let to set forth the
doctrine that they were sent to preach, with many notable miracles, although
they did not teach but that doctrine that was very ancient. And although that
their doctrine was new and unknown to the Gentiles, yet you cannot allege,
that it was so Yes it is evident that the true doctrine both of his person and
office was new and strange unto the^
unto the Jews: for they being studied and learned in Moses law, they heard
nothing of the Apostles, but had been prophesied by the Prophets. Does not
Saint Paul say, at the beginning of his Epistle to the Romans, that he was
separated to preach the Gospel, the which God promised by the holy
Scriptures. Act. 3.
Saint Peter talking with the Jews, does give them plainly to understand,
that his was no new doctrine, because that he did preach Jesus Christ, of
whom Moses had prophesied long before, saying thus. b Deuteronomy. 16.
God shall raise a Prophet among your brethren, Deuteronomy. 18. you would say.
you shall obey him, as you do me, and he that does refuse it, shall be put to
death. Saint Peter says afterward: All the Prophets that have been from
Samuel unto this time, do announce unto you these days, that is to say, the
doctrine that we do preach. That that the Apostles did preach unto the Jews,
that is to wit, the remission of their sins, by the death and passion of
Christ, it was no new thing: for as Act. 10.
Saint Peter said unto Cornelius, All the Prophets have witnessed, that those
that believe in him, shall obtain remission of their sins: for it had been
so prophesied by Esaias. 53* you should have said.
cap. 55. unto the people, above eight hundredth years, saying that he had
laid upon his son all our iniquities, as it does appear in his book, in
the which he does show himself more an Evangelist then a Prophet: for there
he does write the torments of our Savior, even as if he had been present
at his passion. David likewise does talk of the like, where he does
mention, the extreme affliction of our Redeemer, and of the Gall, and Isope,
and the Vinager. Daniel did not only discrie the death of our Savior, but
therewithal, the very time that he should come. And to be brief, all the
Prophets have announced unto the Jews that, that the Apostles did preach unto
them. Now, if we desire to know why this old doctrine preached, as well to
the Gentiles as to the Jews by the Apostles, was confirmed with many
miracles, which they did in the name of God, who sent them, the cause is
this: the Devil had so obscured and hidden the truth over all nations, that
superstitious Idolatry had taken place in steed of the true service of God,
so that the poor Painims did not put their trust in one God, but in a
multitude of Gods. And in like manner, the true Religion given by God to the
Israelites, had been troubled, and almost clean abolished by the traditions
of the Scribes and Pharisees, in the which they did trust, for the
justification and remission of their sins. And in your own consciences you
cannot but see we have just cause.
The like do you report of us, and of your great courtesy ye are content to
match us with the superstitious Jews, and Idolatrous Paynims, placing your
selves in the degree of the pure Gospellers, and the true children of God,
taking upon you the succession of the Apostles, and calling your congregation,
the true Catholic and Apostolical Church. This sounds notably well, but
seeing that your cause is absolutely to reform the Church, as they did;
preaching the ancient doctrine of God, as they did; and dealing with
superstitious Idolaters, that cleave more to the traditions of men, the^ unto
the pure word of God, as the Jews. Seeing then, that our case is reported unto
the similitude of the Jews, and yours to the Apostles and Prophets, how comes
it to pass, that you do not as they did, seeing that you are sent from one
master? Why Because our doctrine being the very same that theirs was, their
miracles serve sufficiently to confirm it, to take away al excuse from them,
that will not believe it, to the worlds end.
do ye not make your commission appear by signs and miracles seeing that God
has ever done the like heretofore, when he has sent the like Commission to
yours?

The XX. Chapter.
I have showed you my reason in the former Chapter, why you must stay (for all
your premises) from the conclusion, that you begin withal in this. For
howsoever some few of them, the^ heard in some sort, that such a Messiah either
should come or was come, yet the particular person, who that same was, was
first preached by the Angel Gabriel, and secondly by Zachary and Elizabeth his
wife ( Luke. 1.) before he was borne: then by the Angels to the shepherds the
day of his birth, after by Simeon and Anna, John Baptist, the Apostles of
Christ, and the rest, as it follows set down in the story: Luke. 2. etc. But
you say yet further, that though their doctrine concerning Jesus Christ the
Messiah was unknown to the Gentiles, yet it was not so to the Jews, for the
Apostles preached nothing, but that which had warrant from the law and the
prophets, as you prove (I grant) well out of the 1. to the Romans and 10. of the
Acts: conferring those places with the 53. of Esaias (though wrong quoted by you)
and out of the prophecy of Daniel. I grant, they preached nothing, that ought
to have been new unto them, forasmuch as every thing that they preached, had
ground in the old Testament, but yet (as you after seem to confess) it was
grown new not only to the Gentiles, but also to the Jews, in that they were
misse-led in the understanding of the prophecies, that went before of him, both
concerning his person and office, through their ignorance, corrupt glosses, and
interpretations, that by false teachers were made thereof. Insomuch, that when
the Messiah came and executed his office (though indeed all the ancient
prophecies were yea and Amen in him, and most plainly in respect of every
circumstance verified) yet they could not be persuaded, either that he was such
a one in person, or office, as he was, and therefore then once it was necessary
by all other good means and miracles also, to confirm the doctrine concerning
him, which was thoroughly done by Christ and his Apostles in their times. Now
whereas hereupon you would infer, that seeing we match you with the
superstitious Jews, and Idolatrous Painims, and our selves take upon us
Succession to the Apostles, and to the true catholic and Apostolic Church,
and to reform you of your errors, as they did theirs; therefore we preaching
that ancient doctrine of God, and of his Christ, that they did: we now also
should confirm our doctrine and commission by miracles, as they did. Beside
many other, there are two principal things, that let you from this conclusion.
The first is, that howsoever other things were old, y they taught of God, and
the Messiah, yet this was new, who was the very person of the Messiah. Wherein
if they had erred (though otherwise they had rightly understood the general
doctrine both of his person, and office) it had been most dangerous for the^:
and therefore that doctrine especially is urged by the^; as for example you may
see in Peter's sermon to Cornelius, Act. 10. And for the confirmation of that
doctrine, they work al their miracles, not generally in the name of the Messiah,
but particulerly in the name of Jesus Christ of Nazareth, as it appears Act.
3.6. etc. Which thing in respect of you, we have not, for that is a thing
agreed on betwixt us. Another stop to your conclusion is, seeing that doctrine
has been once sufficiently confirmed by miracles, by Christ and his Apostles,
yt we teach, and you have the same doctrine and miracles set down in the new
Testament, whereunto you seem to give credit, as well as we: it is thenceforth
needles for the ministers thereof, howsoever they meet with people, that for
Idolatry and superstitious errors match the Gentiles, and the Jews in the
Apostles times: to use any other proof, the^ from those records of the
scripture, which ought now to be accounted sufficient, and therefore now the
calling for miracles to be out of time. To reason therefore as you do, It was
necessary for the Apostles in their time to work miracles: Ergo it is
necessary also now for us, though our doctrine be the same; is besides and
without reason. And yet for all this, we recant no whit for comparing you to the
superstitious Jews, and Idolatrous heathen. For if either be worse then other,
we think it is like to prove your selves, in that having far better means,
and more knowledge of God, and his Christ, then they had, yet you multiply your
Idolatries and superstitious conceits far beyond them. And even for this, that
notwithstanding your better means to keep you in the ways of God, and your
more knowledge, then they had, when Christ and his Apostles came first unto
them to preach this Gospel; you match them in gross Idolatry, and in
multitude of superstitions, and false opinions; is it, that God, vouchsafing
the better to convert them, to work miracles then; thinks it fit to answer
you now, as the rich glutton was enforced in the like case; ye have Moses and
the Prophets; yea and also the books of the New Testament; and if you will not
believe them, you would not believe, though one should rise from death again;
or what miracle soever else were wrought. But where as you suppose, that the
cause why the Apostles wrought miracles, was the blind Idolatry of the
heathen, and superstitions of the Jews only; and not any newnes of any part of
their doctrine; you are much deceived, as you may perceive by that which I have
said. Again, if you would persuade, that their doctrine was in no point new,
because in the doctrine of one God, and in the doctrine of the Messiah, in some
points it was not, or ought not to have been so, your logic is flender. For
in other points it might be new, as I have told you, and so in respect
thereof, though not of the other, miracles were necessary. But this your
objection of lack of miracles, pleases you so well, that you cannot have done
with it; let us therefore hear, what further you can say, touching this matter.

The XXI. Chapter.
YOu do conjure us by the name of the living God, to receive your Gospel and
pure word of God, or else you do threaten us, that you will shake off the dust
of your feet in testimony against us, because that we will not believe your
words. But in this matter ye do allege a wrong text: for we were very
simple, if we should forsake or remove the foundation of our Church, upon such
an occasion, as I will show by this discourse that does follow. I am sure
that you are not ignorant, how that Luther, after he began to preach his
Gospel was not found barren: for immediately after his beginning, he did
engender another Gospeller, that is to wit, Andrew Coralstadius, and from
thence was produced another called Zuinglius, and of Zuinglius, Oecolampadius.
Then, Thomas Muncerus, considering, that he had no less the gift of the spirit
then the rest, he began to forge a new Gospel of the Anabaptists, with
the which he thought to gratify the Town of Milhouse, who had received
already the Gospel of Luther. But the Senate of that town, being vvearied
already with two many strange Gospels, they advertised Luther you first
Apostle of it. And he wrote to them again, that Thomas Muncerus ought not to
be received, if he could not prove his vocation by some miracle. And if you
demand where I have found this, I say to you, not in the works of some
lying Papist, but in the Commentaries of your dear Historiographer master a
Lib. 8. fol. 4.
Sleydon, who has so good a grace in his writing, and is so moved with the
truth of his spirit, Either you had wondrous ill hap for your quotations, or
else your printer was too bad, for it is lib. 5.
that he does omit nothing in his History, but that, that does go against
himself, and the professors of his religion. I do wish those that do
understand the Latin, to read this answer of Luther in the Commentaries
themselves, and for the rest, I will set it forth, translated, not by me, but
by a minister of your own sect, called Robert Preuost, who dwells in a
segnorie of Berne. According to his translation, the words are And Luther had
reason so to advise them, first because he had no lawful ordinary calling, and
then because the doctrine which he set abroach was contrary to the scriptures,
which is not our case.
these. Luther was of opinion, that the Senate of Milhouse should do very well
and wisely, to demand of Muncer, who had given him commission to teach, and
who had called him unto it. If he say, that it is God, let him demand of
him, to show some sign or miracle to prove his vocation: and if he could not
do it, that they should banishe him: for it is common to God, to declare his
will by some miracle, at any time, when he will have the common custom and
order changed.

These are the words of Luther. We ought to yield that that is right to every
body, and not deprive any man of the praise that he does deserve. And so I
say, all the Catholic Church is bound to give praise and thanks to Luther, for
the memorable good and wise counsel that he has given, for he has taught us,
how we shall expel and overthrow, not only the heresies that he did preach unto
us, but likewise yours, and those of all the rest. For if it be so, that every
time that God will change the ordinary custom (such as ours) to an
extraordinary (such as yours) there ought miracles to be showed by those that
come extraordinarily. By this good and godly advise, we know, that Martin
Luther, nor none of you all, which do come extraordinarily, as he did, do
come from God, but rather from the prince of darkness. Calvin does confirm
this opinion of Luther, as touching the vocation of the ministry: for upon
the third Chapter of Saint Luke, in his harmony, he does say thus, None
ought to attribute unto himself by authority any office, forasmuch as it is
great temeritie: such persons did nothing of them selves, except it were, being
called to it by God. Of this we gather, we ought to enterprise nothing of our
selves: for if that the great Prophets have attended to be called of God, what
are those, that in these days take it upon them of them selves? we ought to
answer, that they are presumptuous fellows. etc. like unto Calvin and his
fellows.

The XXI. Chapter.
IN this Chapter, to your purpose the only thing you bring us, is, the
counsel that Luther gave to the town of Millehouse, for the trial of Muncer
the Anabaptist, which you send us, by your quotation, to seek for, in the 8.
book of Sleidon; and there it is not, but in the 5. but this is your hap
with most of your quotations. His counsel was, that they should will him to
prove his calling to be of God by some miracle; because it is common with God,
to declare his will by some miracle, when he will have the common custom and
order broken. Prove that we either in our doctrine or government of our church
do break the common custom and order taught in the church for these, in the
written word, as Muncer did, and then follow Luthers counsel and spare not. It
evidently appears in that book, that Muncer was a monstrous fantastical
Anabaptist, and that in Luthers judgment he taught not only many absurd
things, contrary to the word: but that also perverting all good order, and
policy of Church, and common weal: he meant nothing more, then force,
theeuerie, and other such villainy: and yet pretended for his defense,
extraordinary calling and revelations; and therefore no marvel, though Luther
gave this counsel, for the sifting of such a wretch. In truth the newnes of
your doctrine considered, in comparison of that taught in the word, and the
strangeness of the order of your Church, from that of Christ's, in the
primative time thereof; lead us rather more justly to follow this counsel of
Luther against you, then any thing in us can truly move you to urge it,
against us. Which if we should do, certainly either should we find you as
void of miracles, as you find us; or at least you would be driven to allege
such monstrous, vain, and lying miracles, as that now I think you your selves
would be ashamed to tell. Indeed the time has been, when you would brag of
the miracles set down in your Legends (amongst which S. Dunstans catching the
Devil by the nose in the shape of a woman, with a pair of tongues, and such
like, good store are reckoned up) and when we were told great wonders of the
blood of Hales, which proved in the end, the blood of a ducke; and of great
miracles done in this place, or that place, by the images of this Saint, and
that: but this was in the night of deep and black darkness of ignorance. For
now that the sun of the Gospel shines abroad, we hear little noise of your
apparitions and visions, and other such antichristian miracles, that there was
so great talk of before. It seems now that either your spirits are coniured
into a dead sleep, or that you have lost your old gift of working miracles.
Belike yet in that you make thus much of this counsel of Luther; when they came
from you so readily, and your Church had such a dexterity, and was so fruitful
in bringing of the^forth; it was because God would have the world to
understand, that indeed you were setting abroach a new doctrine; and a fashion
of Government, which neither agreed with the ancient and customable doctrine of
his Church, nor yet with the old order of the same; and that therefore you
thought it needful by such means, to confirm your commission in so doing.
Wherefore, make as much of this counsel of Luther, as you will, it will prove in
the end to touch you more, then us. You cite also a saying of Calvin in his 3.
Chapter of his Harmony upon Luke, but to what purpose? For who of us ever
either in word or deed contraried that speech or doctrine of his? that is the
thing that we object against you, that of your own heads ye have devised a
number of offices, and orders in your Churches, that God never gave allowance
unto: and besides that you have set up a number of points of doctrine, forged
but in the shop of man's vain brain, not only not agreing to the word written,
but diversely and wonderfully disagreeing. And as for us, we stand upon that
point with you, that we neither take office in hand, without sufficient
calling thereunto from God, nor teach things, that we have not good warrant for
from his written word. In the rest of the Chapter, there is nothing but scoffing
at Luther and Sleydan, joined with malicious slaundering of the one to have
bred, not only Coralstadius, Zuinglius, and Oecolampadius (whereof he needed
not to be ashamed if it were so) but also Muncer the Anabaptist; and the other
to be a partial Cronicler: which are things easy for you to speak, but
impossible for you to prove: and therefore therein until you bring further
proof, you are worthy no further answer. And therefore, as yet for any thing
you have said, you were best follow our counsel, and receive the Gospel which
we preach unto you; least the dust we shake off of our feet against you, prove
a witness against you in earnest, at the day of judgment.

The XXII. Chapter.
ALthough that by the testimony of your own doctors ye are condemned, yet
you do still maintain your ill cause, saying, that ye ought to be received to
preach the Gospel Still herein you flatly belly and slander us.
extraordinarily, If the ordinary way be thus by Pastors and Bishops, then
few or none of your Priests have entered the ordinary way, from whose ordering,
Pastors have been and be usually shut out.
that is to say, without the commission of the Pastors and Bishops, being
those that are sent us by the permission and ordinance of God. And you say, to
maintain your commission extraordinary, that you have the holy scriptures,
which you do allege, This objection you will never be able to answer.
the which alone ought in this behalf to be of more credit, then all the
miracles that ever the Apostles did. For it mate so chance, that by subtle
devises and impostures of the devil, miracles may be falselie counterf^^ted,
but not the scripture which is the touchstone of the truth, as it shall be seen
by experience, when the child of perdition, otherwise called Antichrist shall
come. For he, to confirm his saying, shall show such great signs and
Miracles, that the very elect should be seduced, if it were possible. Now to
answer unto this, which is a notable way to deceive the simple and unlearned,
Nay we take not our cause justified because we allege scriptures, but because
by the rule of right interpreting, we be able to show, that the true sense
thereof is of our side, which heretics cannot do, and therefore we standing
upon this as upon the foundation of our cause, and we being always ready to
yield, unless we can prove we truly allege them, all that you say in
sundry chapters following, to prove that heretics have alleged them is
needelesse and beside the point.
I say, that if the alleging of Scriptures should maintain you, and favor
your cause so much as you do say, our side were driven to hard shifts: for
then we might be blamed before the seat of God, not only for not receiving
your Gospel, but likewise, for refusing the Gospel of diverse heretics, that
have been many hundred years before you were borne: which did al allege
the Scriptures, as it does appear by the three passages written unto the Cap.
6.10. and 12.
Hebrews above mentioned. By the which the Nouatians did pretend, to
verify, that the mercy of God was denied unto him, that did offend after
his Baptism, joined with that that is written in the first book of the Kings.
If man (said the good Helye) does sin against man, he may agree with him
again: but if he come to offend God, who shall he be, that shall pray for
his sin? Did not the Arrians allege Scriptures, to maintain, that Christ
was not God and man? Yes surely, How or which prove you this?
as many places or more then the Catholics. Saint Augustine does write in
his book De haeresibus, ad quod vult deum, That there was in his time a
certain sect of heretics that taught, that for a man to be saved, he ought
to be gelded. And they did allege the nineteenth Chapter of S. Mat. where
Christ does praise the Eunuchs, which have gelded themselves for the kingdom
of heaven. And if a man were disposed to forge another heresy like this, he
might soon find scripture to maintain it, being ill interpreted: for he
does command, that we should pull out our eyes, and to cut off our hands
and feet every time, that through them we are scandalizated: for (says he)
it were better for one to enter blind or lame into the kingdom of heaven,
then to be condemned, having all our members: so that, taking these words as
they are plainly written, we ought to cut the members from our body. It seems
you have been brought up in this trade of misalleadging the Scriptures, you
are so cunning in matching herein wicked heretics.
Besides this, he that would forge an heresy somewhat more pleasant and easy,
one might soon do it: the which is, that for to go to Paradise, we have no
need of hose, shoes or money because that our Savior did so command it to
his Apostles. One may likewise prove by the Gospel, that we have no need of
Magistrates nor other Superiors, forasmuch as our Savior has said, that one
is your Lord and master, namely Christ. Moreover, a man may prove by
scripture, that one ought to retain nothing unto himself, if any other
demand it, forasmuch as it is written, If one demand of you your coat, you
ought not only to give it, but your dublet also: and if one give us a box on
the ear, it is not enough to take it patiently, but we must turn the other
cheek also. And to this heresy, you come marvelous near, in your cap. 34.
Iouinian a great heretic, did teach, that a Christian after his baptism
does no more offend God, yea, that he could not, although he would. Who would
not hate such a blasphemous error as this? yet if the alleging of the
Scriptures ought to suffice, he may be preferred before Master Calvin as more
ancient: for he does allege Saint John in his first Cap. 5.
Epistle, who says: We know, that he that is borne of God, does not
sin, for the generation of God does preserve him, and the ill spirit shall
not touch him. And in the same That is a curled gloss that corrupts the text.
John speaks not of the sacramental regeneration, but ^f effectual
regeneration by the spirit, which always accompanies not the other.
Every man that is borne of God, that is to say, baptized, he does not
sin, for the seed of God does dwell in him, and he cannot sin, for he is
borne of God. Saint Augustine does write in his eighty nine Epist. ad
Hilarium, that the Pelagians and Manichees, among other heresies that they did
maintain, they said, that it was impossible for rich men to enter into
Paradise, until they had sold all their goods, and given them to the poor,
and that all things ought to be common. The which doctrine is easily to be
maintained by the Scripture ill understood: for Mat. 10. and 16.
our Savior does say, that for to be his disciples, we must forsake and
renounce all that we have, in testimony of the which, the first Christians at
Jerusalem did sell all their possessions, and presented the money of them to
the Apostles to give to the poor. And that that is worse, the Adamites did
maintain a greater error then this, and more brutish, the which is, that al
men's wives should be common, and they did call this the true Gospel, and the
pure word of God, alleging for it the first and eight of Genelis, where God
does say: Increase and multiply, and replenish the earth. If you do say,
that this is a foolish opinion, I confess it to be so: but that This is false,
that Church condemns popery, for this heresy, Zisca, Hus and their followers
condemned before you.
very Church which has condemned this heresy of theirs, does likewise
condemn yours. When the devil determined to fight with Christ, he thought he
could no wise aid himself so well, as with the holy scripture; persuading him,
that the best way for him to show himself to be the son of God was, to
break his neck, casting himself down from the pinnacle of the Temple. And
he did allege this text saying, Psalm. 90.
as it is written: That the Angels of God should so preserve him, that he should
not hurt his foot against the stones, following that David said. And if I
should go about to write all the places of Scripture that the heretics have
alleged, to maintain their horrible errors, I think surely, I might make a
bigger book then the Bible.

The XXIII. Chapter.
IF O you are your crafts master, a man may see, in wrong alleging the
Scriptures.
that the son do hate the father, or the father the son: or if the wife
do hate the husband, or the husband the wife, they may take the word of God,
ill understood, to defend their cause: for he does command us, that we shall
hate those that are nearest unto us, as under the pain of not entering into
Paradise, if we do contrary. But this ought to be understood, that we ought
not to prefer the love of any creature, how near soever they be to us, before
the love of God. In like manner, he that will say, that we should not eat of
the blood of those beasts that are smoothered, he may soon allege the
scripture for it, which does say, that at the counsel that the Apostles held
at Jerusalem, being present the holy Ghost, this ordinance was made, as we
read in the. 15. Chapter of the Acts. And if that one should take in hand to
bring all the places of scripture, that the heretics have alleged to maintain
their opinions, I dare boldly say, that he shall find it an endless piece of
work. For among so great a number of false Prophets, there has been very
few, or almost none, but they have sought to maintain their opinions by
Scripture, drawing the places, as it were, by violence, to a depraved and a
corrupt sense, being this the manner of interpreting of the Scriptures, called
at this day the pure word of God, by those that have professed to be as long
as they live, enemies to the truth. You should have said in his first come
and 2 book.
The learned and ancient Doctor Epiphanius, in his first book against
heresies, does allege, as touching this matter, a very familiar example,
saying, that if some good Caruer had made the image of a king, adorned with
many Jewels and precious stones, and that another should come afterward, and
should take the same Jewels and precious stones, and make with them the image
of a Fox or a Dog, and that he should say: behold, here is the Image of a
king, would not every body laugh him to scorn, and say, that he did it in
mockery, or else, that he were mad? Yes surely: for although they be the same
Jewels, and that very stuff, wherewith was made the Image of the king, yet,
because that this other vvorkeman has taken them away, and fashioned them
after another sort, it ought no more to be called the image of a king, but
the picture of a Fox or a Dog. Even thus is it with the holy Scriptures,
which were left us by the Apostles and Prophets, for to paint in rich colors
the Image of the great king of glory: This is even your ow^e dealing with the
scripture up and down, when you would confirm Popery therewith.
but seeing that you take those precious stones from the image of this king,
and do appropriate them unto the Image of a Fox, making them serve to cloak
your heresies vvithal, it ought no more to be called the word of God, nor the
holy Scripture, but the word of men, and false doctrine. And therefore, if you
will have it to bear the first name you must set it in the first estate, that
is to say, This is certain and therefore scripture trust interpret scripture,
and not your Romish spirit.
that it ought to be interpreted by him, that did first indite it. It is not by
the will of man, says S. Peter. Epist. 2. Ca. 1. That the prophecy was
brought, but by the inspiration of the holy Ghost, that holy persons have
spoken etc. I know well, that you attribute the intelligence of the scripture
unto your Sinagogue. This we do not take upon us.
But how shall we believe, that the holy Ghost does dwell more in you, the^ in all the universal Church, which has continued from the passion of Christ until
this time? I pray, do so much as answer me, if you my masters be the lodging
of the holy Ghost, Whither our alleging of the^ agree or not with the holy
Ghost it self speaking in the scriptures, we are contented to let always the
true Church of Christ judge.
where did he make his residence before ye were borne? I know already your
answer, the which is, In the hearts of the faithful. And where were those
faithful? Marie, where the holy Ghost was. Answer thus still, and ye shall be
sure, that ye shall not be ouertake^: for it is as good as to play Handie
dandie, and soye shall accomplish the old Proverb the which says: It is as
far from Dover to Caleis, as from Caleis to Dover. But to the end that all
the world may see, the great hazard of eternal damnation that those run into,
that are so ready to believe every body, thinking that they are assured of
their health, forasmuch as those that seduce them, say, behold, there is the
scripture, it is the pure word of God and the very gospel, I will set forth
some heresies, that have been in times past condemned by the catholic
Church: the which notwithstanding have been This you can never do.
as well, yea and more largely confirmed by Scripture, then you can confirm
any of yours.

The XXIIII. Chapter.
THe Catholic Church continually has faithfully holden, and does hold,
that our Savior Jesus Christ is true God and man, having taken natural flesh
in the womb of the virgin Marie, wholly like unto ours, as touching the
corporal essence, that is to say, excepted only sin, the which body he
did form of the very flesh and substance of his mother, by the operation of
the holy Ghost, who has wrought so notable and excellent a work, that two
contrary or diverse natures are miraculouslie joined and united in one person,
without confusion or conversion of the one substance into the other, but by
conjunction and union of them both, called by the divines, Hipostatique. This
doctrine has ever been received and holden by the Church in equal degree of
truth and reverence, with the rest of the points of religion, which now you
seek to abolish. And notwithstanding this, diverse Ministers and Preachers,
derived from the sacred consistories of Valentinus, Photinus, Manes, Theodorus,
Nestorius, Apollinaris, Eutichus, Macharius, Eutiocheus, besides a great number
of other famous heretics, that I cannot here name, have sought to teach the
contrary, saying, that they were sent from him that sent the Apostles, to
reform the Church, Thus at your pleasur^ you father upon these heretics, to
make them resemble us, that, the contrary whereof, the ancient fathers
attribute unto the^, namely that they shunned trial by the scriptures, that
they accused them of insufficiency and darkness, and so fled to unwritten
traditions, and fond revelations even as you do for all the world.
not by the Traditions of men, which you call Papistical, but by the pure word
of God. For even like you, my masters, did Valentinus and his fellows begin
the reformed Church, taking upon them the correction of all the Magistrates and
Fathers in times past, saying, that they did abuse the people, because that
they taught, that Jesus Christ had taken flesh and blood of the Virgin Marie,
saying, that this was a great error: the which ought to be reformed, and
that the people should believe, that he brought his body from heaven, and that
he caused it to pass through the womb of the Virgin Marie, as the water does
through the channel. This Gospel was very strange, yet the said Valentinus
did not want Scripture, as you have, to confirm it, interpreting it, even as
you do interpret here in France. He did allege for his text the third of
John, where Christ does say: No person is ascended to heaven, but he that
did descend from heaven. And therefore did he maintain, that seeing Christ is
in heaven, and descended from heaven, that he took no flesh of the virgin
Marie. Nestorius another notable heretic, did lincke his Gospel to
Apollinaris opinion in this case, seperating the manhood from God, and saying
that the son of man ought not to be called God: for seeing (said
Apollinaris) that this man is descended from heaven, it does follow, that he
took no flesh of the virgin: and besides this, Christ saiethe Ioh. 6.
I am descended from heaven, not to do my will, but the will of my father.
Here he does not speak, as one that is God for if it were so, he would have
no other well, but the will of his father, and so he does speak like a man.
And he says, that he is descended from heaven: for the which cause, this same
Valentinus did take the conclusion of this Gospel to his advantage: for the
third authority, that is written in the first to the Corinthians, where Saint
Paul says: the first man is of earth earthly, the second is of heaven
heavenly. The which passage or place is as fit to serve Valentinus opinion, as
all the places that you, and all those that hold your opinion, can allege.

The XXV. Chapter.
ANother Minister likewise called Apollinaris followed after these, sent by the
said master, and yet according to his saying, he did preach the pure word of
God, affirming that the Church ought to be reformed, which had believed, that
the two natures were contained in Jesus Christ, and that the true religion was,
to believe, as it is written in the 1 of John, that the word was indeed become
flesh, or converted into flesh: And to confirm this, he did allege the said
place, where S. John does say: And the word was made flesh: and when the
catholics did reply against him, saying that the verb or word took flesh,
and not as touching the conversion of one substance into another: he did
fortify his Gospel with another text, where S. John does write of the marriage
at Canaa, where the water was changed into wine, that is to say, as touching
the very substance of the water which was turned into wine: Even so says he,
that it became at the very Incarnation of Christ, alleging that that we have
said, And the word was made flesh. Arrius, which was the most famous heretic
that ever has been, did pretend to verify another gospel: and his was, that
our Savior Christ had not taken at his incarnation, a perfect soul, another
men have, but that he had only a body, and that his divinity did supply the
absence of his soul. Of this opinion was Apollinaris, Theodorus, Mossnestenus:
and Nestorius came after, and they did blame the Catholic Church, because it
did teach the said union, called, as I have said, Hipostatique, that is to
say, of the two natures in one person. And they did allege for their argument
a very subtle reason, the which was, that God did inhabit within the body of
our savior, as he did within a Temple, that is to say, by grace, and not by
being united together. And therefore, even as it were a great folly, to say
that God is a Temple, that so it is to say, that God is a man. This Gospel
did seem very new, yet did not they want Scripture to maintain it, That is
not because we have not plainer places rightly alleged for proof of our
religion, but that in Gods just judgment, such as you, have eyes and ee not.
and that more plainer, then ever I could see any place, to maintain your
heresies. Christ did say unto the Jews. Joh. 2.
Undo this Temple, and in three days I will build it again. He meant it by
the Temple of his body, says S. John. Then the body of Jesus Christ is the
Temple of God, and God is not his temple. See whether this be not a notable
argument to deceive the simple man, that is not used to read, how the doctors
expound these hard places. And moreover they did allege S. Paul in the first
to the Colloss. where he does say, that the plenitude or fulness of divinity
does dwell in Jesus Christ corporally, they do allege this place greatly to
their purpose, to prove, that God is In him as in: left out I thin e.
a Temple, that is to say, by grace, and not being united. For the third
place, they take the 8. of John, where Christ does say: He that has sent me,
is with me, and he has not left me alone. And therefore Theodorus and his
fellows did conclude, that there was no more union between the divinity and
humanity of our Savior, then there is between God and us. Of the which c 1.
Cor. 5.
S. Paul does speak, where he says: he that is joined to God, Well quoted,
you would have said. 6.
is made one spirit with him.

The XXVI. Chapter.
IT does suffice, that one may see by these fellows, how soon one that is
ill disposed may allege scripture in corrupt sense, to maintain such heresies
as these, the which I will not stay to confute: for (thanks be to God) they
do not reign now, for they have perished and their authors, This is but a
blind Prophets dream.
as you shall and your followers, if ye do not repent in time. And besides
this, our Doctors have fully answered It is well yet that you will confess
thus much.
by textes of Scriptures these old heresies, as you may see in all the ancient
ecclesiastical writers, and confuted them, not only with pithie reasons, but
with the true word of God, and the authority of diverse general councels.
And if I have noted here some part, both of their authors, and of them, to
show, how they did seek to confirm their damnable opinions, I do it, only to
warn the simple people, that they should not so soon give ear to false
Pastors, which have nothing in their mouths but the holy scripture, and the
pure word of God, covering the cups of their poison with the gold and
precious stones, which they have taken from the image of the eternal king, to
paint those subtle Foxes, that will lead them all to damnation. And therefore
in the name of God I do desire those, that are not much used to read the
Scriptures, nor to hear how the Church and the doctors do expound the hard
places, So do we, but not to drive the^ from reading the^, but to show them,
hat they must be read and searc^ed diligently.
to beware, how they read them, for fear of falling into error, taking
only the letter, which many times has a contrary sense to that, that is
outwardly written. For if so many men of great learning and excellent
understanding have found such great rocks in this rough sea, which have many
times overthrown their ships: how dangerous then must it needs be unto
those, that will take it in hand, so doubtful a navigations, having little
skill or none at all. But as for you my masters of the contrary side, you can
sail with all tides and all winds, giving the governance of the ship or the
guiding of the stern, without consideration This is a mere slander.
to all kind of people. We have at this day in France (I will not say in
England) many that have the holy spirit, Interpreters of the scriptures: And
for sooth, what are they? Mary, Pedlers, Cobblers, Tanners, Bankrouts,
Runnegates, and such others: which having no other living, Here the author
bewrays himself rather to have been an English man, then a French. For when
this should be wr^ten there were no Lord Bishops in France to make such, but
papists.
sue to my Lord Bishop, and he makes them ministers, being not one of them,
but has the holy spirit: All this is but slanderous railing and lying, for
we do not, say or think thus: but cry upon Bishop, that they admit no suc
unfit me^, and we call upon such, rather humbly to content them selves with the
places of earners, then to presume, without sufficient knowledge, to be
teachers.
for as soon as they can say, the Lord, and rail upon the Pope, the Bishops,
and all the learned men that have been in times past, Oh, these are great
doctors, no place of scripture to them is hard, all the ancient doctors were
men, and the general councels did err. I know, that you do maintain your
opinion with the saying of e John. 8.
Christ, alleging it as other heretics have done, the which is, That the
heavenly father has hid these high and profound things from the great
Clerks, and has revealed them unto the meek and humble.

This is true, but it ought to be understood, to the humble and meek of
spirit, and not to those which trust so much to their own wits, being
puffed up with arrogant ignorance, that they think to know more in three days
reading, then the doctors could in fifty years study, faming themselves to
be like the Apostles, as if that God, governed by their appetites, did send
every month the feast of Pentecost. Mat. 11. you should have said.


The XXII, XXIII, XXIIII, XXV, and XXVI. Chapter.
NEither our own Doctors, nor any thing else that yet you have said (for all
your great brag) have any force either to disprove that lawfulnes of our
vocation, or to condemn our religion. Neither is it true, that we stand so
much upon our extraordinary calling, as you would insinuate to your reader. For
we tell you, that if you take ordinary calling in your own sense, if there be
any good at al, in that Wickliffe, John Hus, Luther, Bucer, and the rest that
have been the first and foremost in these late days in detecting the errors of
the papacy, and in renewing the light of the gospel, had that kind of calling.
And as for the rest since, they have had a better ordinary calling the^ that,
in that it has been more agreeing to the order of calling by the Apostles and
primative Church. But in that, to express what you mean by our extraordinary
calling (you say) that thereby you mean a calling without commission of the
pastors and bishops etc. I perceive that therefore it is, that you charge many
of our ministers to preach the gospel extraordinarily, because (howsoever
otherwise they had, before they took upon them any dealing in the ministry,
the ordinary calling allowed of in the reformed Churches of Christ, where they
were to exercise the same) they took not first any of your popish orders, at
the hands of some of your popish lord bishops, after your popish manner. In
which sort I grant you, many of our ministers have an extraordinary calling:
but then I say unto you again, that their extraordinary calling (having an eye
to that order that Christ and his Apostles left in this case unto the Church)
is more ordinary, then the ordinary calling that you speak of. And therefore
though their calling of late days here amongst us, has not been according to
your order, and that they have neither been chosen by your pastors, nor had
imposition of hands of your Lord bishops, yet you cannot say truly, that any
of them take upon them extraordinarily, that is, as you expound it, without the
commission of the pastors and bishops to preach the Gospel. Name the man,
time, and place, you cannot when and where, any that is accounted amongst us a
sound preacher of the gospel, has either said, that thus he ought to be
received to preach the gospel, or has attempted so to do. For it is
generally held and received of all the Churches, that profess the gospel, and
so likewise is their uniform practice, that none be suffered to take upon them
to preach the gospel, unless it be known and sufficiently appear, that by
the ordinary calling of some according to the order of the Church, where he is
ordered, he be sufficiently authorished so to do. And well known it is, that
there is no Church that professes the Gospel indeed, but the order thereof is,
that none meddle in the ministry therein, without commission (as it pleases
you to speak) either from some convenient number of pastors, or from some
bishop, or from both, by the order of that church appointed to look to, and to
take care of that business. As for the Anabaptists, a captain whereof you named
in the former Chapter, we know, that in their fantastical spirit, they both
hold and practice, as here you charge us, but therein and therefore we dislike
and condemn them as much as you. And you know we renounce communion with them,
we count them heretics, and therefore sundry of us purposely have writ large
and vehement books against them: you do us therefore great wrong to charge us
with that wc is their fault, and which you cannot prove to be ours. But you will
say, I am sure (for in your former Chap. you seem to derive Mu^cer the
Anabaptist his petigree from Luther) that we may worthily so be charged, for
they are such as spring of and from us. But herein again you offer us as great
wrong, as the servants of the good seeds man that sowed only good seed in his
field, should have done him, if they had said, that the tares that came up
therewith in the same field, had been there sowed by him: because when Christ
his Apostles and faithful ministers had first preached the gospel, there were
found in the same age, springing up with the same, and amongst the professors
thereof, Ebionites, Cerinthians, Nicolaitans, Simonists, and sundry other
fantastical heretics, as Hymeneus, Philetus, Hermogines and Phygetus: was it
any reason therefore that Christ or any of his faithful ministers, or that the
gospel it self should be charged with their fond co^ceits? And yet as absurd
and senseless as this kind of dealing were, it is both here with you often in
this your book, and usual is it with all of your spirit, this now for want of
better matter against us, by this means with the simple people to labor the
discredit and disgrace both of us, our churches, and religion.

But you content not your self with falsely charging us to say, yt we ought to
be received to preach the gospel extraordinarily, but also you lay to our
charge, that we seek still to defend an ill cause, and an extraordinary
commission. This you only say, as your manner is, but neither proof nor shadow
of proof you bring, neither indeed can you. For our cause is the very truth,
and our commission is but that ordinary commission of teaching, and confirming
the same unto men, that Christ has left by his own ordinance to all his
faithful ministers unto the worlds end. And for proof hereof we appeal
indeed to the holy scriptures, which in this case even for the reason by you
alleged, we are not ashamed to confess to be the sound touchstone of
truth, and to be preferred in credit before miracles. Yet you some thing
amplify and add unto our speech, in that you say we affirm, that the
scriptures as they are alleged by us alone, ought to be of more credit then
all the miracles wrought by the Apostles. Well, this our reason, to justify
our cause and commission, you say is a notable way to deceive the simple and
unlearned. I wonder that you were not ashamed and affraied so to write. For you
cannot be ignorant, that to confute error, to prove truth, to exhort to
virtue, and to dehort from vice, Christ and his Apostles, and so from time to
time, the ancient fathers, what adversaries soever they had to deal withal,
used always to fly to this touchstone, and for the most certain concluding
of their purpose, did allege scripture: but your shift will be, that these
alleged the scripture rightly, which you speak not of, and we allege the
scripture corruptly and in a wrong sense, and therefore you would have your
words in all this your discourse against our alleging of scripture, to be
taken as written not simply against alleging of scripture, but against
alleging it as we do. Then I answer, that that you should have proved, that
we allege the scripture in a wrong sense, but this you have not once gone
about: only you prove that bare alleging of scripture cannot, nor may not so
countenance our cause as we pretend, for that sundry heretics have
countenanced their heresies by alleging scripture, and that often very
plentifully. About this you spend sundry Chapters, and withal to show your
self to be able, if you list, to be a cunning in wresting of the scriptures as
any of the heretics you mention: all which is to no purpose, unless withal
you had proved (which you shall never be able to do) that we alleging them,
do allege them so likewise. For we are not so simple or ignorant, that we
know not, that the scripture has been and may be misalleadged, as you write,
and therefore we never go about to persuade the people, that they must and
ought to believe us for our bare alleging of scripture: but for that by the
sound rules of interpreting of them, we prove forcibly and inuincibly unto
their consciences, that we allege them according to their true and native
meaning. We call upon them with Christ to search the scriptures themselves John
5, 39. and with Paul we exhort them so to travail therein, as that they may
have the word of God dwell even in themselves plentifully in all wisdom.
Coloss. 3.16. that so according to the commended example of the noble men of
Baerea Act. 17.11. and the doctrine of S. John, they may try the spirits of
them that would seem to teach them a right, before they believe them, 1. John
4.15. we confess gladly with Peter 2. Epist. cap. 1. 20. 21. that no prophecy
nor part of the scripture, is of any private interpretation, and all such
interpretations we count and judge private and humane (whosoever gyues or
allows them) that are not indeed soundly agreeing with the mind of the
author of the scripture, the holy Ghost. And therefore we hold and teach, for
as much as the natural man understands not the things of the spirit of God.
1. Cor. 1.15. that no man in alleging and citing of the scripture^, is to
trust to his own wisdom or learning; but according to the counsel of S.
James, finding himself in this case to lack wisdom, we exhort all men, and
thinking it needful our selves, before we take upon us to interpret them, to
ask wisdom of God, and that hartelie and faithfully, that we may wisely,
truly and sincerely open them unto the people: we know and say with Basil 2.
libro contra Eunomium, that the word of God is not in the sound and words of
the scripture, but in the sense; and with Hierom upon the first Chapter of the
epistle to the Galathians, we are ready always to acknowledge that the
gospel lies not in the words of the scripture, but in the sense, not in the
outward show, but in theinward marow, not in ye leaves of speech, but in the
root of reason. Now this sound sense of the scripture we take only to be that,
which the author thereof thereby intended, for the better finding out whereof,
after invocation and prayer unto God, for the direction of his spirit, to lead
us aright thereunto, we think it very necessary, that no good means that we
can have use of, be omitted. And therefore to this end, we labor for the
knowledge of tongues and arts, we consider of the phrase, of all the
circumstances, have before our eyes the manifest and agreed on sum of
Christian faith and good manners, confer place with place, diligently read the
writings both of ancient writers and new: and that we resolve to be the true
since, which we find, stands best with the lawful and good use of all these.
In alleging of them this course we take, to make it appear, that by the
sound rules of interpreting the scriptures, they are rightly cited by us; we
stand not therefore upon the bare and only cyting of them, howsoever that be
(as you would insinuate) but upon the right and sound alleging thereof; which
you can never prove, is common to us with other heretics. For howsoever they
and you join with us in often alleging the Scriptures for your defense, yet
neither they nor you, join with us in right alleging of them, in that you
and they allege them for the maintenance of your errors and heresies,
contrary to the true sense thereof, and the sound rules of interpreting of
them, and we according to the true sense of the Catholic church, standing
well with those rules, to confirm the Catholic faith. And yet (as I said)
to this end serves what soever you have written in this Chapter, and in three
or four more following, namely to prove, that the devil, and heretics, and
others (as you write) have by wresting and wrong interpreting the scriptures
always labored to countenance their heresies. This we grant to be most true
you see, and yet thereby you have gained nothing against us. For we stand still
upon this, and may do for all this, that if we have the Scriptures indeed in
true sense on our side, thereby we and our doings are so sufficiently
justified, as that we need no further justification.

These five Chapters, as they tend to the proof of one and selfsame matter,
so have I thought good jointly to frame an answer to them together. Be it
granted therefore unto you, that all these heretics (as you have written and
reported of them) alleged the Scripture and consequently (as hereupon you
infer cap. 26.) that one may see, how the ill disposed may allege scripture,
in a corrupt sense, to maintain such heresy, as these. To what end have you
done all this? It appears chap. 22. you entered first into this discourse, to
prove, that though we have the scripture on our side, which we allege, yet we
are not thereby sufficiently defended: and now hereupon only you would infer
and conclude, that a man may see, how the ill disposed may allege Scripture
in a corrupt sense, to confirm such heresies, as these: which we grant to be
most evident: and yet it remains vndisproued, that if we have the Scripture,
which we allege, on our side, we are thereby sufficiently defended. For none
of these, nor any that alleged Scripture. as they did, though they allege
the words of the scripture, have the scripture indeed on their sides: because
if a man have not the true sense thereof on his side, he has not the scripture
indeed and truth on his side.

But perhaps you will say, that you intended only in this discourse this
conclusion, that you have gathered thereupon, and set down in the beginning of
your 26. Chapter: then say I, you made an objection against your selves in our
name cap. 22. which you thought to heavy and hard for you, and therefore you
thought good, thus to slip from it by and by again. For you were never so
simple, as to think, that we were of that opinion, that we accounted our
selves to have those scriptures, which we alleged on our side to justify us
and our doctrine, eue^ for the bare alleging of the words, how far soever we
were from the true meaning. But you begin in your 26. to tell us, what
further meaning you have had therein, as namely, hereby to warn the simple
people, that they should not give ear unto false pastors, that have nothing
in their mouths but the scripture, and the pure word of God And hereupon you
take occasion most earnestly to persuade those, that are not much used to read
the Scriptures, nor to hear how the church and the doctors do expound the
hard places, to beware how they read the^ for fear of falling into error.
Indeed as long as you would have them hereby only to take heed of rash
crediting false pastors, which would countenance their damnable doctrine with
such allegations; I like well, and allow of your warning hereupon given against
such: but then I can assure you this withal, that rather your Popes, Bishops,
and pastors will be found these false pastors, then they whom you mean. I
like also very well, that not only such as you speak of, but further that men
of all sorts, how much soever exercised in the reading of the scriptures, or
acquainted with the exposition of the Church or doctors, should be at all
times wary and careful in reading of the Scriptures, in what sense they take
them. For I grant (as you infer) that if so many men of great learning have
so dangerously mistaken them, it is possible enough, that men that have little
skill or none at all, may as dangerously misunderstande them. But yet upon
these words, either to discourage the pastor from countenancing and defending
his true doctrine, by the Scriptures, and pure word of God, or to discourage
the simple people from reading and studying the Scriptures (which I fear
herein was your secret purpose, though for shame you durst not plainly set it
down) I tell you is deuilish and Antichristian. For though it be true, that
the devil for wicked purpose (as you note in you twenty two Chapter) alleged
scripture to Christ, Mat. 4. out of Psalm. 91. and all these heretics
alleged scripture for the countenancing of their damnable heresies, yet that
drove not Christ, nor true Christians from alleging the scriptures to confute
them, and to confirm the truth, as it appears by Christ's answer to Satan
Mat. 4. and by the writings of the ancient fathers against these heretics.
And the hardness that it has pleased God to leave in the Scriptures is not
such, but as that notwithstanding, the simplest may read and travel in the
Scriptures with great profit, howsoever it pleases you to insinuate in your
taunting manner ( ca. 26.) that artificers may not have the spirit of God and
be profitable readers and understanders thereof. For every one that would be
blessed, is to take delight in the law of god, and to show that his delight,
by meditating therein day and night. Psalm. 1. and Christ has commanded all
his hearers indifferently, to search the scriptures John. 5. And for all the
hardness, that is in them, we read, Psalm. 19. that the testimony of the Lord
gives wisdom unto the simple, and his commandments give light unto the
eyes. And therefore the holy ghost in David speaking of the scriptures of the
old Testament (which were then harder, then they be now, being so opened as
they be now by the access of the new Testament) says thus, Thy word is a
lantern unto my feet, and a light to my paths, Psalm. 119. Wherefore Peter in
his 2. Epist. and 1. cap. calls ye writings of the Prophets, a light that
shines in a dark place* and therefore much more he accounted the scriptures
of the new testament lightsome, which it seems in the very same place he had
an eye unto, adding, that they did well to attend to the former, until the day
dauned, and the day star arose in their har^^ (which by means of the
Scriptures of the new Testament might be) though I forget not, that the same
Peter in the same Epist. chap. 3. wrote also, that amongst the things written by
Paul in his Epistles, concerning the later days, there are some things hard to
be understood. For I remember also, that yet he notes, to whom they are so,
saying, which they that are unlearned, and unstable, peruerte: as they do the
other Scriptures, unto their own destruction: for to such nothing is plain
enough, to preserve or keep them from thus doing. Upon which grounds
(howsoever) you and your fellows with such like discourses as this, would
discourage the simple and unlearned from reading ye scriptures) Origin wishes,
that al would do as it is written, Search the Scriptures, in his 2. Hom. upon
Esaias. And Hierom notes upon these words Colosse. 3. Let the word of God dwell
in you plentifully etc. that even laymen ought to have the word of God, not
only sufficiently, but also abundantly dwelling in them. And therefore
Augustine in his 55. sermon de tempore, says generally unto his hearers, It
is not sufficient, that ye hear the divine scriptures in the Church; but also
in your houses either read them your selves, or else desire some other to read
them, and give you diligent ear to them. And Chrysostom: likewise in his 9.
Homil: upon the Coloss. is very earnest to persuade seculare men (as you call
them) to get them the Bible, or at the least the new Testament, to be their
continual teachets: and in his 3. Homil: upon Mat. he says plainly, that
this as a plague marreth, or infecteth all, that some think, that the reading
of the Scriptures pertains only to monks. And these exhortations took such
place in the ancient time, that Hierom upon the 133. Psalm says, that both
married men and their wives then had this contention, and not monks only, who
could learn most Scriptures. Whereof came such profit, that howsoever your
gibing spirit can not digest the like in these days, Theodoret in his 5. book
of the nature of man, writes that men in his time might commonly see, that
their doctrine was not only known of them, that were doctors of the Church,
and masters of the people; but also even of Tailers, Smithes, Weauers, and of
al artificers: yea and not only of learned women, but also of laboring women,
as Sewsters, Servants and Handmaides: yea he goes further saying, that not
only citizens understood the same, but also cuntrie people, and amongst them
Ditchers, Deluers, Cowherdes and Gardiners, and that in such sort, as that you
should then hear them disputing of the Trinity, and of the creation of all
things.

And as for the objection, that you terrify them so much withal, of the
hardness therein, the ancient fathers have met with that also, and would not
have them thereby in any case discouraged from following this counsel, whereby
they are stirred up to hear (...) them. And therefore Origin in his 20. Homil:
upon John says, It may be said, the scriptures are hard, yet
notwithstanding i^ thou read them, they shall do thee good: and Hierom no^^th
that it is the fashion of the Scripture, after hard things to (...) other
things, that be plain: in his 19. Homil: upon Esaias. But Augustine, belike
meeting in his time with your forefathers, of whom ye have learned this
objection, has these words in his 5. books against Julian, ye enlarge and
lay out with many words (a^ nothing is more usual with you) how hard a
matter the knowledge of the scripture is, and meet only for a few learned
men: and therefore in his 3. book and 26. cap. of Christian doctrine hi^
gives us this rule, to expound dark places by more plain places which
(says he) is the surest way of declaring the scriptures, to expound one
scripture by another: and in his 2. book and 3. chap. of the same matter, he
writes, that in those which are contained, evidently in the scriptures, are
found al things that contain f^^th, manners, hope and love. But Irenaeus in his
1. book, chap. 3 ^^^teth simply, that the scriptures are plain. And Chrysostom:
in his first Homil: upon Math. and upon the 2 Thessalonians: 2. writes that the
scriptures are easy to the slave, husbandman, widow, and children, and that
all things be plain and clear therein. And yet I (...) needs add with
Epiphanius, only to the children of the holy ghost, are the scriptures plain
and clear in his 2. book: and with Solomon, knowledge is easy to him, that
will understand: Prou. 14.6. For the natural man perceives not the things of
the spirit, for they are foolishnes unto him: neither can he know them, because
they are spiritually discerned. 1. Cor. 2.14. Of whom that S. Peter, 2. Epist.
3. might give us to understand he only meant, he calls the^, to whom those
things in S. Paul's Epistles (whereof he speaks) are hard, and whose fashion
it is to misundersta^d not only those things, but also the rest of the
Scriptures how plain soever, both unlearned, and also unstable: wc is an
argument of want of ye spirit of God, and of all true desire indeed to find
knowledge, wheresoever it be. And it may be, this is the cause, why the
scriptures seem hard unto you of the church of Rome, because you are led by ye
spirit of your Pope, which is but a man, and often times an ignorant, and
wicked man, to understand the scriptures, and have indeed no true acquaintance
with the spirit of God, nor any true desire after knowledge, but rather after
ignorance, because that is ye best foundation of your Religion. And therefore
(as the fashion is) you measuring another (...) by your own, happily judge
them to be as hard to all others, as to your selves, and thereupon by the
hardness thereof, discourage them from reading them, as much as you ca^. I am
sure, whatsoever you, or any of your fellows prate hereof, that therein is
contained the will and testament of our heavenly father, and that this
pertains to simple and unlearned artificers, as well as to the great learned
men of this world. For therein and thereby I know, that God is no accepter of
persons: and therefore so far of is it, that any hardness of terms or phrases
therein contained to express unto the^, or bequeath unto them their heavenly
fathers behestes and bequestes, should drive them from the reading and studying
of the^, that so much the more pains and diligence they ought to use to
atteyne to the right sense thereof. For we see in our earthly fathers will, the
harder the tearines and phrases be, wherein he has given us any thing, or
wills us to do any thing, nature and reason has taught us, not therefore to
take and bestow less pains and cost, but a great deal more, to seek to
understand the same, how much more ought it to be so in this case? And I am
persuaded, that our heavenly father has so tempered hardness with plainenes,
and plainenes with hardness in the scriptures, that the plainenes might allure
and encourage every simple man to read and study them, with hope to understand
them; and that the other might admonish him to be no negligent, but a careful
and wise peruser of them: and so both together make every one a willing and
studious reader of them. Which (it should seem) both Fulgentius in his sermon
of the confessors, and Gregory in his epist: to Leander had observed, in
noting, that God had so ordered the scriptures, as ye therein he had provided
for the strong man meat, and for the weakling milk: and that there both the
Elepha^t might swim, and the lamb safely wade.

These things notwithstanding, and whatsoever else might be said further to
this purpose, I perceive that you in this your long discourse of the heretics,
abusing and wresting the scriptures, cared not how little otherwise that which
you wrote was to the purpose, so ye thereby you might gain thus much, as by
such experiments, to withdraw ye minds of men from the love and study of the
scriptures. For I know they greatly comber you and stand in your way, and
therefore by your wills you cared not, if the people never heard of them,
whereof you have given an invincible demonstration in that you have kept them
hidden and shut up from them as long as you (...), under the close bushel of
an unknown tongue. And your goodwill toward thou has otherwise been
sufficiently bewrayed, by the vnreuerent and disgracing speeches uttered by
your chief and great Champions against them, as it is well known, too too
often. For first for their authority (though now some of your side would seem
in that point to speak more modestly) not long ago Piggins a great man in his
time with you, in the first book and second Chapter of his Hierarchy, has
flatly written that all authority of scripture now, necessarily depends upon
the authority of the Church, For otherwise we could not believe them, but
because we believe the Church that gives testimony unto them, adding further,
that Mark and Luke were not of themselves sufficient witnesses of the gospel,
and that the gospels were not written that they might be above our faith and
Religion, but rather to be subject thereunto. And Ecchius, another great
doctor of yours of the same time, in his Enchiridion, writing of the authority
of the church, says, that ye scriptures were not of authenticke authority,
but through the authority of the Church: and therefore he boldly affirms,
that to say, that greater is the authority of the scriptures then of the
Church, is heretical, and the contrary is Catholic. And whereas it was
objected by Brentius in the confession of Wittingberge, that one of your crew
(meaning thereby one Herman) had not been ashamed to say, that the scriptures
should have had no greater estimation or credit then AEsops fables, but for the
testimony of the church. Hosius a Bishop and Cardinal of yours, writing
against the said Brentius, in his third book (being of the authority of the
scripture) defends it as well enough spoken: for (says he) unless the church
had taught us which is scripture Canonical, it could have had small authority
with us. Likewise teaches Melchior Canus in his second book and seventh
Chapter of his places of divinity, that it appears not to us that the
scriptures are of God, but by the testimony of the Church, insomuch that she
must determine (says he) what books be Canonical, and her authority is a
certain rule whereby either to receive or to reject books into, or out of the
Canon. Of the same judgment is Canisius in his Catechism ca. 30. sect. 16.
and Stapleton in his first Chapter of his ninth book of the principles of
doctrine, with a great rabble more of your writers of greatest account since
Luther. And this position so liked Ecchius, that in the place before cited, he
writes of the margent, Achilles, against this position, to insinuate, that this
is a special tried captain of yours. And yet when all comes to all, your
meaning all this while is by the Church, to understand only the Pope,
forasmuch as none but he, has the tongue of the Church in weelding. For
Catherin in Epistolam ad Galatas cap. 2. holds, that it is the Popes proper
privilege to canonize or to reject from the Canon scriptures: which is also
Canus fifth proposition in effect, in the Chapter before named. This being your
meaning, and Leo ye tenth being one of your Popes, what Canonical authority
have you left the scripture, if it be true yt is written of him, that he talking
with Bembus then a Cardinal, co^temptuously said, speaking of the Gospel,
that that fable of Christ had been very profitable unto them? And as for ye
uncertainty of the se^ce and insufficie^cy of the^, who knows not, what cost
usually always upon every light occasion you are ready to bestow, in
amplifying the hardness of them, and in either preferring therefore, or
equalling ye vnwrite^ word, with you call ye lively practice of the church,
before the^, both for plainnes and sufficiency. When you are in this vain,
both the fathers of Colen shall be justified, and Piggius also by your
Andradius, Orthodox: Epl. li. 2. p. 104. though they compared the scriptures to
a nose of wax, and he to a leaden lesbian rule, and to their further disgrace,
Canus may term them a dead judge, which can neither hear nor speak, in his
Chapter and book before named; and in like sort others in the following of
this comparison, with your good allowance, shall and may call them incken
divinity, and what else they list, as we often have showed you, and them ye
only rest upon them, scripture men, or men whose Religion and divinity, lies
in rags and skins of beasts, because of such things the books are made wherein
they are contained. Many beastly and blasphemous speeches and assertions thus
tending to ye disgrace of the Canonical scriptures, any man that list may
find Lynda^s three first books of his panoply, Hosius book de expresso Dei
verbo, and his triple dialogue, Cusans 2. Epist. ad Bohemos and 7. Andradius,
Florebellus, Priereas, and almost all your famous writers of these later days,
every where full often, where they have any occasion to weaken those arguments,
yt we use against you, either for that you are in your positions, wherein we
dissent from you, without warrant of scripture, or that they are contrary to
scripture. And when we urge you that of what credit soever the tradition of the
church be, that you so plead for, yet if it be the word of God as well as the
scripture, then it must needs be, that it agrees with the scripture, and is,
not contrary unto it, for as much as God is always one and selfsame and
therefore always agreeing with himself, and therefore press you with that which
by the words and circumstances of the text of ye scripture, we are sure is the
true sense thereof, and therefore ye undoubted word of God, the^ you, even the
greatest of you, are driven to these poor and base shifts, to cry out with
Cardinal Hosius in his 4. book against Bre^tius, and in his book de expresso
Dei verbo before named, that scripture, as it is alleged of Catholics, it is
the word of God, but as it is alleged of heretics, the express word of the
Devil, or as he says also in the later book, if any have the exposition of
the Roman church of any place of scripture, although he neither know nor
understand whither and how it agrees with the words of the scripture, yet he
has the very word of God. And when all comes to all, though sometime you would
make the pore simple people believe, that in expounding the scriptures you will
follow the uniform consent of holy fathers and councels, yet both this
Cardinal Hosius in his triple dialogue, and Cardinal Cusan in his 2. Epist. ad
Bohemos tell us, and teach us plainly to understand you, that you mean no
other sense the^ agrees with the present practice of the Roman church, when tha^
sense is given: not once blushing to confess, that according to the
variablenes of the fashion and practice of that church, the scriptures must be
understood, and therefore Cusan co^mends that obedience that is yielded
thereunto simply without reasoning, as the Ox or Ass obeys his master. For
whatsoever sometimes, you talk of Popes not erring, and of the not erring of
general councils, or of the authority of the fathers, none that have any thing
craueiled in tracing you into your starting holes when otherwise you see you
must needs be pinched and taken to your sha^e, but he, easily sees, yt in
truth none of these, no nor all these together with the scriptures themselves,
are of any credit and authority with you against ye present practice of your
Roman Church. One father, or the present Pope if he speak and hold with that,
though all the fathers beside are of another mind, and though never so many of
his predecessors held otherwise, yet farewell they, in this case; you will and
must prefer this one, before all the other. These things being most true, and
notoriously known to all men, that with any indifferency have traueiled in the
controversies betwixt you and us, every one has cause to see, howsoever
sometimes you would seem to yield some thing to the authority of ye scriptures,
that you are at a flat point, that neither they nor any authority else of man,
or men, old, or new, shall or may retain any sense of force, against the
present practice and received opinion of your sinagogue. And as long as you are
at this point, whatsoever you have said of heretics abusing of scripture, as
though you were the only men that had care rightly to use them and understand
them, every simple body may see, that of all men you are they, by the
variablenes of your Romish church practice, wc are most likely to make a nose
of wax, and leaden rule both of the letter of the scriptures, and sense
thereof. And therefore whereas in your 23. c. you boldly affirm, that to draw
the scriptures by violence into a wrong sense, is the manner of interpreting the
scriptures, called at this day the pure word, by those that have professed as
long as they live to be enemies to the truth, most fitly may be understood of
your selves; for you are so in love with the present practice, fashion and
opinion of your Roman church, that though that vary never so often, even so
often must the scriptures will they, nill they, vary and alter their sense.

Howbeit I am not ignorant, but that in so writing you meant us, though I am
sure you shall never be able to prove us, either to have professed at all any
enmity with the truth, or so to use to wrest the scriptures. But because this is
a matter of great importance, and therefore such as cannot be determined, either
by your yea, or our nay, it shall not be amiss upon this occasion, to consider,
what sound rules of interpreting there be, that by the same it may be tried,
whither your interpreting of the scriptures or ours, deserve thus to be called
a drawing of the scriptures by violence to a corrupt sense. The uniform
consent of doctors you would often seem (as I have said) in this case to make
reckoning of, as of a sound and Apostolic rule of interpreting them by, but
this is but for a fashion, for you have given us and do daily manifest
proofs, that when but one or two against all the rest of the^ hold with your
curra^t and present practice of your Roman church yt now is, that that one or
two of them over wey with you all the rest. And besides, if this were a necessary
rule, then none could be interpreters of the scriptures, but those that had all
or the most part of the doctors to peruse, few or none, then ancient doctors
and writers there have been so many, and their names are so unknown to most,
could be sure when they had the consent of the most and best on their side, and
so never should be sure of the sense: and for many places very little or
nothing oftentimes have they written. Though therefore we will not shun the
trial of our interpretations with you by this rule, yet we account these more
certain rules and helps to find out ye true sense: first that the true
Gra^maticall sense of the words, and speech used by the holy ghost be soundly
and rightly understood by sound knowledge of Grammar and Rhetoric, for the
native signification of the words and use of the phrase: whereunto much helps
conference of translation with translation: and of all transtations (if need
be) with the original tongues. Secondly, that diligent consideration be had of
the circumstances of the text in hand, as namely, what is the matter and scope
thereof, upon what occasion it was uttered, who uttered it, to whom, where, and
when. Thirdly, yt it be taken in such a sense, as will agree best with these
circumstances, and stand well with all other places of scripture. And lastly,
that no sense be admitted, but that which will stand with the sound proportion
and sum of Christian faith, and good manners, taught us plainly elsewhere in
the scriptures. By these rules we doubt not but to justify and approve that to
be the true sense of the scriptures, which we take them in, either for the
confirmation of the truth, which we hold; or for the confutation of the
errors, which you defend. And such rules they are, as the ancient fathers, in
defending the ancient Catholic faith against heretics, have always used,
and no other, as appears in their works. And such they are, as Augustine in
his books of Christian doctrine does prescribe, as most necessary in this
case to be followed, as no man can, or ought to make any exception against. And
yet such they are; as would anon discover the ridiculous vanity of your
interpretatio^s in any controversy betwixt us and you. For example, let us try
here by your interpretation of Hoc est corpus meu^, which to be sound you will
live and die in. By what grammar, or by help of what tongue, or translation
shall the word Est, is, be all one with transubstantiatur in, is
transubstantiated into? Sure I am in no language, nor in any Dictionarie shall
you ever find ye verb Substa^tiue taken in yt sense. Secondly, the matter in
hand, when those words were uttered, was a sacrament, and Christ spoke them to
his Apostles at his last supper, to the end, to institute a sacrament, to
continue a duetifull remembrance of his death, until his second coming. What
reason is there then to the contrary, but that this speech should be taken, as
the like speech always else has been, and yet is in other Sacraments? Where,
Est, is never taken (coupling the sign and the thing signed together, whereof
a Sacrament consists) as you do here, for, It is turned into, but for,
signifies; which stands also well with the nature of a Sacrament: whereas
yours overthrows the nature thereof, in so annihilating or transubstantiating
of the sign, that you leave no sign to bear any analogy of the thing
resembled, which is the ground of such Sacramental phrases. Thirdly, your
sense agrees not with the rest of the scriptures, not only in that in the
whole body of the Scriptures, you cannot find Est, Is, placed (as it is here)
betwixt two things of diverse kinds, as bread and body be, taken in your
sense: and yet in such propositious you find it usually taken for it
signifies or represents: but also in that the scripture (for all that
speech) calls it bread still, even whiles it is in eating, 1. Corin. 10. and
11. cap. and expounds the eating thereof to be a communion, or partaking
with, or of the body of Christ, and that spiritual, not by corporal
conjunction. 1. Cor. 10. Lastly, your interpretation for the bringing in, and
establishing of a corporal and real eating of Christ, with the mouth of the
body (which is a thing never taught us in the word, and but such a kind of
feeding on him, as you your selves confess Judas, and such may atteine unto,
and be never the better) shakes, yea subuerteth al those articles, that
concern Christ's true manhood, making him to have (even for that needles
presence sake) a body without any of the essential and inseparable properties
of a body: yea at one and selfsame time, to have a body visible, sensible, and
local in heaven; and yet invisible, insensible, and without dimentions of
place in earth. Besides it is against good manners, which forbids eating of
man's flesh, and drinking of his blood, either openly or secretly covered under,
or in another thing And truly Auerroes had some reason, of all men in ye world
to think such Christians, as you, the most savage and foolish, that first
would fall down, and worship a piece of bread for your God, and when you have
so done eat him up, and devour him. Howsoever you please your selves in this
interpretation, and in your imagination grounded thereupon, I am fully
persuaded, that this, and your multitude of images and idols are two of the
principal causes, whereby you have hardened the hearts both of the Turks and
Jews against Christian Religion. And (as I have read) some of them have to
some of your fellows, being in hand to persuade them to turn from their
Religion to yours, yielded these two reasons, why they thought yours worse,
then their own, and consequently as sufficient cause, why they would not
yield to yours.

Now if I should but barely recite a number of other your interpretations and
collections of the scripture, which yet with you go for very sound and
Catholic interpretations, and collections, I am sure, it were sufficient to
make every reader thereof, that has any wit or discrecion left him, to
think yt there were never heretics in the world, that have more fondly and
vainly interpreted the scriptures, then you. For example, let the reader mark
these for a taste. God made two great lights, the sun and the moon: that is,
the Pope and the Emperor: and therefore as many degrees as the moon is
inferior to the son, is ye Emperor inferior to the Pope: Innocent: de
Maioritate and obedient: and Glossa, Ibid. Peter said, he had two swords: yt
is, the te^porall and spiritual sword: and therefore ye Pope has both powers.
Cornelius ye Bishop of Bitonto in ye council of Trent, blusheth not to apply
to ye Pope these words, The Pope the light is come unto the world, and men love
darkness more, then light. Every one ye evil does, hates the light, and
comes not to the light, least his deeds be reproved. Yea Paulus Aemilius in
his 7. book testifies, yt the Pope suffered the Legates of Cicilia, being
prostrate before him, to say unto him, Qui tollis peccata mundi, Thou which
take away the sins of the world, have mercy upon us: Thou which take away
the sins of the world, grant us peace: thus blasphemously applying yt to the
Pope, which belongs to Christ. But you will say, these were but the popes
flatterers, that made these expositio^s, and applications. What then? they were
made and uttered without check, yea to the liking of the Pope. And a picture
once ha^ging in S. Mark^ church at Venice, shows, that Pope Alexander the 3.
himself treading upon the neck of the Emperor Fridericke the 1. caused th^se
words of the Psalm: Thou shall walk upon the Adder, and tread the Cockatrise
under thy feet and. (which are properly to be vndersto^^ of Christ) to be
proclaimed as verified of that action of his: whereby appears, yt the Pope
himself has gone as far as his flatterers. That of Paul (by him understood
of those yt follow the direction of the old man, and are led in their doings by
the flesh) They that are in the flesh cannot please God. Romans 8. Siricius a
Pope also interprets of the^, yt live in the estate of marriage. A Bishop must
be the husband of one wife, says Paul. 1. Tim. 3. that is, by their
interpretation, of one benefice; and so his house and children, yt he must well
order and govern, there also spoken of, be his parish and parishioners. Who so
would vouchsafe the reading of your 2. Nicene council, he should there find
store of such interpretatio^s for the maintenance of images so ridiculously
alleged, as ever were any. And how is it possible, that the Church of Rome,
holding those principles, that she does, but that you must needs be as
violent wresters and rackers of the Scriptures, as ever were. For both Cusan
Epist. 2.3.7. and Hosius de expresso Dei verbo, and in his triple Dialogue, do
teach, that the scriptures must always be interpreted according to the
practice of the Church, so that how often soever that change, the sense of the
scripture must change also. For still the sense thereof must be fitted to the
time, and in no case it may be thought to retain a sense contrary to the
practice of the Church. And now you are fully come to this (whatsoever at any
time you talk either of Scriptures, doctors, or councels) your Pope for the
time being has full power and authority, to interpret all, as one having
authority so to do for his own sense. So that in deed and truth, neither
Scriptures, doctors, nor councels, how plain soever their words be to
contrary the doings of your Church, shall carry away any sense, to ouerwharte
you at all, but will they, nill they, they shall be caused by your Pope to speak
on your side. And therefore these things considered, you are the men, and not
we, that take the precious ornaments from Epiphanius picture of a king, that
you speak of in your twenty three Chapter: and deck the image of a dog, or
of a fox therewith, that is, (according to your own application) which take
the words of the Scripture, and by wresting of them, make them serve to
countenance your heresies. For heresies, we hold none, ^^ither do we
allege the Scriptures, but in his true sense, (...) by these rules before
mentioned, we are always ready to prove. and therefore (for all your saying
to the contrary) the Scripture as it is alleged by us, shall prove even that
word of God, that shall judge you, and condemn you, if you repent not: and the
sense that you force upon it, shall prove but the devise of man, and false
doctrine: yea, your whole Religion is but a renewing of old heresies. For with
the Ebionits you will not be justified by faith only, Eusebius. lib. 3. ca. 24.
but also by your own works and inhere^t righteousness, as the Catharists have
taught you: Isidor: Etymolog: lib. 8. cap. de haeresibus. Of the Manichees, you
have learned your ministering in one kind: Leo sermon. 4. de Quadragesima. Marcus
yt heretic (who by his inuocatio^s made his followers believe, yt in the
Eucharist he turned ye wine into blood) has been your first schoolmaster for
your doctrine of tra^substantiation, Epip. haeres. 34. And your multitude of
images and your worshipping of them, the Carpocratians have taught you, as to
appears, Iren. lib. 1. cap. 23. and 24. when you commit these idolatries, you
have learned to excuse your selves, to torment your selves and to light candels
at noone days, of the ancient idolaters, Lacta^tus lib. 2. cap. 2. and lib. 1.
cap. 21, and 6. cap. 2. As the Messalians restrained the force of baptism to
former sins (witness Theodoret: divine: decret: cap. de baptismo) so do you.
As Montanus taught of purgatory, oblations, and prayers for the dead, and
limbus patrum (Tertullian de corona militis) even so do you. As the
Collyridians sacrificed unto the Virgin Mary and worshipped her; ( Epiphan.
haeres: 79) so do you. As the Angelists and Caians gave divine honor to the
Angels ( Epiphan. haeres. 38) so do you. As Montanus and the Manichees devised
laws for superstitious fasting ( Eusebius. lib. 5. cap. 16. Aug. de moribus
Manicheorum lib. 2. cap. 13) so do you. As the Tatians, Encratites and
Manichees were injurious enemies to Matrimony, crying out yt it was a carnal
life, and therefore forbad it to their elect, and to them that would be perfect
amongst them ( August. Epist. 47) likewise do you. And as the Pelagians denied
that to be sin, which arises not from reason and will, ( August contra
Iulianum. lib. 3. cap. 5) so do you for the very same reasons, deny
concupiscence of it self without consent thereunto, to be sin and (as there
further it appears) they ascribed to the natural powers strenght to do
spiritual things, and affirmed that a man is to be saved for and by keeping
the law, so do you. Of the Valent^nians also you learned to have in such
price, as you have, the sign^ ^f the Cross, and to abuse places of Scripture
for it, as, God forbi^, that I should rejoice in any thing, but in the Cross
of Christ, Iren^us lib. 1. cap. 1. Epiphan. lib. 1. Tom. 2. haeres. 31. Of the
Heracleo^nites you learned your extreme unction, and other ceremonies, you use
to the dead: Epiphan. lib. 1. Tom. 3. haeres. 36. Of the Macionites and
Pepusians (Aug ad Quod. cap. 27) you learned to give women leave to baptize,
Epiphan. haeres. 42. Of the Hemerobaptistes, and of the Ossenes you learned
your holy water, holy salt, holy oil, and holy bread: Epiphan. lib. 1, Tom.
1. cap. 17. and 19. And of the same Ossenes you have learned also your
superstition about relics, and to pray in an unknown tongue, as Elcai their
great Pope taught them, Epiphan. haeres. 19. Thus if a man in reading
Augustine, Irenaeus and Ephiphanius and others (that have labored in confuting
the ancient heretics) would diligently mark what heresies and fond things
they held and used, he should by and by, by comparing their doings and opinions
with yours, find, that you have revived very many of their rotten and
condemned heresies, and that you have learned most of your Ceremonies of them.
And yet as though you of all men were freest, and furthest from all heresy,
still you cry out, he retiques, heretics. But it is but policy, that you
have learned of some thieves, who the better in an hew and cry to escape, ride
crying out of thieves, thieves.

But for all this, as though you meant as honestly, as any man could desire, in
this 33. Cha. of yours, you tell us, that you would have the Scriptures
interpreted by him, that did indite the^: and therefore you allege that, 2.
Pet. 1. that no prophecy in the scripture is of any private motion, or
interpretation. For the prophecy came not in old time by the will of man, but
holy me^ of God spoke as they were moved by the holy ghost: whereupon you
insinuate unto us, that you would have the^ interpreted by the direction of the
same holy ghost: wc we are very well contented wtal. For indeed, that only
interpretation is sound and good, that comes from thence, and that is always
to be accounted to proceed but from a private motion, that has not ground from
thence, though otherwise never so great and public persons, and never so
many devise it, receive it, and hold it never so long. And therefore it is,
that we tell you, that your interpretations, though they be countenanced with
Popes, doctors, and councels, and what else you will, yet are to be rejected as
private interpretations, unless they be warranted by the testimony and authority
of the holy Ghost.

But the^ say you, you challe^ge this holy ghost, to lead you to the true
sense, how shall we believe that it dwells more in you the^ in all the
universal church, from Christ's passion to this time? I answer you, yt we take
no such thing upon us. For we say, if you understand by the Church, you speak
of, Christ's Church, which has from thence continued unto this day, it has
never been destitute of the same spirit of God, that now leads us into all
truth: otherwise, if thereby you understand only your own Synagogue of Rome,
as the state of it has been these later 500. or 600. years at the least, we
say, as it has forsaken the true Christ, and has set up another, of an office
of her own devising, so has she been destitute of his spirit, and has
been guided but by an humane and foolish spirit. But then you ask us, where
this spirit did rest before we were borne? Whereunto (you think) we can make
no other answer, but that (...) dwelt in the hearts of the faithful. And is
not this a good answer? What fault can you find in it? Is it not true? Does
not Gods spirit dwell indeed in such, yea and in none but such? Now whereas
you think, that if you should ask us again, where were those faithful ones,
our answer only would be, where the holy Ghost was, and that we could give
you no directer answer: and so thereat you take your pleasure, saying, that
that is to play handie, dandie, etc: though if we should answer you no
otherwise, we might do so with better reason, then your Collier in Hosius, so
much commended by him, and some of you else might answer, as he did, who when
he was asked, how he did believe, answered, as the Church believes: and being
demanded, how the Church believed, answered, as I believe. For the Scripture
does expressly bind us, when we are called, to answer for our faith, that
we should yield a reason thereof: 1. Pet. 3. and so it binds us not, to be
always able to make demonstration, who be the faithful, and where they dwell
from time to time: yet you understand well enough (if you were disposed) that
we both can, and have given you a more particular answer, and that we have
told both the names of the most famous persons, and also where they and their
followers have lived, and dwelt, that believed as we do, and therefore had
the holy Ghost as well as we. But to let your gibing go, if in earnest you
would have it tried, whither in interpreting the Scriptures you or we have the
holy Ghost, and so consequently, whither you or we be liker these heretics
(you speak of) in misinterpreting the Scriptures: your interpretations and
ours must be examined, which will stand best with the rest of the Scriptures,
wherein we are sure, the holy Ghost has spoken: and so they, whose
interpretations are found best to agree therewith, sentence must be given on
their side, that they have the holy Ghost, and that the other have it not. For
Chrysostom writing of the holy Ghost gave this rule, to try whither Montanus
and Manicheus had this spirit, or no, as they bragged: and hereby he proves,
that Christ taught by this spirit, because he confirmed his doctrine out of
the Law and the Prophets, whereas the false teachers could not do so. Christ
himself also by his own example has taught us, when the question is betwixt
two, about the sense of a sentence of Scripture, yea, though he that brings
the wrong sense, be the very Devil himself, that this is the next, best, and
ordinariest way, to stop his mouth, and to make it appear, that he has
brought a wrong sense, to see, whither it will stand with some other plain
place of Scripture or no. For when the Devil had alleged the ninety one
Psalm in this sense, that the meaning thereof was, that though Christ should
throw himself down headlong, yet his fathers promise was, that he should
take no harm, because by this sense, satan would have persuaded him, upon
presumption upon his fathers protection, to have tempted him: Christ proves,
that that could not be the sense of the place; because it was written (as it is
Deuteronomy. 6.) Thou shall not tempt the Lord thy God. And with this answer satan,
as cunning and malicious, as he was, gave over to reply any further, for the
justifying of his sense, Math. 4.7. So also John. 5. in that great
controversy, touching the person and office of the Messiah, when as the ground
thereof was, that his enemies had falsely interpreted the prophesies concerning
him, yet Christ for the determination thereof, and to make it appear, whither
they or he brought the truer interpretation thereof, says, Search the
Scriptures. And therefore when Paul had preached the Gospel at Berea, it is
noted to the commendation of certain men there, that they searched the
Scriptures daiele, whither those things were so: by that means laboring to
satisfy themselves in this great question, whither Paul, or the Scribes and
Pharisees had the spirit of God in interpreting the Scriptures concerning the
Messiah. And this course all the ancient fathers have followed (as appears
plentifully in their works) in the confuting of those heretics, that you
speak of, and all other, and consequently, in determining whither they or
themselves had the direction of the holy Ghost in interpreting the Scriptures.
And therefore they have given us rules, to help us in this case, as for
example; Tertullian against Praxeas, has given us this, Fewer places must be
expounded by the more. Augustine this, The circumstance of the Scripture is
woonte to give light, and open the meaning, in his book of Questions, quaest:
69. Dark places are to be expounded by more plain places; that is the surest
way of declaring the scriptures, to expound one scripture by another: in his 3.
book of Christian doctrine, cap. 26. and in those books written of Christian
doctrine many more very profitable. Which way Chrysostom: thought so sure a way, that
he says flatly, The holy scriptures expound themselves, and suffer not the
Reader to err, in his 12. Homil: upon Gen: And yet for all this, to this
trial will not you of the Church of Rome be brought, neither for the trial of
your interpretations, nor yet for determining of this question, whither you
have the spirit of truth or no. Christ and his Apostles were contented to put
themselves, for trial of their doings, to this, but your Popes think scorn
to look so low: yea rather they will have all questions, wherein they are
principal parties themselves, tried by themselves, and you and they cry out,
that this is not the readiest way to end such questions. But who is so mad,
as to think, that you can find out a better way, then Christ and his Apostles
used? You will send us (say some of you) for the trial of these matters unto
the doctors, and councels, and yet when it comes to the point, unless they
and their sayings please you, ye reject them also. And you cannot deny, but
that oftentimes also it is far more disputable and doubtful, what was their
meaning, then what is the meaning of the Scripture: and you know also, that it
is an usual thing with them, to send us back again to the Scriptures, for
trial of their writings, as it appears in Augustines 19. Epist. to Hirom,
and in his 111. Epist, to Fortunatian. And therefore indeed (say you what you
will) this is the safest, surest, and readiest way of trial of this and all
other matters in question betwixt us, to bring all to the touchstone of the
scriptures. I would to God therefore, that once you would give over al other
bie, and indirect trials, and come only to this: for then it would quickly
appear, even to the simple, whither you, or we were rather to be followed.
For all this, we join with you in the later end of your twenty three Chapter,
in warning men to take heed, that they do not rashly believe and follow every
one, that will pretend, that they have the scriptures on their side. But
whereas you write yt the heresies, which you will after speak of, and yt were
condemned by ye Catholic church, were as well and more largely confirmed by
scriptures, the^ we can thereby confirm our Religion: therein first you most
untruly report yt of us, as we doubt not, but to make it evident unto the
world, if you would once come to any indifferent trial with us: and secondly, I
must admonish ye reader, yt these ancient heresies indeed were condemned by the
Catholic Church, but that that catholic Church, was not yours, nor as yours
now is. For the differences be infinite betwixt yours, and the Church the^, by
reason whereof, there is as great difference betwixt the Church then, and yours
now in effect, as there is betwixt ours now, and yours.

In your recital of the heretics abusing the scriptures, diverse things slipped
from you also worthy the noting, namely these, that you could not content your
self, with showing us, how they did abuse the Scriptures, in wrong alleging
them, but that (as though your fingers itched to show, that you had as good
skill therein, as they) you still intermingle with theirs your own cunning, in
showing how other places might be abused in like manner, neither confuting in
the end their collections, nor your own, how dangerous soever. Another trick
you have, in noting the trueths impugned by them, and the manner how they went
to work (though never so untruly) yet co^fidently to set down, that the
things wc we impugn in you were holden by the Church in equal degree of
truth and reverence with them, that they set themselves then against: and that
they cried out against traditions of men, and cried only for the written word,
as we do; whereas in truth few or none of the things we condemn in you, were
hatched then: and the contrary before has appeared out of Irenaeus lib. 3.
cap. 2. that it was their fashion, to fly from the Scriptures, and to accuse
them, as you do, and to urge traditions, and that they also used to urge other
such like grounds for their heresies, as you do, as I have showed cap. 3. The
last is, that for the most part you charge them with what you list, not showing
us where you read or find ground for these things wherewith you charge them,
belike least in turning to the places and examining you proofs, we should to
your discredit, have occasion thereby to discry in you, either some malice,
error, ignorance, or some negligence at the least. For example, how prove you
that which you write cap. 22. that the Arrians alleged as many or more
places, then the Catholics? Or that the same Church that condemned the Adamits
has condemned us, Hus and his scholars condemning them.

But to pass on from these things, to your conclusion upon these premises,
and to that which you infer thereupon in your 26 Chapter, I grant you, by that
which you have written in the former chapters, it may be seen that one ill
disposed may soon allege scripture in a corrupt sense, but what is this to
prove, that which you undertook cap. 22. that is, that the holy scriptures
which we allege do not justify our doings. If you would have proved this
indeed, you should have proved, that we allege the scriptures in a wrong
sense, as these did that you have talked on: but that was to heavy a piece of
work for you, and therefore you thought good not once to meddle with it. But yet
as though either you had proved it, or else yt it could not but without proof be
granted you, you boldly affirm, as these heretics yt you have talked of, have
perished and their heresies, so shall we and our followers, if we repent not.
Whereunto I answer first, yt so repentance may be taken, yt it is most true,
that not only we and our followers, but you and yours also, and al men else,
must repent, or else we al, you, and al other, shall perish: but taking it, as
you do, for repe^ting of our religion, and of alleging of ye scriptures wc we
do for ye maintenance of it against you, you have said nothing at al as yet
to make us once to think, yt we have any need at al so, or thereof to repent.
Secondly, I say yt in thus saying, you have showed your malice and boldness
more, then any thing else: for you have therein uttered nothing, but a blind
prophets drea^e and fancy, which no man of any wisdom or discretion will make
any reckoning of. It is well yet yt the evidence of ye truth, has enforced you
here to confess, that it may be seen in all the ancient ecclesiastical
writers, that the doctors fully answered by texts of scripture, these old
heresies by you before mentioned. For even thereby you may see, yt though
heretics never so much misaleage scripture, that yet the true ministers of
the Lord, may and must allege them, even to answer and to confute their
heresies by. And therefore it stands still firm, that if we, by alleging of
the^ aright ca^ prove you heretics, and your opinions, wc we strive against,
heresies (which no further then we can do, we never crave any credit to be
given us) whatsoever you would seem to have said, to beat us from alleging
of the^, yt it appears that thereby both we, our doings and religion are
sufficiently justified, both before God and man. These misalegers of scripture
which in all these Chapters you have spoken of, you say, you will not stay to
confute, for two causes, because they reign not now, and their heresies
together with the^ the authors thereof are perished, and because the ancient
doctors have confuted them as you say: but indeed the reason was, that you
were loath to occupy either your self or reader, in so profitable a matter. It
seems you took more delight, in showing how the scripture might be
misalleaged, to fortify heresy, then how rightly alleged, to confute the
same, and therefore you could find leisure to stay 4. or 5 Chap. in that, but
not at al upon this. Besides, if it be true yt you have reported (if you had
well remembered your self) you would not so generally have said, that they were
al perished. For read your Chap. over again, and you shall find, that therein
you have spoken of some, yt are not so quite dead and perished, but that even
in these days they need to be confuted. But you say, that with you have here
noted, either of them or of their heresies and their alleging of scripture for
the sa^e, you have done it only to give warning to simple people, yt they
should not too rashly give ear to false pastors, wc have nothing in their
mouths, but the holy scripture and the pure word of God, so covering the cups
of their poison, with the gold and precious stones wc they have taken from the
image of the eternal king, to paint those subtle foxes, that will lead them al
to da^natio^. If you had indeed done it only to this end, you had not been to
be misliked: but in deed and truth, you have done it, to breed in men a
carelesnes and negligence in searching the scriptures, and a contempt of
alleging the same, to determine the controversies betwixt us and you.
Otherwise think as you speak, and we are ready to join with you both in this,
and also in yt which you add, in wishing the simple and unlearned in reading
the hard places, to take heed they fall not into error, by taking only the
letter etc. For if great learned men thereby have been endangered, how much
more may such. But surely this is rather a cave at meet and needful for you
the^ for us, if we go no further, but to your peevish taking of the letter of
hoc est corpus meu^, contrary to al sound rules of right interpreting, as I
have showed before.

Now, whereas hereupon you take occasion, according to your manner, to ieere at
our ministry, as though in France and England especially it were generally
unlearned, and consisted of the basest and most contemptible of the people: you
are worthy of small answer, your speech there about is so appare^tly false and
sla^derous. For, God be thanked, in both kingdoms, you your selves are enforced
to feel (to your whole kingdoms grief and deadly wound in the end I doubt
not) yt there are great store of learned ministers and bishops, far other manner
of men, then you have named. And therefore your own conscience could not but tell
you, unless it were seared with a hoate iron, that they do in neither kingdom
commit the guiding of the stern, without consideration, to al kind of people.
In both places, both their doctrine and public order of their churches aims
at a learned and godly ministry: whereof if in some particulers they fail
(which in so great a multitude and compass altogether cannot be avoided) the
fault is to be laid in the particular men, by whose negligence or corruption
it so comes to pass, and not in either of the churches, which would gladly,
that no such fault should at all be committed. Howbeit I dare say, howsoever
you ruffle in your terms of pedlers Cobblers, Tanners, Bankerouts and
raunagates, and say that such be our interpreters of the scriptures, and that
we hold every such one, once admitted by a bishop to be a minister, to have the
spirit, and to be great doctors, to whom no place of scripture is too hard,
because they can rail of the Pope, say all the ancient doctors were men, and
the general councels did err: that yet you can neither prove our ministers to
be such, nor that for these balde reasons, we think any so qualified as you
write. It pleased you but in this, to show your spiteful and malicious spirit:
but alas who will think (do you what you can) that you indeed mislike a base
and unlearned ministry, who not only have held (and yet have as great cause so
to do still as ever) that ignorance is the mother of devotion, but also upon
that ground, have all your Church service in a tongue, that the people shall
not understand, and content your selves, for the most part with such priests,
as can scarsely rightly read the same. Truly, if there had been but a crumme
of right modesty and shamefastnes in you, knowing as you do, the notorious
baseness, grossenes, and ignorance of your ordinary masse-priestes, you would
never have taken this pleasure, that it seems you did, in thus railing on,
defacing and slandering of ours.

Indeed by that saying of Christ, Matthew. 11. (by you quoted Ioh. 8.) when we
see what grace and gifts of knowledge God oftentimes amongst us bestows upon
such: in the mean time, beholding in what great blindness and error a number
of great Rabbis and doctors amongst you walk on still, we take occasion (as
Christ has taught us) to give thanks to our heavenly father, that has
revealed these things unto babes, which yet your great wise men, and men of
understanding, see not. But you would not have us by this place to defend, that
such mean men may come to be cunning and skillful in the Scriptures. Your
reasons are two, for that other heretics have so alleged it; and for that
this is to be understood of the humble in spirit, whereas these men of ours,
trust to their own wits, and are puffed up with arrogant ignorance etc. You
thought good yet neither to tell us what heretics, when, nor where: howsoever,
you know (I trust) that men must not shame well to use that Scripture, that
heretics have abused. Concerning your other reason, I grant you, the place
is to be understood only of the humble and meek in spirit, and whosoever
amongst us come unto the scriptures, trusting to their own wits, and so puffed
up with ignorance (as you speak) we utterly mislike the^ as much as you. But
that you should give forth this sentence of yours in such general terms,
against simple and poor men amongst us, that travel in the Scriptures, you
had neither reason, nor charity in so doing. Commonly such rash judging of
others, proceeds from a mind even so qualified, as you charge theirs to be,
and from no other fountain. And who so considers their gross ignorance, and
errors, that remain in your great Clerks, every where notwithstanding these
scriptures (what other learning soever they pretend) he has most just occasion
thereby to judge, that either they study the scriptures very little, or else
that they come to them with the minds you talk of.

And if you would tell us plainly, what you mean by humility of spirit
(which in this case you speak of) we should soon perceive, that thereby you
understand not true Christian humility, which through a base conceit that it
breeds in the owner, stirs him up the more earnestly to crave assistance
of Gods spirit, and by diligent search of the Scriptures, and more careful use
of all good means, to compass the right understanding of them: but a popish
and slavish kind of humility, which must breed in the owner such a servile
depending upon your Popes will, and Churches tradition for the sense thereof,
as that he admit no sense at al of them (though thrust upon him never so
plainly by the evidence of the place) that will not fully agree therewith.
Which breeds in all of your side, either a flat giving over all reading of
them, or else such a reading of them, as that they must bring a sense unto them
from the tradition of your Church, and so enforce that upon them, whither they
will or no, for howsoever the scripture speak, the Churches tradition may not
be contraried. This is your humblenes of spirit, when you have brought Gods
spirit speaking in the Scriptures in subjection unto your popish spirit: but
this is a proud humility, and a cursed meekenes. You do but malitiouslie
slander us, in that you would persuade your reader, that how bad and simple
soever the man were before, as soon as a bishop has made him minister, we say
straight, he has the holy Ghost, and no Scripture is to hard for him, if he
can with all say the Lord, and rail upon the Pope etc. And yet I must tell
you, that we think it not unlawful, but very necessary to paint out your
Pope with the colors, that are due unto him, that men may the better beware of
him: and yet we count that no railing; but we neither tie the holy Ghost to
the imposition of the Bishops hands, nor place any such matter in these
things here mentioned by you, as you would lead your reader to imagine we
do. You know we might as easily (and suit I am with far more truth) say,
that with you, how lewd and unlearned soever the man be, yet when one of your
bishops has priested him, the^ if he can call the Pope most holy father, and
speak reuere^tly of your Cardinals, bishops and other prelates, and say, fi^
on these heretics, these Lutherans, and Zuinglians, he is straight a famous
and worthy catholic Priest with you. But whereas amongst other things, you
object that as a fault to their disgrace, that they say the ancient doctors
were men, and that the general Councels have erred, it is but to discredit
them with the simple. For you know, that the learned know, that both fathers
and councels have erred, and that you your own selves, when they write or
determine any thing which you like not, will and do as plainly as we
acknowledge the same. For which point let a man read Andrad. first book written
in defense of the Tridentine faith, and but what Pighius has written of purpose
for such cause, to discredit the sixth and seventh Sinods, and he shall most
plainly perceive, that councels are of no further credit with you, then they
shall be found to say nothing to your mislike. But to make it clear, yt it is
no absurdity to say or hold, that councils and fathers may err, and have
erred: it is well known, that as the first Nicean council and sundry after,
accordingly decreed a right, against the Arrians for the truth of Christ's
manhood, so the Tyrian, the Sirmiense, the Ariminense, the Sebucian and the
Antioche^ councels determined with the Arrians against the Nicean and the
truth. The second council of Nice Act. 5. agreed that Angels and men's souls
are bodily and circumscriptible, and yet this council, notwithstanding this
gross error, was confirmed by the 6 council held at Constantinople, which
Pope Agatho has allowed for a general council. The 3. council of Carthage
cap. 23. determined that all prayers at the altar should only be made to the
father. The 2 council of Ephesus was on Eutyches the heretics side, and
decreed for him. Your late councels of Constance and Basil decreed a dangerous
error (in your conceit I am sure) when they decreed the authority of the
general council to be above the Popes. For your holy father could not be
quiet, until he got the contrary decreed in other two Synods at Ferraria, and
Florence. And in the 6 of Constantinople (mentioned before) there was a
perilous heresy agreed on (I am sure in your judgment) Canonthirty six,
against your Popes title, namely that the Bishops of Constantinople should
enjoy and have equal privileges with them of Rome. See also the twenty two
Chapter of the Mileuitan council Ca. the 26. of the 3 council at Carthage and
the 92 Chapter of the African, and the Epistles of the same, to Boniface and
Caelestine, and you shall find plain and direct Canons against the Supremacy,
that now your Popes calle^ge. You were best therefore not only to be co^te^t,
that we say, general councils may er, but to learn to say so, as well as we,
your selves all the sort of you or else you see, you are not friends to your holy
father. You may do it, I warrant you, without any discredit. For August. a
great doctor in his 2. book, and 3. Chap against the Donatists says, that
the very general councels are often corrected, the former by the later, as
often as by trial and experience the thing is opened, that before was shut.
And therefore disputing against Maximinus li. 3. ca. 14. he calls him from the
councils to the touchsto^e of ye scriptures. And as for the doctors, the same
Aug. being one of the chief of the^, in his 2. book. and 2. Chap. against
Cresconius, plainly confesses, that the judges, or doctors of the Church, as
being me^, are often deceived: and therefore in his 2 book of one baptism, he
writes, that we may argue and doubt of the writings of any bishop, whosoever
he be, but we may not so do of the holy scriptures. If he had not thought, yt
he himself not only might, but had erred, would he ever have written as he
did, a book of Retractio^s or Reca^tatio^s? And indeed in his 2 book, and 4.
Chap. ad Bonifaciu^, and against yt 2. Epist. of the Pelagia^s, it appears,
yt he was of opinion, yt of necessity children were to receive ye Communion, or
else they could not be saved: because it is written Ioh. 6. Except ye eat the
flesh of the son of man, and drink his blood, ye have no life in you: and
Pope Innocent, and many of the fathers were of the same opinion then. And yet I
think now your selves hold this to be an error, as well as we. And who will
read his fourth book de anima and eius origin ad Vincentium, and his prologue
to his retractions, he should there plainly find him confess, that there are
many things in his words worthily to be found fault withal, which he
craves that his reader would not cleave unto in any case, but rather pardon
and follow him non erra^te^, sed in melius proficientem: not erring, but better
profiting: Yea in the later place he says, that he would not arrogate that
perfection to himself then being old, much less when he was young, not to
err. And I think that you are not ignorant, that Irenaeus and Papias, were
plain Millenaries: and that Cyprian and a number of bishops in his time in
Affricke, held in council decreed, yt rebaptizatio^ of those that had been
baptized by heretics, which both you and we count errors notwithstanding now.
Why therefore, especially when the names and titles of councels or men are
urged, to the prejudice of the truth taught in the scriptures, may we not say,
that which is true, that they both might and have erred? And thus you have your
answer, first generally to your principal scope in these 4. or 5. last
Chapters, set down together, because the drift of them was but al one: and now
also a further answer to the rest of the matters and words therein here and
there scattered. But yet you have not quite done with this matter, let us
therefore further follow you, to see if you have said any more to the purpose
in that which is behind, then in that which we have heard already.

The XXVII. Chapter.
I Pray Syrs, since you are so absolute, answer me to this objection: A vain
question, for whoeuer of us either said or wrote so?
is it good to believe almaner of people, that do allege the Scriptures, or
not If ye say, yea, why do not you believe the above named Valentinus,
Apollinaris, Hebion, Cherintus and Nestorius, with diverse others, that have
sought to maintain their errors with the new and old Testament. If you say
no, but that we ought rather to follow the counsel of S. John in his first
Epistle, cap. 4. The which is, not to believe every spirit, but that we ought
to prove, whether it be of God or no: Our proof is, that our sen^e wherein we
allege them, stands with the rest of the scriptures, is according to the
analogy of faith and good manners, and received to be the sense of ancient time
and from time to time amongst the sound teachers in the Church.
What proof will you show us of yours? Show the privilege that you have, by
the which God dies enioine us to believe your Gospel, rather the the Gospel
of the Pelagians, Nouatians, Nestorians, and other such false Apostles,
considering that they have alleged the Scriptures as well as you. If you say,
that they were heretics, abusers of the people, and rauishing wolves clothed
in lambs skins, and false interpreters of the Scriptures, all this is
certain: The more have they to answer for, that report so, for they can never
prove it to be so.
But what though the like report goes of you? Ye say, that ye are sent from
Cod, to reform the Church, They say as much. Which of hem I pray you seeing
they lived before the B. of Rome be^ame Antichrist.
They preached, that the Pope was Antichrist, Yea but the Church of Rome then
and now are not al one.
shevving themselves very eloquent in detracting and railing against the
Catholic Roman Church, you do the like. You say so: but you ^ay more then
you can prove.
At every word they did allege the Scriptures in their Sermons, to confirm
their doctrine, as you do for yours. That that they preached, was called by
them the Gospel, and the pure word of the Lord: these are the very terms
that you use among your holy prophets: they have been condemned as
heretics by the general Councels, Not yet by any lawful and f ee gene^al
council, was ever our religion, or any point of it condemned.
you are so likewise. They did appeal unto the pure word of God you do the
like: Yet are they proved to be false This i^ flat dogs eloquence.
cogging knaves, and so shall you. Then seeing there is so great an uniformity
betvveene you, upon what ground Upon this, that we are able to justify our
alleging of them to to be sound and catholic, which they are not.
shall we confirm that reason that should condemn them as heretics, and
allow you for Catholics. This question is rather meet to be proposed to you,
who have learned of the Donatists to tie the Church to your popes sleue and to
shut it up within the narrow limits of his dominion
S. Augustine in his Epistle. 161. did put unto a Donatist called Honoratus
this problem: We desire thee, not to think it much to answer us to this:
what cause do thou know, or what thing has there been done, that has made
Chirst loose his inheritance, spread over all the world, to come to be contained
only in Affricke, and there only to remain? We put the like question to
Though your popish Church has been none of his ^nherita^ce a good while, yet
he has had his inheritance always and ever will have, and this we hold and
teach and therefore your question, is v^i^e, frivolous and fla^^e^ous
Calvin, Beza, Viret, and the rest, that it may please the^ to tell us, if that
by chance they have been advertised, through what occasion our Savior Christ
has lost his inheritance, that is to say, the Church spread over all the
world, to remain now in the later days, with a company of rude Swizers, or
in two or three corners besides, and not among the rest (for there is a great
number of good Catholics) what badge ca^ you show, or what sign to make us
know, that you are the successors of the Apostles of Christ? If that the
Scriptures that you allege, ought to be a sufficient proof, we are content to
accept it, There as no need that we should do so, because we can prove, that
we allege them soundly and they falsely and corruptly.
if you will be content to grant the like unto the above named heretics,
which have fortified their ca^pe with as many places more, then you do
allege. Now if that (notwithstanding the scriptures by the^ alleged) you do
condemn the^ as heretics, because that they did interpret the^ contrary to
that that the Understanding by the Church the true Church, that is one of our
reasons, but that is not al, why we reject them and their manner of alleging
them, principally we reject them, because by the plain evidence of the
scriptures we can confute them. And to despise the judgment of the popish
Church, is not to despise the judgment of the true Church of Christ.
church does teach (and to say truth, you can imagine no other excuse) to
what purpose do you take upon you the names of Catholics, seeing that you
commit the like offense? The diversities of those old heresies grounded upon
the Scriptures ill interpreted, do teach us, that we should not permit the
noise of your reformed Gospel that sounds so shrill, to make us reele from
Yours is but ancient, as Ieroboams religion was, when the 10 tribes were
brought into captivity.
our ancient faith, and without going so far to seek that, that we have so
near at hand. Let us talk of the present time, how many contrary sects does
there reign? How many heads of heresies? With variety of names, you need
lesly increase the number, as your forfathers were wont to do, with those
who^ they first called Waldenses.
Some are Lutherans, some Anabaptists, some Purita^s, some Protestants, some
Precisia^s, and all these do fortify their ca^pes with Scriptures, to fight
one against another. The Zuinglia^s and the Caluinists on the other side do
write, that al these do err, and they prove it by Scripture. The Anabaptists
laugh at all the rest. The Prophets Celestes, which is another sect, do no
less, grounding themselves upon their revelations, because that David says:
Psalm. 84.
Hear what the Lord does speak in me. The Deists or Trinitaries, which are
come last of al, cry out and say, that all they are heretics, and they
prove it by the old and new Testament. I pray now tell me, which of al these
shall I receive, seeing that they do all allege the holy Scriptures? If we
receive some and not all, those that are refused will say, that we offer them
wrong: for they have This is but your saying still, for you shall never be able
to prove this.
their shoppes stored with as good stuff of the scriptures, and as well
alleged as all the rest. If we receive them all, it will be a renewing of the
old confusion of Babylon, through the neglecting of so many Gospels. If you
say, that we ought to follow those that conform themselves most unto the pure
word of God, that will come to one end: for if I do demand of you, how we
shall know which do conform themselves most unto the truth, Indeade we say
and we are not ashamed of it, that only by the assistance and direction of the
holy Ghost, in trying their interpretations by the scriptures, it must be
discerned who alle^geth them best.
you answer me, that it must be done by the grace of the holy Ghost, sent by
the Lord, if with a true heart he is inuocated of the faithful. Seeing you know
so well the way how to agree together, how comes it to pass, that you have
not used it this forty or fifty years, which are the precincts of the time,
since your ancient Church began: seeing that you have assembled so many times
together, We have done so, and Gods name be praised for it, so far we have
obtained our prayer, that we are able by the light of Gods spirit to discern,
who amongst all these and all others (amongst whom you papists are the
principal) alleages them best, and with those we hold peace, for the rest we
morn, yet comforting of our selves with this, that necessary it is for the
trial of the Lords, that there be such sects.
why have ye not prayed unto the Lord, to send the spirit of truth to make
peace amongst his Apostles? I think that you are not so unshamefast, that you
will deny the quarrels and debates, that have risen among you: The stir
betwixt these two, though it has been more then should be, yet neither so
much has it been, at least for the followers of Calvin, as you would seem,
nor nothing comparable to the brawlings and furious contentions amongst your
selves often.
I do not say, in light words, but in great battles, in railing processes,
in horrible exco^munications, sent from the Churches of the Lutherans unto the
Caluinists, and from the Caluinists unto the Lutherans, as I have set forth at
large in the book that I made of the Sacrament: and therefore ye are greatly
ouerseene, that ye have not inuocated the spirit of the Lord, as Calvin has
taught you in his Catechism, to the end that you may come to some accord.

The XXVII. Chapter.
FIrst here you ask us, whither it be good to believe al manner of people that
allege scripture? We answer you, no: but with S. Ioh. 1. Epist. 4. We wish all
men to try the spirits whither they be of God, or no, before they believe
the^. And we add further with John in the same place, Hereby shall ye know
the spirit of God. Every spirit that confesses, that Jesus Christ is come in
the flesh, is of God: and that spirit, which confesses not that, is not of
God, but is the spirit of Antichrist. By which words we answer fully your
second demand also, and give you a proof, that our spirit is of God: and yet
neither these heretics, which you name, nor yours any better, then that
spirit of Antichrist, which John speaks of. For I am sure, you must needs
grant me (if you consider these words of Saint John well) that he speaks
here only of confessing soundly, and rightly, that Jesus Christ is come in
the flesh: which we do (as we are able to prove) by the Scriptures truly
alleged, and neither they nor you are able to prove that, and therefore this
is a plain proof, that ours is of God, and neither yours nor theirs can be.
They confess him not aright to be come in the flesh, in that one way or other,
they erred not only in the doctrine of his office, but also held some heresy
or other against the truth of his person. And you confess him not aright to
be come in the flesh, because not only with some of the ancient heretics (as
namely the Marcionites) for the love you have to your fiction of
Tra^substa^tiation, you hold him to have such flesh, as shall for your peevish
pleasures be without all the natural properties of humane flesh, and so a very
phantasme and not flesh indeed, but also most craftily you take from him that
glorious office, that the Scripture gives him, and translate it to what you
list, and so in effect you deny the cause of his coming. For to what end
came he, but to execute that office, that we are taught in the Scripture, his
heavenly father appointed him? Deny therefore that he has executed that
office, and you deny the cause of his coming. And you know, sublata causa
tollitur effectus: deny the cause and the effect is denied. I know you will
think, that I offer you great wrong, in charging you thus directly with
denying Christ of his office: but if you will have patience a little, if I
prove it not, let me have the shame thereof. You will say for your defense,
that you confess and acknowledge him to be the Savior and redeemer of the
world: and you will say, you believe by him to be saved: I do not deny, but
you will and do say all this, and more also; but what is that to the purpose,
as long as in your deeds and practice you go from it again, and rob him of
that honor, that is due unto him? Judas said unto him, Hail master, and
kissed him, when indeed he betrayed him: and Pilat wrote him, Jesus of
Nazareth king of the Jews, and yet crucified him. But to come nearer unto you,
it cannot be denied, but that the false Apostles, that gave Paul occasion to
write to the Galathians, did not deny these things, which you give out in
words of Christ, this only was their fault, that they taught men to join
their own merits, atteined unto by the observing of Moses law, together with
Christ in the office of justifying the^, as it most clearly appears,
throughout that Epistle. For having of which conceit in their observations of
Moses law, and namely in being circumcised (for otherwise in the same place he
says, neither circumcision, nor uncircumcision avails any thing) he
tells them most confidently chap. 5. that Christ should profitte them
nothing: yea, that they were abolished from Christ and fallen from grace.
Whereupon most evidently it follows, that Paul was of this mind, that
howsoever the law was observed of them that believed in Christ, it might not
be observed with this mind and to this end, thereby together with Christ to
justify the obseruer. You cannot say, that here Paul speaks of observing
the law, to this end before they had faith. For he speaks to such, as after
they had by his ministry attained unto faith in Christ, were now taught by
false teachers, to join their own merits in observing Moses law, with Christ
in justifying. But yet you say, he speaks in this, and in such places only
of the works of the ceremonial law, which was then abolished: wherein you say
more, then you can prove. For he so excludes works from this office of
justifying, that he often aduoutcheth, that justification comes freely, as Romans
3. Ephesians. 2. and he calls salvation the free gift of God, Romans 6. and
therefore as little comes it for moral works sake, as for Ceremonial. But
though you could prove, that he disableth only Ceremonial works, yet you
could not escape the sentence set down by the Apostle against such, as do
them to the end aforesaied. Yes, say you, for we do not teach men to observe
them at all, much less to any such end. What then? you have deuiled a number
of Ceremonial works of your own, as the observing of holy days, and fasting
days, going on pilgrimage, offering to this shrine, and that, taking of holy
water, creeping to the Cross, wearing of this thing and that, and a thousand
such other, which you persuade men and women to observe, with as great an
opinion to merit thereby, as ever the false Apostles taught either Galathians,
Colossians, or any other to observe Moses Ceremonies. And you must remember,
that Paul reasons to the Col. cap. 2. that seeing they were in Christ freed
from the ceremonies of Moses law, which he calls there, the ordinances of the
world, much more they ought to take themselves freed from traditions, touch
not, taste not, handle not, and very reason will tell you, that if in Paul's time
it were a denying and renouncing of Christ, to observe the Ceremonies, that God
himself had appointed once, and which so long by his own ordinance had been
kept in the Church, with that opinion thereby together with Christ to be
justified: much more is it so, to observe these beggarly Ceremonial ordinances
of yours, which yet never had any allowance from God, but do flatly contrary
his will in his word. I know you Jesuits have taught you yet one shift more,
and that is this; that you have not any such opinion in your works moral or
Ceremonial, nor in any thing else, that you do, or use, wherein you have
opinion of merit, for their own dignity, or worthiness considered in
themselves, but for that they are tincta sanguine Christi, that is, advanced to
that force and dignity through the force of the death and passion of Christ.
Wherein satan (as it seems) has been put to try the uttermost of his
cunning. For therein (doubtless) is contained (though colourably) a deep
mystery of iniquity: and yet under new colors, the very same Antichristianitie
in robbing Christ of his office, that was before. For the reason, why we charge
you with denying Christ's office, is, that we take it taught in the word,
that he is a sole, and whole, a full and perfect Savior in himself, and by
himself, because it is write^^ Math. 22. that in the marriage of the kings
son, all things are prepared already: and Act. 4. that his name is the
only name whereby comes salvation. And we find, that you communicate (at
least) some part of this office to men's own works and satisfactions, and that
(which is more monstrous) to the works and satisfactions of others, and to a
number not only of vain and frivolous things, as to holy water, hallowed
grains, Agnus Dei and such like, but also to the doing of some things, which
we know and are most sure of, are horrible sins before God, as to your
blasphemous Masse-saying, and to the unnatural murdering or deposing of
lawful Princes by their own subjects, at your Popes pleasure and
commandment. And by this new shift, none of this former dealing is recanted,
or revoked: but only this is added, that these things thus communicate with
Christ in justifying and saving, not simply by their own virtue, force, and
dignity; but by an efficacy, that they have got through Christ. Whereupon it
must needs follow, does before God and true Christians, that you are grown
more injurious to Christ, then ever any of your forefathers were. For whereas
before, you your selves alone robbed Christ of his office; whiles you taught
plainly, that these things ex condigno, and ex opere operato, that is, even
in respect of their own dignity, and by the work wrought, were meritorious to
everlasting life: now you continue not only your former robbing of him your
selves, but you will make him the principal, or (at least) accessarie to this
robbing of himself. For now in effect you tell us, that he came, and did those
things, which he did in his own person, not thereby in and by himself to
begin and finish our salvation, but to merit by his doings and sufferings,
that these things done by us and others for us, should be the formal cause
of our righteousness, and so of our justification and salvation. So that now
Christ is only a Savior in meriting, that these things (which otherwise
should never have had that force and efficacy) should have a power to deserve
and procure our salvation. Is not this now a trim office, that you have
devised for Christ, that he should be a Savior only in procuring ability
to these things to save? What one jot of Scripture have you for this? Nay, as
the Scripture does manifestly take from works, yea even from the moral and
most righteous works done by the faithful after regeneration, the office of
justifying (as it may appear, in that Abraham's works and Paul's, when they
were in that state, though they were never so full of them, are disallowed to
have any such effect. Romans 4.2. Phil. 3.8.9.) so does it teach us, that Christ
came not, to make other persons or things to have the office of saving men's
souls, but to begin and go through that work so himself, as that no part
of that glory shall be communicated to any other person, or thing. For therein
we read, that his own self bare our sins in his own body on the tree: and
that by his stripes we are healed. 1. Pet. 2.24. and so perfectly, that it is
written Heb. 10.14. we are sanctified by the offering of the body of Jesus Christ
once made, and with one offering has he consecrated for ever, the^ that are
sanctified. Whereupon he calls himself Alpha and Omega, Revel: 1.11. that
is, the first beginner, and last accomplisher of our salvation, or as it is
said Hebr. 12. the author and finisher of our faith. Whereas by this new
Jesuitical divinity, in the matter of justification, and salvation, Christ
has but so borne our sins in his own body and offered himself to death
for us, that howsoever thereby he has begun to heal and cure us, the
ending and finishing it, must be by those other things, and he has done all
this to no purpose, unless his work begun be ended by these things following,
in our selves and others.

O what intolerable blasphemy is this! and into what a bottomless pit of
desperation do these men, the authors of this doctrine, wilfully cast
themselves! For if the case stand so, as they say, how is it possible for any
man at any time ever to have a faith without wavering? which kind of faith S.
James determines to be fruitles. Iam. 1. For when can any man tell, that he
has hit of all those things, that are left besides Christ's merits, to
accomplish the full merit for his salvation? Or how can the soul of man
standing before the judgment of God, without any warrant from God, and
contrary to all reason, persuade it self, that it shall have heaven for these
things, so full of imperfection and vanity, if not impiety? Further, to prove
that you deny Christ his own office, and pin upon him an office of your own
devising, it appears also in this, that you will not let him be King,
Prophet, and Priest to his Church, as the scriptures teach him to be. For
neither will you suffer him to govern his kingdom, according to his own
orders, neither to teach his people only with his own word, nor to save them
only by his own obedience and merits. But in all these you cross him, in
bringing in a number of fashions, laws, and ordinances, yea officers, and
offices into his house, that he never said Amen unto, in teaching men rather
the traditions and inventions of men, then doctrine only, that has warrant
from his mouth, and in setting up a number of means to salvation besides him.

Now as for us, we neither with the ancient heretics, nor yet with you hold
any heresy concerning either his person, or office. For concerning the one, we
hold and believe, that he is perfect God, and perfect man, and yet but one
person consisting of those two natures: and concerning the other, that he is
such a Savior, as that he has begun and finished whatsoever was necessary to
merit or deserve our full salvation by. And therefore when we have done all the
good works, that possibly by his grace we can, yet, though we know and believe
that God will both accept of us, and of those our good works for his Christ's
sake, for fear of robbing him of any part of that office that he took upon
him, we dare not think, that thereby we have any manner of way merited any part
of our salvation. That only we seek at his hands, and through him and his
merits alone we look for it. This doctrine in every point has warrant from
the Scriptures, and from all sound antiquity. And this and the rest of our
whole doctrine tends greatly to advance the glory of God, both in setting
forth the severity of his justice against sin, even to the least sin, and the
infinitenes of his free mercy in Christ: and altogether to throw down man
under the burden of his sins, both original and actual, that he may seek to
rise again not at all by any strength of his own, but only by the grace of
God in Christ Jesus. Whereas yours contrarily tends to this end, to lift up
man in a conceit of himself, and to abscure both the justice, and the mercy of
God: As your doctrines of free will, man's ability to keep and ouerkeepe the
law: of venial sins, even for the littlenes of them, and of man's own
justifying of himself, may make most evident to them, that consider of them.
And therefore seeing it is written, that God resists the proud, and gives
grace to the humble: James. 4.6. and that it is his property, to send away the
rich empty, and to fill the hungry with good things, Luke 1.53, and to
justify the publican, and to send the pharisie home without: Luke 15. a great
sign this is, yea a good proof, that we, rather then you, are led by the
spirit of God. And as for these old heretics, you are bound to believe us,
rather then them, because our doctrine not only by the testimony of the
Scriptures, but also (I dare say) even in your own consciences, is sounder
both concerning the person and office of the Messiah, then theirs: and thus you
are answered both to your first, and second question, which you put unto us in
this Chapter.

But yet you go on, and say, they alleged Scriptures as well as we: that we
deny, for they alleged them corruptly, to prove their heresies, and would
not be drawn to expound one Scripture by another, but peeuishly urged the
literal or wrong sense of some hard places, against the circumstances both of
the same places, and that which is manifestly taught in others: which is your
fashion altogether: and we allege them truly to confirm only the truth,
and therefore are very well contented, that our interpretations should be tried
by all sound and good rules of interpreting. Whereas you add, If we say, they
were heretics, and abused the scriptures, etc. the like report you say is of
us: I say, the more is their fault that so report of us, for they can never
prove it. Howbeit to make your report seem the more probable, you compare our
dealings with theirs, which (by your saying) are very like. But the reader must
be advertised, that you frame their speeches and doings here without book: I
mean, without warrant of any good author that reports these things of them,
even of your own head, that so you may the better make their speeches and ours
alike. I pray you, in what good author did you ever read (and yet here you
confidently aduoutch it) that the Palagians, Nouatians, Nestorians etc. (who
were long dead, and buried before your Pope was hatched) preached, that the
Pope was Antichrist? It may be true that you write, that some of them railed
against the Roman Church, that then was. But, alas, what is this for your
Romish Church now, which is no more like that then, then an apple is like an
oister? Indeed this is one of your tricks, wherewith you coosen the poor
simple people. For it is the fashion of you all, when you find in any ancient
father, any thing that sounds to the credit of the Catholic church, or to
the commendation of the Roman Church in their days, to allege it as spoken
in the commendation of your Romish church now a 1000. years after their death,
whereas there is more difference betwixt yours and that, which they speak of,
in weighty and material points of doctrine, and discipline, then in years. If
your Romish Church now would return to the state of the ancient church of
Rome, and grow once like that, you and we should soon agree. For that is the
thing, that we will stand upon with you, that it is you in your railing upon
our churches, that according to the fashion of these ancient heretics rail
upon the church of Rome that then was, rather, then we. For our churches are
1000. times more like it indeed, the^ yours as it is now. Nether are you able
to produce your authors, to prove that these heretics did at every word
allege scripture, or appeal only thereunto. For the contrary is evident both
in Epiphanius, Tertullian, Irenaeus, August: and others that wrote against
them. For they testify, that many of them shunned the trial of the Scriptures
only, and fled, even as you do, to traditions, succession of fathers,
visions, and other such like motives, as councels, fathers, antiquity, consent
etc. as I have showed cap. 3. and as appears evidently in diverse of these
fathers writings, as in Tertul: in praescrip: contra haeret: Epiphanius in many
places de haeresibus: Chrysostom: in Math: 4. Irenaeus libro: 3. cap. 2. August:
Contra Maxim: lib. 1. de Baptismo contra Donatist: lib. 3. cap. 2. in Joan:
Tract. 13. de vnitate Ecclesiae: cap. 15. Epist. 165. ad Generosum. Who but one
of your Religion would ever thus grossly abuse his simple poor Reader? You
yet, as a man that had said all this while nothing, but that you might truly
say, proceed on with your comparison, and tell us, that they were condemned by
general Councels, and so are we: they were found cogging knaves, and so shall
we. Whereunto I answer, that those which you call general Councels, were but
late Conuenticles of your own, since the apostasy of your Church from the
ancient Roman Church, wherein there was indeed no freedom of a lawful
Council enjoyed, and therefore whose condemnation we need care no more for,
then Christ and his Apostles needed to care for the sentence of condemnation,
that in their times the high Priests, Scribes, and Pharisees gave of them and
their doings in their councels. And as for your unmannerly prophecy, we need
not esteem it. For neither is your mouth any slander, nor yet do we take you
to be a true Prophet. But seeing (say you) they and you be thus like, why
should they be condemned for heretics, and you absolved, and received? I
answer, the likelihood is denied, and the reason I have given you already. As
for Augustines problem you talk of, it is impertinent, and touches us not.
For we do not with the Donatists shut up Christ's inheritance within the
compass of any place, as they did in Afric, neither say we yt Christ at any
time has lost his in heritance, but we say, that Christ has had always, and
has still his Church without restraint of place, wheresoever it pleases him:
neither does it remain now only with a few rude Switzers, and in two or
three corners besides, as it pleases you to speak. For it is well seen, that
diverse whole kingdoms, as England, Scotland, and Denmark have received our
Religion, and that indeed it grows so mightily in most places, that it
makes the stoutest of you greatly fear, that ere it be long, your kingdom of
the Pope will be greater in the west Indies, then in these parts.

Having done with urging this problem (which indeed fitteth you Papists
better, then us, in that you tie Christ's inheritance to your Popes girdle) you
tell your Reader (but you mean to prove it at leisure) that these heretics,
that you have talked on all this while, have fortified their camp with as
many more places, as we allege: and therefore once again you would have a
reason, why that notwithstanding they should be counted heretics, and not
we? You make us answer, because they did interpret them contrary to the
Churches doctrine: which you suppose, is the only answer we can give. But I
have told you, that because when there is question of truth, there is commonly
also question of the church, our answer is, that their alleging of them was
heretical, and ours true and right, as may be proved by the scriptures
themselves, and by the right rules of interpreting of them. But be it, that we
answer as you imagine, what have we lost, or you gained thereby? This say you,
that you have no more right, then they, to be counted Catholics, because you
allege them also contrary to the Churches doctrine. Here again you deceive
both your self and your Reader, with the ambiguity of the word Church. For if
we answer, that we reject their allegations, for that they alleged them
contrary to the Churches doctrine that then was: we by the Church, understand
a sound and sincere church of Christ in possession of sound Religion, and not
whatsoever Synagogue will entitle it self with the name of the Church, and so
under the name of the Church war against the true church. In which sense
only your Church (against whose doctrine we allege them) has the name of a
church. And yet you, as though it must needs be granted you, that your church
is as well ye church of Christ, as that that was in their times, you make our
fault and theirs one, because we contrary yours, which is the church falsely so
named: whereas they in theirs co^traried the churches doctrine truly so
termed. You must prove therefore your Church now, and that which was 1000.
years ago, at least, to be al one in doctrine (which you can never do) before
you can prove their fault and ours to be all one. Howsoever this use yet, you
will make of the variety of opinions, and the alleging of the Scriptures by
these heretics, that you will not remove from your Religion, or faith (which
falsely you call ancient) for all the shrill noise of our Gospel. Whereunto
this only I reply, that if now (the diversity betwixt their dealing and ours
herein showed you, as it is) you that notwithstanding persist in this mind
upon this ground, you therein shall show your selves to be led rather by
will, then wit, or any sound wisdom.

But at last you give over wandering any longer so far abroad, for examples to
this purpose, and you will talk (you say) but of the sects and heads of
heresies of this present time: who all likewise allege scripture, and
condemn one another. And therefore, having reckoned up Lutherans,
Anabaptists, Puritanes, Protestants, Precisians, Zwinglians, Caluinistes,
Caelestes, Deistes, and Trini^^ries, you would know of us, which of these you
should receive. And to make your question the harder to answer, you add
(saying) If we receive some, and not all, they that are refused will think
they have wrong offered the^. For they have as good store of scripture well
alleged, as the rest: and if all should for this cause be received, then
thereupon would follow a Babylonicall confusion. This objection, taken from
the variety of sects and opinions in these days, I have so answered in
answering to your fourth chapter, that thereby I have made it most clear, that
(though you had as great ground for it as you pretend) yet all that variety
neither can nor ought to prejudice any thing our Religion. And therefore unto
that answer of mine hereunto, I must refer the reader both now and
hereafter, whenever it comes, for his satisfaction: yet this here I would
have him further to note, that to make the number seem the greater, you have
here reckoned up them as different Sects, and heads of heresies, amongst whom
either there is full agreement, as betwixt them, whom you call Caluinists and
Zwinglians, or but such difference, as notwithstanding they agree in the
substantiallest, and fundamental points of Religion, as the Lutherans and
Caluinists, the Protestants, and they whom you term Puritanes. Which
differences if they be sufficient with you to make different Sects, and
several heads of heresies, then as many several orders as there be amongst
you of your religious men, and women, and as many several sorts of schoolmen
as you have, differing amongst themselves, in questions of divinity, so many
several Sects there are amongst you: all which would rise to a marvelous
long beadrole. And indeed he that considers well these things, though he
shall find you like Sampsons foxes tied together by the tails, with the thong
of the Popes supremacy, yet otherwise he shall and may most easily find,
that you are far more justly to be charged, to nourish within your Synagogue
of Rome, multitudes of sects, and heads of heresies then we, both for that you
exceed infinitely in number and matters, and for that whereas some of ours, to
our grief, unwillingly are termed by our enemies Lutherans, Caluinists,
Zwinglians, etc. you delight and take pleasure in your distinct titles of
division, as to be called Dominicans, Fra^ciscans, Jesuits etc. Secondly,
there are some of these, which you here name as Caelestes, Deistes, and
Trinitaries, and the Sect of the family of love (wherewith elsewhere some of you
charge us) who are far liker you then us, and have rather sprung up amongst
you, and of you, the^ of us. And this is certain, that all these, our men have
been more painful to detect, and confute them, then ever were yours. Our
answer therefore to your demand hereupon builded, is this, though all these
allege scripture, yet neither allege they it as well as we, neither is there
any remedy, but that you must and ought to receive them, for the true members
of the Catholic church (howsoever others allege them) that allege them
best and soundliest. But then, you will say, you are as far of, as you were
in the beginning, seeing every one will stand upon this, that he and his side
allege them best, and therefore once again you will reply and say, that to
determine who does best allege them, is a thing so hard, that few shall be
able to find it out: and therefore in the end you shall be driven to think
it necessary, that the Pope should be judge in this case, otherwise men shall
never be at a certainty whom to follow. Hereunto I answer that the harder the
matter is, the more pains men ought to take thereabout, seeing to know and
find the truth, stands them so much upon: secondly, I say with S. Paul,
that when you and all the world have done what you can, there must be heresies
amongst me^, that they which are approved amongst the^ may be known. 1. Cor.
11. Thirdly, how hard soever it seem, yet by searching of the scriptures, and
examining the allegations and interpretatio^s of them, by the rules of right
interpreting (wc I before set down) in humility of spirit, God will lead the^
yt be his (how simple soever) at one time or other by the direction of his
spirit, to find out who they be, that soundliest handle them. For he has
promised, If we seek, we shall find, and if we knock it shall be opened unto
us. Mat. 7.7. And as for the judgment of the Pope, or any one certain man, or
company of me^, because ye Lord in his wisdom foresawe what was in man, and
so how prone to err: in this case he has not appointed us any such to run
unto for the determining of this matter. And therefore it is intolerable
presumption for any such to take upon the^, that ye Lord has made the^ such
judges in this case, that they cannot err. The ministry of men, conference
with men, reading of men's labors upon matters of Religion, and such other good
helps, with an earnest and humble invocation of the name of God, for the
direction of his spirit, are to be used carefully of every man, as he may, in
this case But when all comes to all, we see no other, but yt it is the will
and pleasure of our God, rather to leave us thus to be exercised in scearching
the scriptures, and in traveling by these means to find out the truth, and
to settle our selves therein, the^ to send us for full resolution to any one
man or me^, least so we should after be deceived through the error of those
men, then we shall be this other way. Seeing therefore Christ took this way
himself, both with the devil himself, and with his chaplains, both to confute
their errors and erroneous interpretations, and to confirm the truth, by
searching the scriptures: and neither he nor his Apostles sent us either by
word or their example, to the high Priests then, or unto any other for
resolution of the church or truth, this way as the best and only way we think
all Christians bound to take. And in so doing, let not any man despair, but
that through the goodness of God, he shall be enabled to try the spirits, and to
discern, who amongst all other allege the scriptures soundliest. For we see
it is the fashion of our God, to reueile his truth and the mysteries thereof,
to those that be his; how simple soever, when he does conceal and hide them
from the great men of the world. Mat. 11.1. Cor. 1.

But you say, If this may and must be atteined by the grace of the holy ghost,
obtained of the lord by faithful invocation of his name, how chances it, that
since Luther (for no ancienter you say, (though it be never so false) our
Religion is) you have not obtained that holy ghost, to end your hot
contentions and debates amongst your selves, that so you might be at unity yet
amongst your selves? This is spoken, as though it must needs follow, that
either we have not faithfully prayed unto God for his spirit, or else, if we
have, that then of necessity there neither could be, nor would be, any
difference of opinions, and contentions at all amongst us. If you be of this
mind, then ye manifold differences, schisms, sects, and varieties of opinions,
yt have been, and yet are, in your church (as I have noted cap. 4.) argues in
your Logic, that your church never yet prayed faithfully and effectually for
the holy ghost. But indeed your argument is naught. For it appears (Ioh.
17.) that Christ himself prayed for unity amongst his Apostles, and all that
should believe their doctrine; and no doubt of it, he was heard in that he
prayed for. Heb. 5.7. and obtained, for his heavenly father would deny him
nothing: and yet you have heard (cap 4.) after this there were varieties of
opinions, and hoate contentions betwixt some of them, that doubtless of both
parts were within the compass of Christ's prayer. And therefore that prayer of
Christ, and the prayers of his servants made to that end, are to be
understood to take place, and to be effectual, in that there is so much unity
amongst the true members of the Church atteined thereby, as is sufficient to
hold them together in the communion of saints: which is, if they join
together in holding the foundation, and fundamental points of Religion, though
otherwise there be differences and h^at contentions sometimes amongst them. And
it may not be thought (as you seem to take it) that such prayers either are
not effectually made, or else there must follow thereupon simply an universal
accord in all things. For then Christ's prayer was not effectual, in that
after, Paul and Barnabas were at a^arre Act. 15. etc. That unity, that you
speak of, the Church may strive for here, but she is not to make her account
to atteine unto it, before she come in heaven and be married to her husband
there. And so much unity there is betwixt us, and those whom we count members
of Christ's Church with us, as that, though there be some variety of opinions,
and therefore also contention but too much, yet we join so together here in
the foundation, and other most principal points of our Religion, yt we doubt
not, but the Lord has heard our prayers, and granted us the spirit of unity
so far forth, as that one day we hope in heaven all to join together in
perfect unity, notwithstanding the iarres that otherwise in the mean time, to
try us withal, be found amongst us. You know we pray daily, that Gods will
may be done in earth, as it is in heaven (and so do you, or you are to blame)
and herein we hope, we are heard: and yet simply we never found, nor shall, as
long as the world stands, the will of God so done here, as it is in heaven.
For continually there is disobedience to his will here in one thing or other,
one way or other, even amongst the best, but in that, in such measure, as God
sees this fit to be obtained here, he grants it, we are notwithstanding to
think our prayers effectual. Christ himself prayed (John. 17.15) to deliver
his church from evil, and yet though that prayer was heard, in that God so
far forth preserves his church from evil; as he sees it expedient for the
state thereof here, we see daily that many are the troubles, and evils that the
poor church is encombred withal. And therefore (to conclude) you must
understand, that the faithful prayers of Gods saints are to be accounted
effectual, though the thing they pray for, be not obtained in full perfection
here, as long as so much here is obtained, as the Lord sees to be necessary
and convenient for the estate of his servants. So that notwithstanding the
differences amongst us, you might and would (if you had the grace) join rather
with us in our Religion, then continue in that wherein you are; the professors
whereof are torn a sunder with more and greater differences, then the churches
that receive ours are: howsoever you deceive the simple with the vizarde of
unity, in that you join together under your Pope against the truth.

The XXVIII. Chapter.
NOw to turn again to our former purpose, if it were so, that of our own
free deliberation we were minded to forsake our Catholic Religion, If you
should be of no Religion, whiles all of one, were full of one mind^, you must
die a nullifidian I warrant you.
the injurious disputations that you use among your selves, were sufficient, to
make us to suspe^d our judgment, without leaving to any of both parties,
until that we could see more resolute in your opinions, being the bardest
matter, the knowing in what cu^try the residence should be kept for that
matter. Where and when? nay our absolute sentence i^, as our books do
testify, and we prove it out of the ancient fathers, that your doctrine in
this point is but new, and a very young, ^^ng, in comparison of that you would
here have it seem.
You have given absolute sentence, saying, that the Catholic church has
erred, even from the Apostles time unto this present, in praying to God for the
souls of those that are dead, constituted in a third place called Purgatory.
You should, me think, at the least allow a third place, although it be not
that, to receive the souls of those, whose consciences you have so troubled,
that they know now, neither what is their faith, nor of what Religion they
should be: Such v^setled and unstable persons for all your foolish gibing, you
know well enough who has a right unto and that their place is known, though
your purgatory had never been dreamed of.
for when they read Luthers works they are Lutherans, when they meet with
Caluins works they are Caluinists, and at the last they do not know, which
side indeed is the truest, being both false: and therefore I think it were
good, that a sequestration were made, that neither God nor the Devil might
have part of their souls, till there were a farther inquiry made of such a
number of sects, and that some good and honest arbitratour might give
judgment, as concerning which party has most right. And in the mean while I
beseech god, to open so the eyes of the people, that they may see both your
errors and their own, and that through the abundance of their sins, he
permit the^ not to fall into an Heathenisme, unto the which you do seek to
draw them with so many contrary Gospels.

The XXVIII. Chapter.
ONce again you object unto us, the contention betwixt the Lutherans and
Caluinists: which (you say) is cause sufficient, not only to make you stay
from yielding your consent to either of us, though otherwise you were willing
to forsake your Religion, which wrongfully you call Catholic: but also so
troubles the consciences of them that read the books written on both sides,
that they are led one while on the one side, anon again on the other, and so
in ye end they cannot tell of what Religion to be For whose sakes, though
otherwise (as you say) we give absolute sentence, that the Catholic church
has erred, eue^ from the Apostles times to this present, in praying to God for
the souls in purgatory, you think yet we should appoint some third place or
other to receive their souls, until it were determined, with of these belong to
God, and which to the devil. And then you conclude this Chapter, with a
solemn prayer to God, to open the peoples eyes to see both our errors, and
their own sins, least for them through these varieties of opinions amongst
us, they be drawn to heathenisme by Gods permission. This contention in the
later end of your former Chapter you wonderfully amplify, telling us of great
battles, railing processes, and horrible excommunications, that have passed
about this matter of the sacrament, on both sides: and yet there, in another
book, which you have made (you say) of the sacrament: you signify unto us,
that you have bestowed more cost to amplify this matter. Against this and such
like outcries of these men about this matter (gentle Reader) thou art to arm
and stre^gthen thy self, with that which I have set down in the fourth
Chapter concerning this matter: whereby I have made evident demonstration unto
thee, that it is no new thing amongst the famous teachers in the Church, and
true members thereof, to have as great and hot contentions, as ever there has
been amongst us in this. And if that which I have said there were not
sufficient, I could now further show you, that not only there is as great a
controversy now and has been a long time amongst themselves, the nature of
their Religion considered, as any they can charge us with: namely this, whither
their Pope or general Councels have the greater and higher authority, but also
I might easily again say, and say truly (as they themselves know well enough)
that in ancient times in the Churches of Christ, there were such lamentable and
grievous contentions between Paulinus and Flauianus, Lucifer and Eusebius, the
Meletians and Eustathians, all yet otherwise being for and in the
substantialest points of Religion sound Christians, as that with great trouble
to the Church, they shunned one another communion, and that for very many
years together, as you may read in Epiphanius libro. 1. Tom. 2. in Theodoret
lib. 1. cap. 8. etc. in Socrates libro. 2. cap. 33. and 34. and in Zozomen
libro. 2. cap. 17. and 18. And we read histor: tripart: libro. 1. cap. 12.
that Epiphanius and Chrysostom were at such hoate contention and enmity (and
yet they were famous Christians and Bishops both) that departing one from the
other, the one spitefully said to the other, thou shall never die Bishop, and
the other said to him as uncharitably, neither shall thou get home to thy
Bishopric alive: both which their imprecations or predictions, as the story
shows, came even so to pass. For Chrysostom died banished, and the other
before he got home to Cyprus. If you would see what controversy there was
betwixt Cyprian, Cornelius and Stephanus Bishops of Rome, read Augustine
contra Donatistas libro. 5. cap. 23. and 25. and Eusebius. lib. 7. cap. 3. and 4.
And who is so ignorant, that the Church stories and ancient writers, ministers
unto us but too too great store, in all ages of controversies, and those also
too hoatly followed even amongst Christians, of great name and fame in their
times. And therefore what vain thing is it either for you, or any of your
fellows in this sort still to amplify this one controversy about the
Sacrament amongst us, as though it were sufficient cause of all, or of any of
these things, which you infer thereupon against us. Had there been any
wisdom in them that lived in these ancient times, when these contentions were
that I have spoken of here and elsewhere, thereupon to have gathered either
all, or any of these things? Nay, it is evident, that if thereupon they had
either stood a loofe from the truth, grown Neuters or Atheists, that they
had been without excuse before God. For seeing to know the truth, and to be
settled in it, is a thing so necessary as it is, the more difficult it is made
by such means to find it out, the more thereby they that are the Lords, and
have any grace, are provoked to labor, and search to find it, and to settle
themselves the stronglier in it. And therefore seeing such offenses have been,
and always in some measure are like to be for the exercising of the Church,
and trial of Gods children* you and such as you, that by such discourses, as
this, lead the people to gather such lessons thereupon, as to suspende their
judgment till all parts be agreed, or now to be carried this way, now that
way, as long as the contention lasts, seem to be disposed, to teach the
people to learn how to be Atheistes. If you minded to have them settled in
Religion, and preserved from neutralitie, the mother of Atheism, it were your
parts to join with us (especially in these great diversities of opinions
about Religion, that be now a days in the world) to persuade them most
diligently to search the Scripture, and thereby to try all spirits, and their
opinions, whither they be of God or no: yea even so much the more, for these
varieties sake, that so they might find the truth, and be settled in it. For
they may not fainte, or give over thus doing for this: for necessary it is that
these should come: these have been, and will be for the trial, who they be
indeed, that thirst after the truth, and will cleave unto it. But in taking
this contrary way, whatsoever you say, not we, but you lead men, and that
with a strong hand to Atheism. And so much the more folly you show, in making
these collections of yours of these controversies amongst us, seeing amongst
your selves i^ were an easy matter, to put you in remembrance of a number as
hot and feircely followed contentions, as this yet ever was amongst us. Some
thing to make this appear, I have noted Chapter the 4. but seeing you have
never done with this objection, the better to make your vanity therein appear,
let the reader further understand, that your Popes themselves amongst
themselves one against another, have further proceeded in malicious contention,
then ever the Lutherans, or Protestants did. For (as Platina writes) when Pope
long after him (for Boniface the 6. his immediate successor was Pope but 25.
days) carried such hatred toward him and his proceedings, that he caused his
decrees to be abrogated, and (as other Historiographers write of him) he caused
him to be taken out of his grave, and solemnly to be in a council disgraded:
which when he had done, therewith not content, he cut of his two fingers, that
he used to consecrate withal, and cast them into the river Tibris. But Romanus
the first succeeding him, ratified again Formosus doings, and abrogated and
disanulled all Stephens proceedings against him. Whose course Theodorus the 2,
and especially John the 10 followed, in justifying, and condemning Stephens
doings against him in another council at Rauenna, consisting of seventy four
bishops. Howbeit Sergius the 3. the 4 Pope after, takes Stephens part against
Formosus, and that so hoatly, as that once again, though he were the ninth
Pope from Formosus, he causes his body to be taken up out of his grave,
disgradeth him again, beheadeth him, cutteth of the 3 fingers that were left
him of his right hand, and threw his body, and the pieces thereof despitefully
into Tyber. About the year 1354 (as Godfridus de Fontanis writes) there grew
and burst out marvelous hoate contentions betwixt the Friars of Dominicke and
Francis in France, about their privileges, and the prelates of France and the
Scholars of Paris: insomuch that there were public and bitter Sermons made
by one against another, and the one side excommunicated another. And Matthew.
Paris. reports, that there was by the prelates of France, and the doctors of
Paris, nine erroneous conclusions (which by his report were of matters of great
weight in religion) laid to the charge of the Gray-friers, for the which they
excommunicated them, and for which there was hot stir on both sides. About
the year 1470. there was a notorious contention also betwixt the Dominicke
friars, and the Minorites, the one side following Scotus, and the other
Aquinas, whither Mary was conceived in original sin or no: the Minorites,
with Scotus, holding the negative; and the other, with Aquinas, the
affirmative: which in the year 1509 grew so great, that it troubled and
divided al these Western parts of the world, notwithstanding that Pope Sixtus
the 4, had given out his bull in the year 1576. on the Minorites side.
Insomuch that some of the Dominicke friars were burned at Berne, for their
devises to maintain their faction, as witnesses both Pencer, and Munster. And
who knows not of the 24. great schisms (at least) which have been in the
Romish Church? during which times (some of them lasting very long) their
Church was torn into so many factions, as there were Popes and antipopes.
Amongst which factions and their heads, there grew sometimes wars indeed,
and when they were quietest, railing processes and excommunications one of them
against the other in most bitter manner (as the stories of those times do
testify) were usual amongst them. But what should I ru^ne any further into
this matter? Seeing it is a thing most certain, and whereof no man can be
ignorant, that has taken any pain in reading Stories, that the Church of Rome
for all her brag of unity, these late years has been so full of hoate and
fiery contentions, as that never a country, never an order, never a Cloister
or Church amongst them, but it has had most tumultuous contentions, at one
time or other, both within themselves, and with others. And therefore, if this
contention amongst us be cause sufficient of such conclusions, and dangerous
consequents, as you set down in this chapter, what my all these be, which we
know have been amongst you, and of like, whereunto we know, your Church is yet
full? And that more is, certain it is, that howsoever co^fidently you write,
that there have been excommunications betwixt the Caluinists and the Lutherans,
one against another about this matter (though with grief we must confess,
that it may be, that both parts have exceeded their bounds but to far) you
make here a greater show of it, the^ there is just cause. For whatsoever
certain of the Lutherans (as you term them) have done in excommunicating the
other, yet I think you can never prove, that Calvin, or any of his judgment
in this point, have proceeded to far against any of them. But if they had, why
should this seem so strange a thing unto you. For you know, I am sure, that
Victor once bishop of Rome did excommunicate certain bishops in his time of
the east Church, because they would not join with him and the west Church in
the time of observing Easter. And that Stephanus another bishop of Rome went as
far against Cyprian for his opinion of rebaptizing, you cannot be ignorant.
Again you know, that there are but few of the Lutherans, that pursue this
controversy so hoately (the greater part being contented to deal in it more
brotherly, and quietly) and that the hoatest of them also have been so
thoroughly answered to all their objections, as that there begins to be
greater hope of unity herein ere it be long, then you well like of, or then
shall come to pass indeed if you can let it. But alas (though it has been far
more, especially of the one side, then any way can be justified) yet what has
been their bitterness and heat, of either side, at any time to be compared, with
the bannings and cursings, fightings and brawlings, murderings, manglings, and
all barbarous extremities, that the malicious and spiteful heart of man can
devise, that have been amongst your most holy fathers, the Popes of Rome
themselves, and their favorers and followers at sundry times, and for many
years together. Howsoever, as long as both parts agree in the fundamental
points of Christian religion, and in ye other most necessary and fruitful
documents concerning this sacrament (as clearly appears by a book lately
set forth of the Harmony of our confessions) and the controversy lies only
about the manner of the real presence, and eating with the mouth, which
mouth-eating (as all sides confess) may be, and yet without fruit to the
receiver, the benefit indeed arising by his presence only to the faith of the
communicant: the matter is not of so great moment, and weight, as that either
you should need to make such a do about, or that the maintainers thereof
should need to strive so eagerly for. Which (I hope) God will in his good time
reveal unto them, and so make them to give over their contention, and to grow
into unity in this matter with their brethren. I cannot but tell you yet before
I end this Chapter, that you very greatly belie us, when you write; that we
have given absolute sentence, that the catholic Church has erred even from
the Apostles times unto this present, in praying to God for the souls of those
that are dead, constituted in a third place called Purgatory. For both your
deuyses of Purgatory, and of praying to God for the releife of souls there,
we say, and constantly defend to be but popish devises, found out and
grounded but upon humane reason, dreams and fond visions, and apparitions, and
neither taught by the Apostles, nor any true pastor of the Church of Christ,
for three hundred years at least after Christ. Tertullian was the first, and
that in a book written by him when he was a Montanist, that makes any mention
toward the allowance of prayer for the dead. And until the Florentine
council, the greek Church could not be brought to join with you, in this
doctrine of yours as you know well enough. And therefore it had been more for
your credit and honesty, to have spared this your merry conceit, and pleasant
devise of wishing us, though we refuse your Purgatory, to provide a third
place for them, whom our contentions make constant on neither side. For either
(if you had been wise) you would have uttered that your conceit with more
truth in your first entrance into it, or else you would have let it alone for
altogether.

The XXIX. Chapter.
IT does appear well, by that that I have said, how the assurance of your
vocation to the ministry is but founded upon sand, for as much as you do
seek particulerlie a contrary meaning every one to his own particular
sense, being not this the way that an extraordinary minister sent from God,
should use to confirm his doctrine: for this has been the custom of all
old heretics, as I have already said. There is a very great difference
between setting forth the Scripture to refourme ones religion, and to reform
ones conditions: for when there is any question of the refourming of ones
manners, Good stuff, by this divinity then men may by the warrant of the
Apostle, take the scriptures in diverse and sundry senses.
there is no need to regard, whether the doctrine be new or old: for (as the
Apostle says) let every man take it to his own sense: but when it is to be
talked of, as touching ones faith, the Catholic ought greatly to beware of
And such be all they, whosoever made them, that will not stand with the rest of
the scriptures: of which kind your popish interpretations be.
singular interpretations, and to hold them as very suspicious. If this rule
be received and followed, your popery will be found new devises, and will you
nil you, you shall become all one with (...)
He ought to follow the sentence that is holden and taught by the ancient
Catholic Church, without making any account of al these new devises: for even
as, when one will repair an old house, he dares commit it to any mason,
although his cunning be but small: but if the foundation must be touched, he
will seek the best masters he can find. Even so, when one will correct me for
my evil life or conditions, although that it be so, that he that seeks to
reform me, be not of the wisest of the world, and that he allege to me some
place or figure of the scripture, not altogether to the purpose, yet all this
ought to turn to me to one effect: for I know his meaning, although he cannot
well express it, the which is to have me change my naughty life, and to leave
my ill conditions. But all the pack of you shall never be able to prove ^opery
to be thus grounded.
But when he shall come to touch my faith, and to persuade me from that, that
all my ancetours did ever hold, from that, that the Catholic church derived
from the Apostles has holden and does hold, and from that that both the
Scripture, and the general Councels, and all the ancient doctors teach and
affirm: in the repair of this foundation I ought to trust none, but even the
very best, I mean not one or two, but all these that I have named. And now,
if you say, that they may all err, I pray, remember the old proverb, that
says: he is a fool that thinks that he only is wise, and all the other
fools, and that it is more agreeable to reason, that one only should err,
then one great multitude: for as they say commonly, two eyes see more then one,
and four more then two.

The XXIX. Chapter.
WHat you have gained by all you have hitherto written, to disprove either our
vocation or Religion (for all your great brag here in the beginning of this
Chapter) by weighing together your objections and my answers, now let the
indifferent Reader judge, unto whom I doubt not (your brag notwithstanding)
it shall and will well appear, that both may be builded upon ye rock, for any
thing you have yet said. The only new thing, that you set down in this
Chapter, is this, that the former variety amongst the^ that allege scripture
considered, you allow well, that one should listen to mean men, alleging
scripture, though not very aptly, to reform manners withal. But when they are
alleged to teach faith, then it is meet, that the Catholic man trust none,
but the best, and those alleging them according to the general Councels; and
all ancient doctors. And therefore you write, that the Catholic must take
heed of singular interpretations, that he must follow the sentence held and
taught by the ancient Catholic Church, and not suffer himself to be
persuaded from that faith, that all his ancetours did ever hold, the
Catholic Church has ever held, the Scriptures, general Councels, and all
the ancient doctors do teach. In which case, if one should take upon him to
be wiser then all these, you would have him (according to the proverb)
accounted a fool, that thinks himself only wise, and all others fools,
because in reason it is more likely, that one should err, then al these etc.
Be it that all this were very true, what have you woonne hereby against us? For
neither shall you ever be able to prove (as we have often told you) that your
religion is that ancient Catholic religion, nor your Church to be the ancient
catholic Church, nor that your Church has either the Scriptures, general
councels, or fathers, as you herein take it for granted, on your side. For in
truth you have none of these on your sides: but the only grounds of your
religion are your own private and singular interpretations, and traditions of
men, without warrant either from the Scriptures indeed soundly understood, or
from general Councels, or ancient fathers, that are worthy to be of credit in
Gods Church. For (as we have made appear in infinite discourses against you)
al these are far more strong on our side, then with you. And therefore you
rather are the fools, that seem wiser, the^ all these in your own conceit,
and so labor to draw us from the ancient catholic faith and Christ's true
Church, by your corrupt glosses, and allegations of these, and by your vain
and uncertain traditions of mortal men. Whereof let the reader take for a taste
these few proofs, amongst infinite others used by us. The Scripture with us
teaches justification freely by faith in Christ without works: Romans 3.24.25.
Ephesians. 2.8.9. and you condemn the^ as heretics, yt teach so. The scriptures
with us teach, that Christ's offering himself once for all, has made perfect
all them that are sanctified. Heb. 10.14. and you co^trarily teach, that they
must be perfected by the iteration of his sacrifice in your mass, and by a
number of other things done by themselves, and others for them. The Scriptures
with us teach, that Christ is ascended into heaven, Coloss. 3.1. Act. 1.9. etc.
and that the heavens must contain him, until the restitution of al things,
Act. 3.21. and you contrarily will have him, as often as you consecrate, to come
down, to hide himself under the forms of bread and wine. The scriptures with
us say, concerning the cup in the Sacrament, to all Christians rightly
prepared, Drink ye all of this, Matthew. 26.22. and you say, it is heresy to
hold, that the lay people must drink thereof. To proceed a little further,
the same Scripture in the 2. Commandment Exodus 20.4. forbids (as we do)
both the making and worshipping of Images, to represent God the father, the
son, or the holy Ghost withal; and you allow both these. The scriptures
prefer (as we do) the speaking of five words in the Church that may be
understood, before ten thousand in a tongue not understood: 1. Cor. 14.19.
and your Church (as it appears in having all your service in lat in)
prefers five words spoken there i^ an unknown tongue before ten thousand,
spoken in the vulgar tongue of the people to their edification. Lastly, the
Scriptures (as we do) account marriage honorable among al men in all estates,
and the marriage bed undefiled: Heb. 13.4. insomuch, that they aduouch the
forbidding of it (though under pretense of holiness) to be a doctrine of
Devils. 1. Tim. 4.1.2.3. and yet you condemn it in your priests, as a filthy
life. In like manner is there a plain contrariety betwixt your religion, and
the decrees of ancient and general councels. In my answer to your 17. Chapter,
I have showed you already, that the ancient, famous, first general Council of
Nice, in the 6. Canon thereof, is directly against that pre-eminence that now
you give to the Bishop of Rome, over all Churches. There also you have heard
the council of Gangra pronounce you accursed, for your doctrine against the
marriage of ministers. I have also showed you before, that the 6. general
council holden at Constantinople in the 36. Decree, has flatly determined
against the principal article of your religion, your Popes supremacy, in
determining that the Bishop there should have equal privileges, with your Pope
or Bishop of Rome. The councels also of Constance and Basil against your
received opinion now, preferred the authority of a general Council before the
authority of your Pope. And certain it is, that in the time of Charles the
great, there was a council called at Franckeforde, whereat the Bishops of
France, Germany and Italy were assembled, about the year (as Regin writes in
his 2 book) 794, where the making and worshipping of Images, allowed of by the
false Synod of the Greeks (as he terms it) was condemned. And Hickma^e
Archbishop of Rheames, writing against another bishop of that (...) ( Chap.
20.) somewhat about these times, calls this a general counsel, called by the
will and co^ma^deme^t of the Pope, and Emperor Charles; and witnesses, that not
only there the false Synod of the Greeks, yt made for Images was confuted and
rejected, but also a great book made thereof then sent to Rome. As for
fathers, and ancient doctors, I have plentifully showed to be against you
already for the sufficiency and authority of the Scriptures, Chap. 3. and 5.
against your real presence, Chap. 11. and against your doctrine of
Justification, and other points of your religion, Chap. 16. And it were as
easy a matter to show the^ so to be against you, and with us, in almost all the
rest of the points in controversy betwixt us. At least this most confidently
I do aduouch, that for 600. years you shall never prove them al nor half to
be on your side, in the third part of the questions betwixt you and us: and
therefore you do but too shamefully deceive the simple people in this case,
with a show and brag of that, with you are of al other furthest from.

The XXX. Chapter.
Our Savior Christ did approve his vocation after another sort, then you do
yours. But in another place you know he says, that the word that he had
spok^n, should judge them at the last day. John 12.
Search (says Ioh. 5.
he) the scriptures, for they hear witness of me: he does not say, that they
are Judges, as you say, for you will have none other arbitrator but the word of
God. You know, that they are two different things, to bear witness, and to be
a Judge, and yet the scriptures of the old Testament do co^taine, not only the
verity of the doctrine of our Savior Christ, but therewithal the very
sufficient probation of his person, to teach us the true word of God, and to
overthrow and destroy the whole kingdom of Satan, as it is plainly seen by
those that list to look upon the oracles of the old patriarchs and Prophets.
It is written in the third of Genesis that God said unto the woman, that her seed
should break down the serpe^ts head. And likewise in the said Genesis cap.
12.15.19.22. and 24.
book there is mention made of this divine seed of Abraham: and in the 15.
and 53. Chapters of Esaias, and in the 2. Psalm, David does talk of it. And in
like manner Daniel, Moses and Aaron, withal the rest of the prophets in their
sacrifices have very perfectly painted the coming and passion of our Savior.
Moses left written in the prophecy of Jacob, that the Messiah should come, when
the roial scepter and the administration of it should be taken from the line of
Judah. Daniel was not content to say as the rest, that he should come, There is
no reason in the world, why you should count from that year, for neither
Daniels words will bear it, neither yet the true account of the time from
thence to Christ's death: for that was about the year of the world 3354, and he
suff^ed Anno. 3996. as Functius calculateth. Neither is there any mention in
Dan: of 72. weeks, but of 70, and of numbers whereinto he deuideth that.
Beside it seems that your Arithmetique or wits, were very sle^der to reckon
72. weeke^, that is so ma^y times 7. years, to be just five hundred, when as if
you account again, you shall find, that your number is not so just by 4. as
you would seen, for 72. times 7. makes 504. A sha^efull learned man sure you
have showed your self here.
but he did assign the very time, that is to say, by the seventy two weeks,
counting from the fourth year of the reign of Zedechias, until the time that
our Savior was na^^ed upon the Cross, the which time was just 5. hundred
years. The^, seeing that Christ came at the very prescribed time, he might
well have said unto the Jews, that the Scriptures did bear witness of him.
But yet to say the truth, if he had done no other but this, he had not fully
approved his vocation, to condemn their incredulity. For they might have said
unto him: we know well, that by the saying of the old prophets the Messiah
should come of the line of Jacob, about this time, forasmuch as the scepter of
this kingdom is taken from the line of Judah, to be delivered unto Herod: But
what though, is this a good consequence: But now that t^is point is
sufficiently confirmed already, and so also all the doctrine of the gospel by
him and his Apostles, therefore now to refuse to believe the ordinary
ministers of the Church, unless they prove the same again by miracles, which is
your dea^ing with us, is an evident sign of unbelief.
the Messia^ ought to come about this time, therefore it is I? No, no, show us
your commission, let us see some signs, how we shall know it: for if we should
receive you as our king, it may be, that some other would come and crave the
like, saying, that we were abused Our Savior Christ sore fearing this
objection, to^ke another witness with him besides the scripture, I mean his
miracles. The works that I do (says John. 5.
Christ) in the name of my father, bear witness of me. The like proof is
made, when S. Ioh. Mat. 11.
Baptist sent his disciples to our Savior, to have him teach the true belief,
that they should have in him: this question was put to him, art thou he that
should come, or ought we to attend for some other? Go your ways (said Christ)
and tell John what ye have heard and seen, The blind receive their sight, the
lame do walk upright, the dumb speak, the deaf hear, the lepers are
cured, the dead are raised again, and the poor are preached unto: the which
is as much to say, as, tell John, that I am the true Messiah, and that he ought
to attend ^^ other. I do verify my doctrine both by the Scripture and by
Miracles. For first Esaias does write, that when the Messiah should come, he
should do the Miracles above mentioned. Then, seeing that I have done the^ in
your presence, it follows, that I am he that should come. Thus you see Sirs,
that both the And by the same scriptures, and by the same Miracles, we justify
our vocation and religion: what will you have more?
Scripture and Miracles were necessary for the confirmation of the coming of
Christ among the Jews, who were never harder of belief then we are, according
to your opinion: and therefore blame us not, if we send you packing like
Coggers of the Scriptures, But they do. 2 Thessalonians. 2. and Apoc. 14. verse. 8.6.
and 7.
the which do neither bear witness of your coming, nor yet do any miracles,
the which two things and more, are necessary to make us believe your reformed
Gospel.

The XXX. Chapter.
THe drift of this Chapter is to prove, that Christ did not only warrant his
vocation and doctrine by the testimonies of the Scriptures, but also by
miracles: which I grant you prove sufficiently. Whereupon you would conclude,
that we accou^ting you as hard of belief, as ever were the Jews, therefore we
should prove our calling and religion unto you by both: whereas (if it be true,
that you say) we can do neither, and so are to be sent packing like coggers
only of the Scriptures. Whither the Scriptures give testimony unto our
religion or no. I refer to the reader to judge by that which I have written
already, and by that we have written from time to time in our books made in the
defense of our religion. And concerning our vocation and calling, I trust, I
have sufficiently confirmed that, by the^ also, in that I have showed our
calling to be conformable to the calling of true Pastors in the Apostles time.
But if further you require a more special testimony from thence of our coming
by our calling, I send you now to 2 Thessalonians. 2.8. and Revel. 14.6. etc. where
it is prophesied, that God would toward the later end send his messe^gers
again to consume Antichrist, and by preaching the everlasting Gospel, to
overthrow Babylon. And as touching miracles, you have been answered
sufficiently already: but that you complain not, that we refuse to answer
you, as long as you can object any thing: to this now alleged I say, that you
must understand, that it was necessary for Christ, to confirm his calling by
miracles, because it is true (as you allege out of Esaias) yt it was prophesied,
that the Messiah should work miracles, when he came: and so also it was
necessary once to establish and confirm the particular doctrine of his person,
the ceasing of the ceremonies of Moses law, and other such new and strange
things, as the coming of the Messiah brought with it, both to Jew and Gentile:
which reasons you cannot show, why we should work miracles now, to confirm our
vocation or religion by to you. For neither was it prophesied, that the
ministers of Christ should bring Antichrist to consumption, or the whore of
Babylon to her fall, by working of miracles, but (as you have heard) by the
spirit of Gods mouth, breathing in his everlasting gospel: the force whereof,
in our ministry, you perceive daily to be such, that it is eue^ a miracle and
wonder unto you, to see in how short time it has prevailed, and prevails
still against your kingdom, do you what you can to let it: neither need
those things so notably once confirmed by Christ and his Apostles (which are
the only things that we teach) to be for your sakes confirmed again, though
you be never so hard hearted. The word written, and the miracles therein
recorded already, must serve the turn, to convert you to our religion therein
taught, and thereby sufficiently ratified, or else (gibe at it howsoever here)
you shall one day, to your smart (I fear) find your selves to be without all
excuse.

One trick of your learning yet I may not forget, which you have in the
beginning of this Chapter; which is this, that alleging this saying of
Christ, Search the Scriptures, for they are they that testify of me, you
note, that he said not, they are judges, but they bearewitnes of me, which you
tell us, are two different things. This was by the way to give us a blow, that
would have no other Judge, but the word of God. And to what end, would you have
the Scriptures, but to stand at the bar, as witnesses? Truly yt your Pope,
and your Church might sit on the bench, as judges, to give sentence, as it
pleased them, whatsoever the witnesses depose. But what little reason there is
therein, nay, what blasphemy that sauoureth of, you and every man may learn by
the certain and infallible truth always witnessed unto us by the one, and of
the manifold errors, judged and practiced by the other. It is worthy the
marking, to see how still it grieueth you, that the Scriptures, or certain
word of God should sit above your Popes and you, to check and control your
doings: and how feign you would bring them under, to be judged and ouerruled
by you. But to answer this your objection, you must be put in remembrance,
that there is not such a difference betwixt a judge, and a witness, but one and
selfsame man may be both a witness and a judge: and yt if there be such a force
in this word witness, here to drive the Scriptures to the bar to stand but
amongst witnesses, there is as great, force in the word Judge, in another place
to bring them to the be^ch again, to sit as judge. Remember your self
therefore, that the same Christ, that said here, that the Scripture bear
witness of him, said ( Ioh. 12.48.) to such as you are, He that refuses me and
receives not my words, has one that judges him, the word that I have spoken
shall judge him at the last day. And never disdain you, that the scriptures,
that bare witness to Christ, sit as judges over you and your doings: if you do,
ye will not serve your turn. For Christ has told you, what you shall trust to,
if you will not stand to their judgment here, you shall one day (will you, nil
you) be judged by them to your smart elsewhere. Wherefore howsoever in the end
of your former Chap. you count him a fool and to be rejected, that counsels
you to leave that which you take to be the catholic faith, confirmed by the
ancient Doctors, and general councels: if he bring scripture indeed on his
side, you will prove most fool, if you believe him not. This your Gerson saw,
and therefore he has written, that there is more credit to be given to one man
learned in the Scriptures, and having the^of his side, then either to the Popes
sentence, or to the decrees of a general council. And your Abbot Panormita^ ad
Canone^, Titulo, de Electionibus has the like saying. But indeed whiles we
labor to draw you from your errors, to join with us in our religion, we do
not persuade you from that, but to that indeed, which our ancestors, whom we
may safely follow, the Patriarchs, Prophets, Christ, and his Apostles has
taught us: and which the true Church of Christ has by her sound and faithful
pastors, and lawful Synods, and councels ever since unto this day taught us.
This we are sure is true. For we find our selves able by the Scriptures, the
sound monuments of antiquity, and the Cronicles of al times, and ages to prove,
and justify it to be so, against al gaine-sayers. And therefore I would wish
you, for fear of the sentence of this Judge, the scriptures (though you labor
never so much to bereave the^ of that office of a Judge amongst you) that
neither lack of miracles working by us, nor the glorious dombe shows of
catholic faith, Catholic Church, ancient fathers, and councels etc. hold
you any longer from ioining hands with us. For to pretend all these never so
much, will no more excuse you from falling under the sentence of this Judge,
then the like did your predecessors, the hie priests, Scribes and Pharisees in
Christ's time: who by reason of such falsely pretended arguments, kept
themselves back from yielding unto the same religion then preached by Christ
and his Apostles, to their utter destruction. The Lord of his infinite mercies,
open your eyes in time, and give you once grace in simplicity of heart, to
search for the truth of religion in his written word, and to leave deceiving of
your selves and others, with these sounding and swelling words of vanity Amen.
Your childish and gross oversight and ignorance by the way showed about
Daniels 70. weeks in this Chapter is most pitiful. For whereas he speaks but
of 70, you say he did speak of 72, and those you count to contain less
years by 4. then they do, and contrary to al truth of story, and the
express words of the Angel, Chapter 9. set down by the Prophet, you appoint
them their beginning before the Captivity, whereas they must of necessity
begin after.

The XXXI. Chapter.
YOu But not alone for especially we comfort our selves in the goodness of the
cause.
do allege the invincible patience of your holy Martyrs in times past, for at
this present, if it pleased God that you did martyrizate no more souls with
your false preaching, then there are bodies that suffer for your doctrine, your
sect were nothing so dangerous as it is. You glory in your Martyrs of times
past, which have sealed with their own blood the doctrine of that holy City
Geneua. But in this ye are much deceived, for S. John Chrysostom in his first
oration against the Jews does say, that the pain does not make the Martyr,
but the cause: for otherwise the thieves and murderers might claim the like
title, although they suffer for another cause: for we honor and love the
martyrs (says he) not for the torments that they do suffer, but for that it
is for Christ, and that they suffer for Justice. There is no such thing there,
turn the place who list, yet I de^^ not, but in some other place he may write
so, but no where against such as we, but rather against such as commonly your
fellows be here in England, who dying for t e^s^n, yet you will canonize for
holy Martyrs.
And S. Augustine in his first book contra Epistolam Parmeni^ni, Cap. septimo,
writing against some of your fellows that presumed to be Martyrs, he does
say, that every one is not a Martyr that is punished by the Emperor, or by the
king for matters of Religion, otherwise (says he) the Devils might attribute
unto themselves the glory of martyrdom, because they suffered persecution at
the Christian Emperors hands, when throughout the world, their Idols were
pulled down, and they cast out, and those that did offer sacrifice unto the^
grievously punished: then (says he) the justice is not certain through the
p^ssion, or for having suffered death: but the death and passion is glorious,
when it is for the sustaining of the true faith. And therefore (says he) our
savior, because he would not have the simple deceived under this color of
truth, he did not only say: blessed are those that suffer (but he added) for
justice. But this can in no wise be attributed unto those heretics that
suffer, to separate the union and concord of the Catholic church. In that
book it appears, these Donatists did indeed complain and yet brag of their
persecutions but thus much I find not there testified against them, or of
the^. In his book de haeresibus ad quod vult Deum he writes to this effect of
them.
And in his book de vnitate Ecclesiae, contra Epistolam Petiliani, he does
write, that the Donatists, which were a sect of heretics that reigned in his
time, to confirm their doctrine, they did not attend, that others should put
them to death, but they did cast them selves down from high places: others did
burn themselves in the fire, to be honored after their death as Martyrs: and
that is more, they did threaten men, if they would not kill them. He writes in
that epistle no such thing, you had the worst luck in quoting of your
testimonies that ever had a^y, for 3. for one you cite wr^ng.
S. Cyprian in like manner does write in the first book of his Epistles, in
the first Epistle, that though an heretic suffer death for Christ, that does
not confirm him as a Martyr, but that his death is the very punishment of his
errour^, and that he cannot go to heaven, which is the mansion of the humble:
for seeing that he does separate himself from the house of peace, which is
the church (ye know well of what church he does speak) that he cannot be
received into heaven, etc. All those that have written the histories of the
Bohemia^s do say, that in the time of Zisch^ was a famou^ soldier and
captain, but minister he was none.
one Zischa a martial minister of the heresy of the Heborits, or Hussites,
there were a certain sect of heretics called Adamites like unto the old
heresy of the Nicholaites: for they did say, as these do, that men's wives
should be common, and they went all naked, every one taking the woman he
liked best, whom he did carry unto their minister, and before him he did
say, the holy ghost does inspire me to lie with this person: then the said
reverent father did give him his blessing: saying, Increase and multiply, and
so they went away. This above named Zischa, although he had done a number of
wicked deeds, yet he determined to abolish and take away this sect, And
therefore popish traitors that are executed amongst v^ for high treason,
though they seem to take their death never so patiently, we lawfully cou^^ and
call t^aitours, though you ^anonize them for Saints.
and so he caused two women to be burnt for this abomination, the which two
(notwithstanding the torment of the fire) did sing and give thanks to God, for
that it had pleased him, to permit them to die for so holy and so just a
quarrel. Did not Michael Seruet, who was once master Caluins dearling, rather
desire to suffer at Geneua, then he would confess, that Christ was God? and
yet notwithstanding his great patience (or to say the truth, diuilish
obstinacy) cannot be sufficient to make him a Martyr, nor to persuade you, to
believe his doctrine. What need all these seeing none of us ever stand upon the
bare sufferings of me^, no more then you? you should yet have named the places,
where these things are written, and not thus have sent us to seek we cannot
tell where.
There is a certain minister of the Lutherans called Ioachim Westphall, who in
a work of his does mock at Calvin, who did vaunt, that within these five
years above an hundred had suffered death, to sustain the Gospel of Geneua:
and he does answer him at large, proving that the sect and doctrine of the
said place, ought not to be approved for the multitude of false martyrs: for
the Anabaptists who^ he does justly co^de^ne, have had of their sect a great
many more, for in less the^ three years there have suffered a great number
more then ever there did suffer of Caluinists in fifteen. And to conclude this
matter, the said Westphal does say, that the devil has his Martyrs (even as
well as God) with whom like a good sergeant he does march giving the vau^tward
unto the martyrs of the Caluinists, that have suffered at Geneua. The more to
blame are they if they should say so, but though heat of contention caused
Westphalus to write so bitterly, I think very few will join with him in this
judgment: sure I am they whom you call Caluinists do not judge so of them,
because of that 1. Co. ^. v. 15
So that if one demand of the Lutherans, whither go those that die in the
Religion of Calvin, of Beza, or of the Anabaptists? they say, to the Devil.
And if one demand of the Caluinists in like manner, whither go the Anabaptists
and the Lutherans? they say likewise, to the Devil. And who would put the
like question to the Anabaptists, I am assured they would say at the others,
to the Devil. For my part I believe you, I assure you, all three. This argues
a most devilish and profane spirit in the writer.
And seeing that ye agree so well, that one serve for an others harbenger, we
were very fools, if we should stay your passage, but let you go all to the
Devil for company, for I think if you were all gone, our debates would cease,
and hell would be so full, that the devil would long for no more.

The XXXI. Chapter.
YOu need not to tell us, that Augustine and Chrysostom have taught, that it
is not the death, but the cause, that makes a martyr. For we know that to be a
most certain truth, and the general doctrine of all good writers both old
and new: and therefore you might have spared your pains bestowed in the proof
of this. And therefore most willingly we acknowledge (as Christ has taught
us) that only they are blessed martyrs, that suffer for righteousness sake.
Mat. 5. and none to be martyrs, how patiently soever they seem to suffer
their deaths, that by for an il cause, either in life or doctrine. And yet we
are not ignorant, that many have died in lewd, and for lewd opinions, who yet
have seemed to die willingly and cherefully: and therefore we deny not, but
that it may be true, that some such wicked women of that beastly heresy of
the Adamites, were put to death in Zischaes time, in Bohemia, and died, as you
write: and that it is possible, that such filthy heretics, as Seruetus was,
may show themselves stout in dying. But what is all this to prove, that our
martyrs have broken the union of the Catholic Church, or that they died as
heretics for heresy? Before you can say any thing to the purpose, either to
prove them no true martyrs, or to blemish their patience, you should have
proved, that their cause and religion, for which they died, was not the sound
Christian truth and faith: but that you will never be able to do. And
therefore both all this, and what else you have noted (though falsely, for there
is no such thing, in either of these two places) out of Augustine contra
Epistolam Petiliani, of the Donatistes forwardness to die, and out of Cyprians
first book of Epistles, falls down to the ground as needles besides the
question. For whatsoever they there spoke, they spoke it of heretics, and
therefore it has no force against us, until you can prove us so; in alleging
Cypria^s testimony by the way of pare^thesis, you say, we know of what Church
he spoke, when he said, the heretics that he wrote of, could not be
saved, because they separated themselves from the Church, the house of peace.
Indeed we know, that he meant not your Church, which is a bloody house, a
house of war, and co^tentio^: a house of error, and superstition, but the
Church of Christ that was in his time, to with yours is not so like, as a drunken
man is to a sober and discreet man: or a whore unto an honest matrone: for
there is likelihood in substance, though not in quality, and yours is unlike to
the Church then in both. Zischa you call a martial minister of the Heborites, or
Hussites: you would say, or (at least I am sure) you should say, a noble
martial Captain: for minister he was none of them, whom their malicious
enemies nickenamed Thaborites, or Hussites: for so they were called, and not as
you call them. At your pleasure you call Michael Seruet, Caluins dearling, but
you cannot prove, that he was ever in any such account with Calvin, why you
should term him so. But yet if he had been so, through his cunning in
dissembling his heresy for a time, the more commendation was it to Calvin,
that when he proved an obstinate heretic, he was so earnest and zealous in
the cause of his God, that all former affection set a part, he furthered his
due punishment, as he did. And for all your speech, of his willingness to die at
Geneua, and great patience in dying, I cannot read, but that he shunned death
there, as much as he could, keeping or holding still his heresy, and that
thousands have died on the gallows for murder, felony, and treason, with as
great show of courage and patience, as he. But to let these things pass, and
to return again to your principal drifte in this, which was (as you show in
the beginning of it) to prove, that neither our vocation, nor religion could
get any credit by the invincible patience of our holy martyrs; what has been
said as yet to prove this? Your only argument hitherto has been this, The
cause, that a man dies for, must be good: and he must be no heretic: many
heretics have dyed with great show of patience: Ergo etc. This argument is
stark naught: for all these things in your antecedent may be granted, and yet
of al them together your conclusion follows not. These things which are not
at al in question you have proved; but this that indeed should have given life
to your argument, that ours died in, and for an ill cause, and were heretics
(which is indeed the thing only in question) like a wise man (because you
could not prove it) you let alone. But therefore you shall be contented (for all
your miserable craving of it to be granted you) to be denied both it and your
conclusion, which, without it you can never come unto. You will therefore prove
(as you make your reader believe) that our Martyrs were such, as died in an ill
cause as heretics, and therefore went to hell. But what be your proofs?
Ioachim Westphalus a Lutheran, in a work of his (but it seems either you
could not, or would not tell us in what work, for some politic reason you had
doubtless) mocked at Calvin, for vau^ting (but where he made this vaunt, or
where we may find it, you tell us not) that within five years above an hundred
had died for the religion of Geneua, proving unto him, that seeing there had
been far more of the Anabaptists put to death in less space, and that the
Devil had his Martyrs: his religion was no whit confirmed or countenanced by
his Martyrs: but they might for all his brag, be in the vauntgard of the
Devils martyrs. What a miserable argument is this? A contentious man in the
heat of his contention said thus to disgrace his adversary and his side,
therefore thereupon it shall follow, that it was well and truly said of him. I
think you will grant me, that Epiphanius and Chrysostom were good men both,
yet in heat of contention one against another, Epiphanius burst out into such
choler, as he said, that he hoped the other should never die bishop: to who^
Chrysosto^e answered as angerly again, that he trusted the other should never
return alive into his own country of Cypres: and infinite be the examples,
whereby we may see, that men otherwise have in heat of contention marvelously
ouershot themselves one against another. And therefore God forbid, that upon
every speech of disgrace uttered in such a case by one against another, should
by and by a firm argument be gathered, that it is even so, as the one has
said of the other.

But you will say, you stand not so much upon his speech against Caluins
Martyrs, as upon that, that there were mo of the Anabaptists, that had died in
a shorter space, then he talked of, and that otherwise, the devil has had his
martyrs, which we cannot deny. Hereupon indeed it follows, that an argument
drawn to justify an opinion, and the followers of it, from the bare death,
and show of patience of them that hold it, is not good: but so did never any of
us reason. For first we labor to prove, the cause good, and that done, then in
the patience of such, as have died in so good cause, together with the cause, we
take comfort. And yet in truth, we are sure, we may speak it to the glory of
God, there were never either so many, or any, that so patiently died for any
other opinion, or opinions whatsoever, as first and last died for the testimony
of our religion. For we account all them ours, that have from the beginning
died for the glorious cause of the Gospel of Jesus Christ, and in that we are
able by the Scriptures, to prove our religion to be the same, we are sure, we
are not deceived in our account. In the conclusion of this Chapter, to show
your self to be not only one that dare write any thing how gross a lie
soever it be, but as malicious in your judgment, as ever was any. First, you
set down, not only, that the Anabaptists condemn the^ that die in Luther,
and Caluins religion to hell (which is likely enough, because they were
frantic heretics, and have denied the foundation) but also the Lutherans
and Caluinists will and do give that judgment one of another: and yet I am
sure, you are not able truly to say, that ever any of Caluins judgment said,
or wrote so. Secondly, though your own judgment be short, yet so it is set
down, that you show that you believe that all the three sorts go thither? And
such care and compassion your catholic heart had of it, when you had done,
that you jest at it, accounting your selves fools, if you should stay their
passage thither. For if we were al gone for company, you think you should be
at quiet (you say) and hell would be so full, that the devil would long for no
more company. Is this your popish divinity, to make sport at the damnation of
men? And hold you this for a principle, that it is folly to stay men from
running together to hell? Indeed it may be. For I have read, that it is a rule
amongst you, that, if your Pope lead headlong with him multitudes by heaps to
hell, yet no man may be so hardy, as to say unto him, why do thou so?
Distinct. 40. Cap. Si Papa: But howsoever you account this divinity, certain I
am, you will find it, that in no two things more, the devils show themselves
devils, then in these, In laughing and reioicing in the damnation of the souls
of men; and in letting them go freely for company to hell, without stoppage, as
many as will. Truly, truly, God must take from you this profane and deuilish
spirit of yours, and give you grace to repent of it, or else you may be sure,
how many soever die and go to hell before you, hell will long for you, and you
shall find place, and room enough there, I warrant you.

The XXXII. Chapter.
THere is a certain minister of the Lutherans called What will not a
passionate adversary say, to disgrace them that he writes against? If like
testimonies of men of your Religion, writing yet, in some points one against
another, will be admitted, it is an easy matter thus to discredit your whole
faction.
Heshusius, the which within these three years has made a book against
Calvin, Peter Boquin, Theodore de Beza, and Gulielmus Elcimalcius: and he
says amongst other things, that Carolstadius, Zuenfeldius, Calvin, and Beza
do show well the uncertainty of their faith, by the diversities of opinions
that there is amongst the^, the which fault (says he) does proceed of this,
that they have forsaken the true sense of the scripture, to follow the opinions
of their own heads. And yet in truth lies therein himself.
And in that very book the said author does give the lie to Calvin, because
that in that he wrote against the above named Westphal, he says that Martin
Luther and his adherents, did acknowledge him as their brother, the which thing
he maintains to be false. Greater and more disagreement^ there are amongst you
papists, and therefore these conclusions press you rather then us.
Thus seeing ye agree together like dogs and cattes, and that all these sects
have confirmed their false doctrine with the shedding of their own blood, it
is best to conclude, as we have said before, that it is not the pain nor the
torment that does make the righteous martyr, except we should say, that
diverse contrary messengers are sent from one master, the which is notoriously
false, for that good king from whom the truth does come indeed, has so good
a memory, that he does never send contrary messengers, but rather his
faithful servants do all with one voice, and one accord honor him, as the
father of our savior Jesus Christ.

The XXXII. Chapter.
HEre again (as in the former Chapter) you labor to discredit Calvin, Beza,
and others only with the testimony of Heshusius an utter enemy of theirs,
about the quarrel of the controversy of the Sacrament, whom heat of
contention, and a desire therefore to disgrace his adversaries, rather then
just cause, led thus to write. For what reason had he there to join
Zuenfeldius with Calvin and Beza, with whom they held no more communion and
fellowshippe, then he himself, and Corolstadius, who was a doctor in
Wittenberge in Luthers time, and an associate to him in disputation against
Ecchius, he might with more reason have joined with Luther himself, and his
partners, then with these. And howsoever the intemperate heat of contention
emboldened Heshusius, to give Calvin the lie, most certain yet it is, that
Melancthon a great friend of Luthers, whom Heshusius cannot deny was an
adherent of Luther, accounted of Calvin, as of a good brother. For in an
Epistle which he wrote to him, he calls him Charissim^. fratrem, most dear
brother (it is the 187. Epistle in the book of Caluins Epistles.) And I am
persuaded, that what Calvin wrote, he was able to justify in this behalf, how
rudely soever angry Heshusius gave him the lie. This objection of our
disagreement has been often enough urged and answered already. It seems,
that you have great penury of arguments against us, when this must come in
thus often, especially seeing (as I have showed) greater contentions have been
amongst your selves. In which cases would you have thought a man should have
dealt well with you, if the bitter speeches of the one side, had always been
taken as sufficient arguments to disgrace the other? Or would you have liked,
that thereupon a man should infer (as you do) that you agreed no better,
then dogs, and cattes? and that therefore you so differing amongst your
selves came not both from one master, God, who uses not to send contrary
messengers: this had been an hard conclusion against a number of you in the
time of your schisms betwixt your Popes, and Antipopes; and in the times of
the contentio^s of your Friars with your other Prelates, and also amongst
themselves; whereof I have put you in remembrance before, Chapter twenty eight.
And yet if you will needs meat this measure unto us, upon occasion of this
one controversy about the manner of Christ's real presence, you must be
contented, that upon more and greater contentions, amongst you, we send you
home as good measure again. As for your conclusion, that it is not the pain,
but the cause, that makes a true martyr, we granted it you at the first: but
where to make way, to bring it in here again you insinuate, not only that the
Donatists, Adamites, Seruetus, and the Anabaptists (of whom you have spoken in
your former Chapter) have died to confirm their false Religion (which we
grant you) but that these also, that you spoke of last, Lutherans and
Zuenfeldians have done so likewise; therein your fault is double. For first in
so saying you term the Religion, for the which they whom you call Caluinists
and Lutherans died, false, which you shall never be able to prove so to be: and
secondly in so saying you would seem, to make your Reader believe, that
amongst those, whom you call Lutherans, some have died even for the
confirmation of their singular opinion, wherein they differ from their
brethren, whom you call Caluinists; and that so some have died for the
confirmation of Zuenfeldius vanities, which is more also, then you can prove, I
am fully persuaded.

The XXXIII. Chapter.
SOme of your godly sect (to If you had meant to deal plainly, you should
have named the man and the place where any of us do thus childishly reason.
verify that the vocation of your ministry does come of God) do set before
our eyes the holiness of those new Christians, that is to say, how they never
swear, but yea for yea, and no for no, that they do no wrong to no man, that
they do neither rob nor steal, but that they are content with that that God
has sent them, and that they are very charitable to the poor: then seeing
that our savior does say, that one shall know the tree by the fruit, ^ndeede
we may truly say, howsoever some that profess our religion, either through
the common frailty of man or hypocrisy, have too too little of this fruit
growing of the^, that yet if they should follow the rules of our religion, they
should bear this sweet and pleasant fruit abunda^tly.
we ought to confess (say they) that the tree being good, the fruit is good:
that is to say, their Religion is good, seeing that, by the grace of God, it
does produce such sweet and pleasant fruit. I answer you first to this, that
our savior does not ever give general rules, but that that most commonly
does happen, as when he says, that Luc 6.
of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks, would you affirm by this,
that his meaning was universally? God forbid, that he that is the author of
all truth should mean so stark a lie. Do you not remember what speech he
did use to the Pharisees, when he said, Mat. 15.
this people do honor me with their mouths, but their hearts are far from
me? you see that this sentence is contrary to the other, if you do not
understand it as I have said, that is to say, that many times a man does
utter that, that is in his heart: as a ruffian takes great pleasure to talk of
quarrels, a proud person to talk of hautie enterprises, a covetous man to
talk of riches or gains, and so it is of all other sins. But with all this
a man may not affirm truly, that hypocrisy does never reign in their
hearts, whose mouths are full of Gods word. Dan. 19.
The Judges of S. Susan, had not they God and his laws in their mouths, and
the Devil in their hearts? John. 18.
We have a law (said the Jews and Pharisees against Christ) and according to
this law given us by Moses, he ought to die. The zeal of justice did sound in
their mouths, and hateful envy did dwell in their hearts. And therefore you
see many times, that man does speak contrary to that that he thinks, and
even so it is of the sentence of our Savior, when he says, that by the
fruit one shall know the tree. For many times naturally the fruit is good,
although the tree be worth nothing, The heathen Philosophers lives, howsoever
they carried a show of the matter of holiness, they cannot be said to be holy and
good indeed because their works were without faith, and lacked the form of
good works.
as the famous lives and works of diverse heathen Philosophers do witness,
of whom the holiness and scrupulosity of conscience was such, that I do believe
assuredly that at the day of judgment, a great number of Christians which
lead Painims lives, will be confounded with the example of those men that knew
not God. Thus of the first, the fruit is good, but the trees are worth
nothing, for their Religion was false and Idolatrous, applying, as S. Romans 1.
Paul does say, the truth of God to unrighteousness. And as for the second,
the trees are good, being grafted upon the true Catholic Religion, but the
fruits do degenerate from the stock.

The XXXIII. Chapter.
IN this Chapter you say, that some of us have gone about to justify, that
our vocation is of God, by the holiness of life found amongst us, because Christ
has said, The tree is known by his fruit: and the good tree brings forth
good fruit. Mat. 7.17. Howsoever thus you would persuade your reader, that we
are driven to use these kind of arguments, taken from the show of patience in
our Martyrs, and the goodness of the lives of the professors of our religion,
the truth is, though sometime the goodness of their cause considered, we take
comfort in their patience, and the reformation that our religion has wrought
in many remembered, in some sort we rejoice thereof also, yet never did we build
the credit of our vocation or religion upon either of these. For we know, there
may be and has been great show of patience in such as have died for heresy:
and that religion is not to be judged either by the badnes or show of goodness
in the lives of them that profess it. For both amongst the professors of
sound Religion, we know there has always been, are, and will be some lewd
livers: and also amongst those of a false Religion, through the force of
hypocrisy and superstition, there has been found, and may be still, a
marvelous great outward show of holiness and piety. And therefore do we
always teach our hearers, and readers, to learn to discern the true Religion
from the false, by searching the Scriptures, and not by view of these things
which therein may deceive them. Wherefore you might very well have eased both
your reader, and your self of all the pains you have taken about this matter
in these four next Chapters. Howbeit, seeing you could aforde so much needeles
pains, to disgrace what you could, the profession of the truth, I will be
contented to take so much pains, as to weigh what you have said, and give you
such answer, as you deserve, for the maintenance of the credit thereof. In
this Chapter first you would prove, by conference of this foresaied rule of
Christ, with this saying Luke 6. Out of the abundance of the heart the mouth
speaks, that it is no more general the^ that. For after out of Math. 15. and
other places you have showed, that notwithstanding that saying of Christ, man
oftentimes speaks otherwise, then it is in his heart: you conclude, even so
is it many times, naturally the fruit is good, when the tree is naught, as in
the good lives of many heathen philosophers: and contrarily, the trees may be
good, as grafte upon the true Catholic Religion, and yet the fruits
degenerate from the stock. Be it granted, that Christ's meaning was no more
generally to be taken in the one, then in the other, and that it follows
thereupon, that even as sometime a man through hypocrisy may speak well and
think ill, so a good tree may sometimes by some occasion have some fruit not
answering the goodness thereof, intermingled with the good, yet you shall
never be able to prove, but that Christ's speech here is so generally true, as
that always a good tree brings forth good fruit, and a bad tree bad fruit:
as always it is true, that out of the abundance of the heart the mouth
speaks at one time or other, though at sometimes also and in some things the
mouth be bridled. For Christ does not deny, but that even of a good tree there
may be found here and there a rotten apple, a worme-eaten one, or otherwise
not answerable to the natural fruit of that tree. For he knew, what
imperfections there were, and would be always found in the best men: neither
does he that said, Out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks,
say it would always be so. For he knew, how through hypocrisy oftentimes
the abundance of filthy matter lying in the heart would be dissembled. It is
sufficient for the verifying of these two Proverbs generally in that sense,
that Christ meant them, that the good tree naturally brings forth good fruit,
and the bad, bad fruit: and that the abundance of the heart will make the mouth
at sometimes bewray that, which lies in the heart, let otherwise hypocrisy
do what it can. And therefore you conclude more, then your premises will
bear. For though it be granted you, that the one proverb has some
limitations as well as the other, yet it must be only in manner, as I have
said. Whereupon will never more follow, that an ill tree may have sometimes
naturally good fruit growing upon it, and a good tree, bad fruit: then it
will ever be found false, that at one time or other out of the abundance of the
heart every mouth will speak. And the examples, you have set down are both
unfit. For neither were the works of the heathen philosophers (what show
soever they had outwardly of goodness) good works indeed, nor ever will it be
granted you of any that can distinguish betwixt good and evil, that a
Catholic in your sense (with doubtless with you is one of the Popish Religion,
that now is) is a good tree? The reason of the one is, because howsoever the
works of those philosophers had in them the matter of good works, in the
co^formity they had to the outward actions commanded by the law, yet they
lacked the form of good works, in that they neither proceeded from a right
fountain, were done to a right end, nor in right manner: and you know, that
forma dat esse rei: the form is that, that causes the thing to be this or
that: and that it is written, whatsoever is not of faith is sin, Romans. 14,
and it is impossible to please God without faith: Heb. 11. which faith they
were without. The reason of the other is, that your religion being naught and
Antichristian it self, cannot make any man or woman a good tree, but bad like
it self: for qualis causa, talis effectus: such as the cause is, the effect
will be. Wherefore for any thing you have said as yet, every good tree will so
bring forth good fruit, and every bad tree, bad fruit, as that by their fruit
they may be discerned. And indeed (cavil you to the contrary as much as you
list) this is most certain: all the difficulty is in knowing the good and bad
fruit that Christ meant of, and how always to discern the one from the other.
In my judgment (and I think likewise in the judgment of every one, that
well weighs Christ's words and the circumstances thereof) by the good fruit
we are to understand pure religion joined with an holy life: by the bad
fruit, a bad religion, and like life: the good tree, that bears the former,
are only the children of God, whom he has regenerated, and justified indeed
in Christ Jesus: the bad tree that bears the later, are those, that remain
in their sins, and under the burden thereof, not yet having had their eyes
truly opened, to see the truth, nor their hearts effectually touched, and
taught to believe aright in Christ. And these trees are to be discerned by
sound trial and examination, which of their fruits are justified by the
written and undoubted word of God, and which not.

The XXXIIII. Chapter.
IF that the sense of this proverb be hard for you to digest, I a^ content
to stay until your stomach be somewhat better, assuring my self that you
can interpret it no way unto your advantage. There is nothing more certain,
then the good tree to bear good fruit, if one does not make him change his
own nature, but if one do grafte upon it some crabstocke or some other kind
of wild fruit, the tree can bear no other but crabs or wiledings: even so we
Christian persons, who are the trees of God, planted by the pleasant fountain
of his grace, and purged with the holy water of Baptism, to bear fruit at
our season, so that we take ever to prosper withal, the dew of his grace that
planted us, I mean, the faith of our savior Jesus Christ, so long we bear
good fruit, as it is said before, alleging the The 5. you would say, as
before.
3. of S. John, ill understood by Iouinian, he that is borne of God does not
sin, for the generation of God does preserve him, and the enemy of our
health shall not touch him. If yo^ had looked into the book, you should not
have found both these testimonies in one chapter, for the first is in the fifth,
and this in the third.
And in the said Chapter, he says again, all men, or every man that is
borne of God does not sin, for the seed of God is in him, and he cannot
sin, because be is borne of God. By this it is not meant, that Baptism (the
which he does call the being borne He speaks of real and not simply of
sacramental regeneration.
of God) does take away from man the power or liberty to do evil, for if
he will degenerate from the grace that he has received by the sacrament of
regeneration, and that in steed of growing graft upon the stock of the love
of God, which is the true life, that he will fructify toward his death and
destruction, in this case he is no more the son of God, for as Christ
says, John. 8.
If ye be the children of Abraham, do the works of Abraham. But as he does
continue and has this good will, which was taught by the Angel unto the
sheepheardes, and that he does continue, having the grace that was inspired
in him by the holy ghost at his baptism, so long he does not sin unto
eternal death, Yea the Apostle to the great comfort of them that are once
truly regenerat, teaches in these places, that such by the power of that
grace shall be so preserved, that they shall never sin, as the vnregenera^ do,
with their whole man unto death.
for the generation of God, that is to say, the grace received by this holy
sacrament, does so defend him, that the Devil cannot persecute him to death,
being not able to prevail against him, and as long as this good seed, which
is the word of God, does dwell in him, he cannot sin, and if he did sin,
the seed would no longer remain in him. The holy ghost (says Sap. 1.
the wisema^) shall refuse the hypocrite and dissembler, and shall depart from
the vain and crafty cogitations, and therefore the grace of God and sin can
not dwell together, nor we ought not think S. John's words strange, in that he
says, that he that is borne of God does not sin, for it is as much to say,
as that one can not serve two masters, and that he that serves God can not
serve the Devil. For. S. Paul says, 1. Cor. 10.
You cannot assist at the table of God and of the Devil altogether, for what
communication is there between justice and iniquity, or between Jesus Christ
and Belial. And he that does love this world declares himself an enemy
unto God. And a little before he had said, he that does commit sin, is the
son of the Devil, the which does not affirm, that a sinner cannot be the
son of God, if he repent and do penance: but in the mean while, If this
assertion be true, ^^en as often as the regenerate either actually sins, or
has but a mind to sin, he is not the child of God. I would gladly know
the^, h w often the author has continued a more^h the child of God together,
or any man else?
he that is in actual sin, or has a mind to do evil, is as then not the
son of God, but the son of the Devil. The good tree does not bear ill
fruit: for although the fruit do rot or perish upon the tree, that corruption
does not proceed of the tree, but of the worms, birds, or of some other
kind of vermin: and therefore, when they say, that by the fruit we shall
know the tree, and by the works the faith, this ought to be understood, when
the fruit does ripe in season, and that it has the natural humor and
property of the tree. And in a man, that he have the influe^ce of the true
faith and not otherwise: for even as the rotten fruit hanging upon the tree,
does digress nothing from the good stock: even so the ill works of us that
are Christians, ought not to stain our holy and Catholic religion. Thus we
also answer the objection that you make against our religion, from the lewd
lives that you see in some, which seem to be of our profession. It is a good
defense for you, you think, why should you not grant ^ then so to be to us?
For the corruption of our ill fruits comes of our selves, and not of our
religion, the which does defend us from doing that we do, I mean, to
swear, to blaspheme, to commit adultery, to do any man wrong, or to offend
God any way. He that does desire then by the fruit, to know whither the tree
of our Religion be good, he ought not to bend his eyes to look upon the
rotten fruit, as if that were sufficient to disprove the goodness of the tree:
but let him look upon the good fruits, You shall find, that you far
oue^shot your se fe in your reckoning, when you compare indeed their religion
exp essed in their writi^gs with yours.
such are all the Doctors, as well of the Greek as Latin church, so many good
Emperors and virtuous Kings, Princes, Dukes and Earls, which have reigned in
France, Spain, Germany and England, and over all the world, and have died in
the faith, leaving their works to bear witness of their good fruits. Many
Kings, Qu^enes Nobles and others of our religion have done these things also.
The which have builded so many fair hospitals, to help and relieve the
poor, so many goodly Colleges to entertain fatherles children at their
books, so many foundations and works for the common wealth, and that have
builded so many sumptuous The first pulling of them dow^e here in England came
even from your Cardinals and great bishops, under the pretense therewith to
found colleges, and so having given the king an example when he was disposed
to follow it, they easily consented, indeed the abhomina^ions therein committed
was their overthrow.
Abbeies and houses of Religion, the which you with your godly zeal have not
only robbed and spoiled, but that that is more odious, you have pulled them
clean down, to deface the memory of our ancesters, and to acquit all these
which are notable monuments, you brag of the good deeds that your good
Christians do, which are much like unto the gains of those that use to cog at
dise: for although they win much it is never seen: or like the Jews, which to
color their horrible cruelty in putting our savior unjustly to death, they
went and bought with the money that they gave to Judas, a field to bury the
dead. As deep and grounded papists were lickorish of Abbey lands as any other,
and as greedily and securely they enjoy them still amongst us. Cardinal
Woolsey and the Bishop of Rochester your great Martyr, first began that course
here.
And so you having robbed and spoiled from the religious houses and Abbeies
more then you are able to restore, you think to acquit it al with giving a
little to the poor. No, no, these devises are but vain, if by the fruit the
tree be known (as Christ says) let them that have any judgment, look upon
the fruit of our trees, and then judge, whither they be good or no.

The XXXIIII. Chapter.
PArtly in the former Chapter, but more plainly in this you show, that you
understand by the trees, that Christ spoke of, good Religion, and bad. But if
you view the place, you will (at least I am sure, you should) rather thereby
understand, ye persons of men effectually called (as I have said) or not
called at all, or (at least) yet vneffectually called: and that sound religion
is one of the principal fruits, that he meant should grow upon the former, to
discern him from the later. For his scope was not there to teach us, how to
discern religions, but how to discern the children of God from the children
of satan. And thus it will prove, that the sense of this proverb will not
prove hard at all to us to digest, but to you: who what show soever you ca^
make with the philosophers of outward good works (whereof you brag lustily in the
later end of this Chapter) yet you shall never be able to prove your selves
good trees, because your Religion by the sound and perfect touchstone of the
scriptures, will be proved false, and Idolatrous. This your self give to be the
very reason, why the philosophers were bad trees, notwithstanding that in
respect of outward show of holiness, we may truly confess with you, that even
their lives at the day of judgment shall and will confound a number of
Christians in name, which led Painims lives. And therefore until it be set out
of question, that your Religion is not false, nor Idolatrous (which is
impossible, as long as the Scriptures keep their place) if you brag of ten
times more outward works, then either you do, or can, yet your own mouth will
condemn you, as yet to have said nothing to prove your selves good trees. And
on the contrary even by this your own saying, if we can prove our religion to
be the sound Christian faith, taught indeed by Christ and his Apostles, and
therefore that never since, hell gates could prevail against it (which we
doubt not of, whenever you will enter into this controversy with us) then
(for all your saying here to the contrary) Christ's sentence shall give us very
good advantage.

Thus having showed your cunning in restraining, and collecting of this
proverb of Christ, as I have: now as one, that after some wresting, found it
stronger for you, then you would have thought, you grant it to be most true,
ye naturally a good tree brings forth good fruit, and not bad at all, and a
crab-tree nothing but crabs. And this you labor to prove, first, by certain
testimonies of S. John, affirming, that he that is borne of God, sins not,
and then by other places, as John. 8. Sap. 1.1. Cor. 10. you confirm that
doctrine of S. John: and lastly by a similitude, showing, that as the
rottennes, wormeatennes, or any such fault in the fruit of a good tree,
lets not, but that still naturally yt tree may be said to bear good fruit,
because these things fall out by some accident, unnatural to the tree: even so
the good tree always, as it is a good tree, brings forth naturally good
fruit. Here in effect you let go, and give over the former restraining of
Christ's words, and recant that you said before, ye a^il tree, as the
philosophers, may bring forth good fruit: and a good tree, as a Catholic in
Religion (by whom you mean a Papist) may bring forth ill fruits: and (will
you, nill you) you are enforced to confess, that Christ's words are generally
true, and simply therefore always verified of both good trees, and bad trees,
as they are naturally considered. But yet you add, the tree is known by his
fruit, and faith by works, so as then the fruit be ripe in due season, and
not otherwise. Wherein I take your meaning to be, that not every show of
fruits, nor unripe works, but works indeed good both in matter, and manner of
doing, are the fruits, whereby a good tree, and justifying faith is discerned.
You yet proceed and say, that, as a rotten and wormeaten apple hanging upon a
good tree (seeing that came not through the nature of the tree, but by means of
worms, birds, or some other such accident) ministers not a sufficient
argument, to prove that tree to be an ill tree: so the ill works of Christians
ought not to stain their holy Catholic religion. For ye corruption of their
fruits, comes not from the nature of these religion, which forbids such
fruits or works, but from themselves. In all this (understanding not as you
do, but as you should, the holy Catholic Religion indeed, which yours will
never prove) we join with you, and allow, what you have said. And as you
supposing your religion to be the holy Catholic religion, have thus answered
the objection, drawn from the good works of professors of our religion, and
from the bad works of yours: so even in the same words and manner, supposing
our religion, and not yours, to be that true and holy religion, your objection
against us, grounded upon the good works of some of yours, and lewd lives of
some that yet profess ours, is also answered. For we tell you (as you seem
here to tell us) that your works are not ripe works, such as good works should
be, both in matter and manner, and therefore no argument more of the goodness of
your religion, then the Philosophers works were of the goodness of theirs: and
that the ill works found in some of our professors, ought not to steine our
religion, forasmuch as none of them are justified, but condemned by the same.
But in the uttering of these things you have uttered diverse things, whereof it
is needful to admonish both you, and your Reader. First, in examining S. John's
words, you seem simply to understand, that by being borne of God, he meant
nothing else but being baptized, as though they were both one, or (at least) so
inseparably co^ioined, yt whosoever were outwardly baptized, were certainly
forthwith thereby inwardly regenerated and newborn, wherein, you and all that
join with you therein, show both great error and ignorance, in the doctrine
of that sacrament. For though by that sacrament, all that have received it, are
sacramentally newborn, and received into Christ's Church, and therein have had
the washing away of their sins, in the blood of Christ, represented unto
them, offered unto them, and sealed and ratified, on Gods behalf to belong
unto them, if they inwardly also will embrace it: yet, to confound the
sacrament of regeneration and the washing away of our sins, with regeneration
and remission of sins it self, or to tie the later, so unto the former, as
that of necessity, whosoever is partaker of the former, is also partaker of the
later, is against all good divinity, Scripture, and experience. For divinity
admits not, a confounding of the outward sign with the inward grace in a
sacrament; and the scripture, and experience withal teaches us, ye Simo^
Magus was baptized; and yet no sound divine ever held, that forthwith thereby
he was inwardly regenerated, for by his fruits, the contrary by and by
evidently appeared, Act. 8. Again, if outwardly to be baptized, were by and by
to be regenerated, then all that have been baptized have been inwardly
regenerated, and all that are baptized once must needs be so: which thing if it
were so, why, and how comes it to pass, that many never show any fruits of
regeneration, and die giving plain evidence, that they were never borne anew,
notwithstanding they were baptized; and that there is no more have made, to
baptize Turks, Jews, and whomsoever we can come by? But it seems that as
you hold this error of baptism, that to defend it withal, you are of
opinion, that a man once may be truly regenerated, and so the child of God,
justified and sanctified in the blood of Christ, through grace, and yet
afterward in conclusion finally may so fall away, that he become the child
of the Devil, and this is the second thing that I though good to admonish you,
and your reader of. For this is also a most dangerous error, shaking all the
certain grounds of our faith, and therefore to our comfort it is plainly
taught us contrary to this in the Scripture, that the gifts and graces of God
(whereby are meant the gifts of regeneration) are without repentance, Romans
11.29. and therefore whom Christ loves once as his own (as doubtless he
does all them that are newborn once indeed) John tells us he loves to the
end, John. 13.1. And Paul upon this ground (that he knew with whom God once
went so far, as toward them, to show his power, and mercy in regenerating
of them, that he would never finally forsake them, but perfect in the^, that
good work of his) assures the Philippians, that he that had begun that good
work in them, would perform it until the day of Jesus Christ, cap. 1.6. And
yet I do not deny, but such may have their falls, and that in such sort,
that to their own sense and feeling, and in the opinions of others, they have
quite fallen from grace, and all the good gifts of regeneration; but yet if
before they were not sacramentally only, but really in truth newborn, and
cleansed from their sins in Christ; the spirit and graces of God in them were
but in this case, as the sun hid from our eyes by thick clouds, and as fire
raked up in the ashes, which God will cause to shine again, and to grow to a
fire in them, when he in his good time has caused the clouds to vanish, and
has removed the ashes. This you can hold to be true in Peter,
notwithstanding his fall, because Christ prayed that his faith should not
fail, Luke 22. why should you not then upon Christ's prayer, made generally
for all his elect, that his heavenly father would keep them, and that from
evil, Ioh. 17.15. conceive the like of all those, who^ God has once sealed
indeed, with the peculiar seal of regeneration, proper only to his elect?
But it seems you think you have ground enough for this your opinion, in that
you see many that have seemed to stand, finally to fall; and that you find the
promises run upon this condition, if we persevere unto the end; whereunto I
answer, that in the former, you may be deceived two ways; either in taking
them to have stood indeed, which yet never came unto it, or in conde^ning them
as finally to have fallen, when as it may be otherwise: and as for the second,
I say, that as it is certain, that the promises run upon that condition, so
the Lord will give all those grace, to perform that condition, that be once
thus sealed to be his. For nothing shall separate the^ from the love of God in
Christ Jesus, Romans 8. and such are kept by the power of god through faith unto
salvation, 1. Pe. 1.5. You must therefore thirdly be admonished, that indeed
you do misundersta^d John, and the other testimonies to fortify John's
doctrine, as da^gerously as ever did Iouinia^, Nouatus, or any other, if you
take them so to be understood, as it seems you do, that by these places we
are taught, that none in any actual sin, and having a mind to do evil, is
in that mean while, the child of God, but of the Devil. If this were true
doctrine, seeing it is written, that no man lives and sins not, 1. King. 8.
no man can say his heart is clean, Pro. 20. but even when we are at the best,
we must needs confess, that those good things that we would do, we do not, and
those evil things that we would leave undone, we do, To. 7. and that if we say
we have no sin, we deceive our selves, and there is no truth in us, 1. Ioh. 1.
and therefore it is certain that there was never child of God yet, but often
times he has had a mind to do evil, and been sometime in actual sin: I
say, these things being most true, because both Scripture and experience teach
them so to be, if this doctrine of yours be true also, then so often as there
is a purpose, and performance of any actual sin, and as long as that is
found in man, so often, and so long he is the child of the Devil, and not of
God. If this be thus, if you knew how far actual sin streatcheth, and
weighed without dissembling, how prone the best men are to fall, I am fully
persuaded there is none of you all, that a whole day together, can have
assurance, that you are any other, but the children of the Devil. For if the
Lord should straitely mark what is done amiss, and enter into judgment with
his servants, no man could for one days space in truth clear himself, of
all actual sin, committed either in word, deed or thought, by omitting good
things commanded, or doing ill things forbidden. If in stead of saying, in the
mean while, you had only said, therein, and in that respect he is not the
child of God; your speech might have been borne withal. For indeed in the
newborn, though there be a new man, yet as long as they live, they shall
find some relics of the old man, rema^ning, and so a law in their members,
rebelling against the law of the spirit, Romans 7. Gal. 5. by means whereof, it
comes to pass, yt though sin reign not in their mortal bodies, and they
never commit sin unto death, and transgress with the whole man, as the
carnal men do; yet in respect of this old man, that is left, sin dwells
in them, as a tyrant, and gets them now and then, to do him some service,
though not with the consent and liking of the new, but it striving against the
same, as it also evidently appears in the two foresaied Chapters Romans 7. and
Gal. 5. wherein, and in which respect, they may be said not to be ye children
of God, but in the mean while, in that by the inner man, these things that are
done, through the tyranny of the old man, are not consented unto, but misliked
and striuen against by them; therefore with Paul they comfort themselves, and
say, now if I do that which I would not, it is no more I that do it, but the
sin that dwells in me Ro^. 7. and with John (after yt through ye beholding of
this their infirmity, they have confessed, yt if they should say they had no
sin, they deceived themselves, and there were no truth in the^) they raise up
themselves again saying, if we acknowledge our sins, he is faithful and just
to forgive us our sin, and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness, 1. Ioh. 1. and
so remain still, even whiles they find these battles, foiles, and risings
again in themselves, the children of God. For S. John is not to be understood,
to deny simply that the newborn sin; but to deny that they sin unto death,
or with their full and whole power and will, as they do wc are unregenerated.
Otherwise, he were contrary unto himself, in yt he confesses, speaking of
himself, and such as he was, the^ (as you have heard) that if they said they
had no sin, they deceived themselves, and there was no truth in the^. Neither
is there any thing in any of the rest of the places, by you alleged, that
co^trarieth this my interpretation of John, or confirms yours. For me^, in
the time when sin is but thus dwelling in them, and so through their
infirmity, now and then (though against the will of the spirit) dursting from
them: yet even the^ retain the spirit of God in the^, which shows it self
both in procu^ing that it was not committed, but as it were with a piece of the
will, and in after so taking up the trespasser for so doing, inwardly in his
conscience, that he grows to indignation with himself, for yielding so far,
and so to a more carefulnes to take heed of sin afterward, and to a firmer
purpose and power, to exercise himself in good works, every day dying more
and more unto sin, and living more and more unto righteousness: whereupon it
comes to pass, that such are not, no not even in this time of their
infirmity, answerable to the description of the wise man, wherewith he sets
them forth, that are not capable of the good spirit of God, Sap. 1. and such
do yet bring forth the works of Abraham, in their inner man at al time, and
outwardly also upon the recovery, from the foil of the flesh, from time to
time. But sin and grace cannot dwell together you say: and herein, you
strengthen your self with Ioh. 8, Sap. 1, Matthew. 6.1. Cor. 10. it is true, sin
with his head vncrushed, in his full power and strength, cannot dwell in ye same
man, in who^ is ye spirit of regeneration, at one and the selfsame time; but
(as I have said) it may and does: or else, it never continues a day to an end
in any one man, except the man Christ. For all else daily offend and sin, but
yet the^ sin weakened, and not in his full strength, dwells in the man, in
respect of the flesh, yt is, in respect of so much of him, as is not fully
brought in subjection to the spirit, and the spirit dwells in him every day
prevailing more and more, in respect of the other part which is renewed
according to the will of the spirit, and therefore called the new man. This
point of divinity though most true and certain, by these your speeches, it
seems, you are not acquainted wtall: but yet it seems strange, that you wc
brag so much of the spirit, to direct your Popes, your councils, and Church,
should (considering the manifold and great sins and errors they have fallen
into) set down this doctrine, that sin, and the spirit of God cannot dwell
together. As for your place, Wisdo. 1, it is rightly to be understood of such,
as are hypocrites, and dissemblers, and dwell in foolish and wilful ignorance,
for from such the spirit of discipline flies, but such are not the children of
God, that I have described to have in them, both the new man, and the old,
spirit and flesh, and therefore such may, as I have said, be capable of Gods
spirit, and such may be the true servants of God, and do the works of
Abraham, and be partakers of the table of the Lord, as long as sin reigns
not in their mortal bodies, howsoever sometimes it show it self to dwell in
them. And this you must be driven to confess, or else you preach the right
doctrine of desperation, to your self and all that hear you. But to pass
from these points, which I thought good thus to admonish the reader and your
self of, let us return to your conclusion of this Chapter, wherein, after you
have showed us, that to find your Religion to be a good tree, we must not
look upon your rotten fruit, because your Religion condemns such fruit, but
upon your doctors and great personages that have died throughout the world, in
your faith, and left notable monuments of hospitalls, colleges, and such like
works behind the^; you charge us not only that our Religion cannot show the
like, but that rather we have spoiled and defaced your momuments, as your
Abbeys and such like, and think to make ame^ds with giving some little now to
ye poor. Whereunto briefly my answer is, this; all this cannot prove your
Religion good, nor ours bad, unless you can prove yours true by the scriptures,
and ours false. For as bad fruits as these you charge us withal may be found,
in them, whose Religion is good, and as good as these you brag of, to the
outward show, may be found, where the Religion is false, and idolatrous even by
your own doctrine, in the former Chapter, which answer were sufficient.
Howbeit, for the more full, and particular satisfying of the common reader, I
say further, first in that you forbid us to judge of your Religion, by ye view
of the rotten fruit, that we have found in some that have professed it, because
your Religion condemus such fruit, you must not think much if we prescribe the
same rule to you, in respect of ours: for as evident it is that our Religion
conde^neth sin, yea even to the least sin, as ever did yours, and more too,
in that we condemn the first motions arising in man's mind to sin, though
not consented unto, to be sin, which you deny; and in that we teach the least
breach of the law, deserves in it self damnation, and you do teach there are
a number venial sins, even for the littlenes thereof, and therefore to be
put away even with trifling toies, and devises of your own. Secondly, I say
that by that, your Religion be conferred with the Religion, that most of these
great personages, and doctors you talk of died in, and both of them be tried
by the scriptures, and then compared with ours, it will be found, that not
half of them died in your faith as you imagine, yea, that the ancientest and
best of them died in ours, and therefore both they, and their monuments are
ours, and give greater credit unto our religion, then all the rest do unto
yours. And even of late days, diverse famous persons of our religion, have
founded Schools, Hospitals and Colleges, as well as yours. What Duke Cassimer
is, you know, and what he has done at Newstade and elsewhere in Germany this
way, it cannot be unknown. Even now also with us in England, a zealous
professor of our Religion, and an ancient noble Counselor, Sir Walter
Mildemay, has founded a noble new College in Cambridge, called Emanuel
College. And since the beginning of her Majesty's reign that now is, our
gracious sovereign Lady Queen Elizabeth, notable things by her self and
others, there has been done, to the erecting of Hospitals and common
Schools, and also to the maintenance, and furtherance of learning, in both the
Universities; insomuch, that I dare be bold to say, it is as much to the good
of this Church, and common wealth, as if an other such University as one of
these, had been now founded, built, and endued as richly, as either of these
now is. And though our Clergy men now, be not able to build so many Colleges
as yours were, yet those things that they do that way, though they match not
yours in quantity, they yet may ouermatch yours quickly in quality. For you
know in the Gospel, the widows two mites, which she threw into the treasury,
for the poor, of the little that she had well gotten, was in Christ's account,
a greater alms then theirs, which threw in far greater sums of their
superfluities. Mark 12. And well known it is, that the richest and greatest
of ours, are for their places, but beggars to them, that have been of like, or
the same place amongst you, whereof, the reason is, not only that they lack a
number of devises that yours had, to increase their gain, but also, that they
have not your Romish consciences, which with your Popes dispensation, could
make them wide enough to swallow up the commodities, not only of as many
benefices, but also Bishoprics and other offices, civil or ecclesiastical,
as they could possibly get. Whereof it came, that of their very superfluities,
unless they had been prouder then Lucifer, and more wastfull in belly cheer,
then ever was the rich glutton, some thing might well be spared, and of a
number of them, so much, as might have procured the building of many more then
they left behind them. Hospitals and Colleges, though you would so insinuate,
we have pulled down none, but have increased the number of them. And as for
your Abbeys, and other ^loisters of religious houses, you had for the enriching
and building of them (under pretense of your requiting of them with your
Masses, Dirges, and trentals) devoured so many widows houses, robbed so many
heirs, and fatherless children, spoiled so many Parishes of the ordinary
maintenance for their ministers; and since, the livers in them, were grown to
such height of sins not to be named, as that in the just judgment of God,
there could no less punishment come upon them, then the utter defacing and
overthrowing of them, lest if they had been left easy to have been set in
their former state again, they should too easily and too quickly have been
shoppes and sties for the like filthinesses and abominations again. And yet
here with us in England, Cardinal Woolsey by the Popes authority, pulled down
the first, and to the suppression of the rest, many of your bishops and Clergy
under king Henry consented: and in diverse other places they have been also, by
lawful and sufficient authority, orderly for these causes, defaced: and
doubtless though not turned to so good uses, as they might perhaps have been,
if the wrath of God against them, for the foresaied causes, would have
suffered it; yet I am fully persuaded, to a better use by far, yea infinite
degrees, then they were before. And therefore these things considered, this
rather may be counted a good work in us, thus to have defaced them, and
converted their use, then a fault whereof we need repent us: And consequently
vain is your charging of us, with seeking to make amends with giving a trifle
to the poor. This is a fault that rather touches your kingdom, then us: for
we account all alms and other outward good works whatsoever, to be
unprofitable to the doer, unless they be done with goods gotten with a good
conscience; which will overthrow most of the glory of the gay works that you
most brag of: and you are they that care not, so your Church be enriched, if it
be with the farming of concubines, and dispensation for any sin, and with the
rentes yearly for ye open stews, and yt with ye which they get by whoring during
their lives, so you have it when they die. For there was nothing more common,
the^ for your priests to farm co^cubines, though they might not be suffered to
have lawful wives, and experience has taught, yt there was no sin, but there
might be marcha^dise made of it, in your romish court and fair: and ye your
Popes a long time, have taken rent for the stews in Rome, and that yearly a
good round sum, and yt they have been glad to take the goods of those
harlots, when they died, for their Churches use, it is most notoriously
known. And what has been more usual both in practice and doctrine with you,
then to teach much satisfaction for sin, and redemption of former faults, to
be performed by alms giving, especially, so it were to your Priests and
Clergy men, never caring so you might come by it, of their goods alive or dead,
whether ever it was well gotten, or no? For in truth, this has been the
policy, that has brought your Clergy, to so infinite wealth, as they were of,
and made all other but beggars in comparison of themselves. Therefore now let
them that have any judgment, as you wish, look upon the fruit of your trees,
whether they be so good or no, as you here make bragges of.

The XXXV. Chapter.
NOw seeing that you have visited our garden, if a man may be so bold, I pray
lend us the keys, that we may in like manner visit yours, and that we may see
the fruits of your religion. Read all the histories written from the passion of
Christ to our days, and you shall find, that al those sects that have left our
Roman Church, have done more mischief in one year, Your Romish Church that
now i^, is as far gone from the ancient pure Roman Church, as ever any
heretics went from it, and of you especially your saying is true.
being separated from the said Church, then they did in an hundred years
before. But because our meaning is not to recite all the acts of your
predecessors, enemies to the Catholic Church, it shall suffice to make a
short discourse of those that have been of late days, I mean the Bohemians or
Hussites, whose followers you do affirm your selves to be: for in your godly
book of Martyrs, This is untrue, as every one that will view the ^ct, and
momuments of the Church, written by master Fox, may see.
you have placed John Hus as the first Martyr of your ancient Church (who was
burnt for an heretic about an 120. years agone) eue^ as we account Your
religion and Stephens agree ^o well, that if he were alive again, you would be
as ready as ever were the Jews, to stone him, whatsoever you say of him now,
he being dead.
S. Stephen to be the first Martyr of our Church. Now, to know, whither ye^e of
the opinion of the Hussites or no, that I leave for some other time, and for
this present, I am content to condescende to that that you have written, I
mean, that John Hus did preach your Gospel, and made a number of such
faithful persons as you are, and that he suffered death to sustain your
Religion. Then let us see, what good fruit this did produce unto us: those that
have written the stories of Boheme, and among others Your author you know was a
great papist, and afterward a Pope, and therefore worthily he is to be
suspected as a partial reporter, and yet cap. 35. before, he is enforced to
confess that the Senate had secretly murdered so many of those that called the
Pope Antichrist, that the blood of the^ running out of the gate bewraied it,
whereupon this and some other extremities followed.
Aeneas Siluius, do testify, that in the year of our Lord God. 1418. there
was a certain monk that became an Hussite in the city of Prage, which is the
Metropolitan of that kingdom, the which accompanied with a number of
companions as zealous as himself, they did execute so horrible a cruelty, that
eleven of the principal magistrates were driven to fly from the City, to
save their lives, and seven more (for in all they were 18.) being taken by
them, they did cast them out at the windows of their own houses, and did kill
them with their spears as they fell. This was done, Sigismondus being then
Emperor, in the time of Martin the first Pope of Rome of that name, and
Vneslaus being then king of Boheme. The next year after the death of this
said Vneslaus: they did spoil This al, is too much and more then either your
author, or the evidence of the matter, will beat by far.
all the monasteries, Abbeies and Churches of of the said kingdom. And among
others, one John Zischa, who was their captain in the City of Prage, he made
them all pass through the edge of the sword, without sparing man, woman or
child. And the like was done in another town of the said kingdom called
Messim, the year 1423. It were too tedious to write all their cruelties, they
did not care, whither those of their company were of their sect or no, This is
your slander for any thing that I can see in your author, or any where else but
indeed no people s^ barbarous but you ca^ find in your hearts to vs^ them
against good Christians: yea he has been a Pope of Rome that has betrayed a
Christian Emperor into the h^nd^ of the Turks, for so dealt Gregory 9. with
the Emper^ur Frederick. witness Caspinian.
for some were Idumeans, some Palestines, some Moabites, and some other
Amelecites: even as of your bountiful goodness ye call all those that will
not be of your sect, Papists, Infidels, Hypocrites and Idolaters: and therefore
we may justly say, that you are their right hears apparent, although ye have
gone somewhat before them, and (as our savior said) accomplished the measures
of your fathers by the heroical acts that you have done in this ( You may
wholly thank your selves for the desolate estate of France.
almost desolate) kingdom of France, there needs no other witness to prove
it, but the testimony of your own eyes and ears, which have heard and seen
more almost then any man can write. Therefore I beseech you, not to reproach any
more the abuses of our ecclesiastical ministers: for although it be so, that
they have need of some reformation, yet I do think it is necessary to
choose some better stayed persons then you are If you may be judge, this will
easily be the sentence
for you have done more harm in five years, then ours have done in 1500. S.
Augustine in the first book of the city of God, Capite 1. you might have
added.
does magnify in the Christians behalf the divine favor of God: for he
does write, that when the Goths did destroy and spoil the city of Rome,
the Romans (although they were not Christians) did retire themselves for their
sauegard into the churches and Temples of the martyrs. And the Goths being but
a barbarous nation, had that respect to God, that they never durst nor would
enter into those holy places to do them any displeasure. It is a wonder, that
yo^ that have so openly slai^e thousands in Ch^rches, since your most barbarous
and faithles massacres of late in France began, and as it is notoriously
known, not yet beyond the memory of man, in Merindall and Cabriers, should yet
be so impudent to object this to us as a fault (which yet you have not proved,
to have been committed by us) wherein you glory as a virtue.
You which make so great profession of the Gospel, have showed your selves a
great deal more cruel then those barbarous people: for they did pardon all
those that went to the Temples, and you have in many places spoiled the
churches, and murdered al those that ye found in them, so that one might well
say to you that, that Optatus Myleuitanus in his book con. Parm. Donatist.
the which was, that the Donatists ought to be content (and you likewise) to
have wounded the members of the Church, and to have divided the people of God,
If you would have learned this lesson, it had been well with us.
at the lest you should have spared the alters and the temples, and not to make
war against the stones.

The XXXV. Chapter.
NOw in this, you crave the keys to enter by into our garden, to visit our
trees, that so you may see the fruits of our religion, having gotten in, in
your own pleasant conceit, after you had cast your eyes about you, and looked
a while upon our trees: first, you bid us read all the stories since Christ,
and tell us that so doing, we shall find, that all those sects that have left
your Romish Religion, or Church, have done more mischief in one year, being
separated from you, then they did in an hundredth before. Now doing as you will
us, we find indeed, great hurt has been done, by the ancient heretics, for
the space of six hundred years, that have separated themselves from the Roman
Church that then was, but withal we find, that our Church is far liker that
Church, then your Roman Church that now is, and since, what hurt soever has
been done, by one or other, that have separated themselves from you (though we
challenge not communion with every one that has so done) your own doings we
find in stories, has far exceeded theirs, in all kind of impiety. Thus having
in these general words, set a good face upon it: as though you could say very
much of the bad fruits, which you find growing of our Religion, you begin
at the year 1418, with the sturs in Bohemia; laying to our charge, the
murdering of seven magistrates of Prage, by a certain Monk, and his
companions, and sundry other things done, by John Zischa, and his army, in the
time of those wars there; then you lay to our charge also once again, all the
troubles of late in France, preferring us for cruelty, before the Goathes, that
conquered Rome, and yet spared their Temples and those that fled thither, and
this is all that you spied at this your view, save that most untruely (as most
clearly it appears in Master Foxes book of them) by the way you would seem
to have espied, yt we place John Hus as the first martyr of our Church. I
answer therefore to that which you now object, that both those sturres of
ancient time in Bohemia, and these of late in France, began first of your
selves, and so it clearly appears, both by the stories, and other
circumstances, of these broiles. For howsoever you, out of your Aeneas Siluius
(a writer far more partial, then Sleidan whom you charged before with that fault)
report that murder of seven Magistrates in Prage, by a Monk, to our discredit,
and the rest of the sturs there, that after followed; certain it is, that when
all was laid against John Hus, in the council of Constance, that might be
devised any way to hurt him, and his cause, and amongst other things, he was
charged with sedition, and stur that had been before in Prage, he openly in
the face of the whole council cleared himself thereof, and all his followers,
and shows indeed, that they did arise first from a letter sent from the
College of Cardinals, to the king of Bohemia, requiring him, that together
with them, he would renounce and forsake his obedience unto Pope Gregory the
12, which he did, for the which cause, the Clergy were against the king, and
so began the stur. And as for Zischaes wars, it appears in the stories, that
the nobles of Bohemia, and Morauia, having under their hands and seals, to the
number of 54, entreated the council of Constance, as they had sundry times done
before, for the safety of John Hus, and Hiero^ of Prage, and yet understanding
that that council to ye perpetual infamy thereof, proceeded contrary to the
Emperors safe conduict, given to Hus, to burn the^ both, and to make most
wicked decrees there, against the kingdom of Bohemia; partly for the love they
bare unto these two me^, and partly provoked by the monstrous cruelty, showed
upon them, by ye counsel, to prevent the mischief intended further thereby,
against themselves, and infinite numbers of that nation; they rose in arms,
and banded themselves together, rather to root Papistry out of Bohemia, then
to suffer the Gospel to be rooted out from thence, which they saw was the
intention of that council. Even your own author confesses, that the injuries
done by this council, to these two men (to the great dishonor of the kingdom
of Bohemia) caused Zischa to do as he did cap. 36. de historia Bohemica. So
that your own selves, and your bloody tyranny was the cause of all the sturs
there. You father also more upon your author, to amplify the matter withal,
then he reports, namely, that they spoiled al ye Monasteries, Abbeys, and
churches of the kingdom, and that John Zischa made al to pass through the
edge of the sword, without spa^ing man, woman or child; this all, is your
addition, and it is contrary to the truth, both of the story, and evidence of
the thing. And howsoever the truth were, concerning the death of those seven
magistrates that you speak of, certain it is, that your said author tells
of certain men (he was ashamed belike to name how many) by the magistrates of
Prage, before that, secretly and treacherously murdered, in their
councel-house, not concealing, that they that were so privily made away, were
favorers of the religion of Hus, and that they that so dispatched them were of
yours, cap. 35. and 37: whereupon he says, that that matter coming to light,
there was great stir in the City: whereupon, for that and other intolerable
injuries before that offered them (not concealed by your own author, cap.
36.) it may be that some such outrage, in revenge thereof, was committed by
some of their friends and favorers, as you note out of him. Which I rather
believe, was or might be so, because I read in an other Historiographer, that
in Zischa his time, the Consuls of Prage being grieved with the sturs that
then were, called for Johannes Premonstratensis, and nine of his adherents into
their councel-house (as though they would have co^ferred with them of the
common wealth) and when so they had got them thither, that there they secretly
slew them, which after being perceived by some blood, noted to have come from
thence into the channels, that author denies not, but that thereupon there
grew such stur and tumult, that the people overthrew the Councel-house and
diverse other houses, and slew eleven principal Citizens, whom they judged the
authors thereof. Whereby yet any man may see, yt your side gave the first
example thereof, and that they therefore are as justly to be blamed as the
other. But what marvel is it to hear, that such outrages fell out in such
turbulent times, especially when they that in respect of their place, should
have given example only of just and orderly dealing, behaved them selves so
tyrannically and wickedly as they then there, of your faction, did? when ever
has it been otherwise in such times, and upon such occasions, but that some
things have fallen out of both sides not justifiable. Indeed I grant it had
been far better, that the Bohemians had taken some peaceabler course, and
lamentable it was of both sides that there was such shedding of blood, but yet
when men are provoked as they were, and can conceive no hope of better, but
rather of worse, such is the infirmity of man, that we see, it commonly falls
out so. As for your civil wars, and the mischiefs that thereupon have fallen
out in France, you must meet with a very mean man, and simple reader, if
notwithstanding the fresh remembrance thereof, and the stories thereof written,
you can make him believe, that the fault thereof is wholly ours. Nay every man
sees, and understands that your side are they that began first those
troubles, that have burned, and with sword most monstrously consumed, whole
congregations, men, women, and children, assembled to exercise themselves, in
prayer, and hearing of the word, according as by your kings edicts, they were
permitted; and that your side it was, that under pretense of an honorable
marriage, betwixt the king of Nauar, and the kings sister, drew into Paris all
the protestants of name, and otherwise as many as you could, and when you had
them there, most tira^nously and trecherously made a most bloody massacre of
them. And your friars or friends they were, that of late most villanously slew
the French king. And the principals and accessaries to that most treasonable
murder, are they that yet are up in arms against his lawful successor the
king of Nauar. This and a number of such other dealings of yours, are so
famouslie known abroad, that you come to late to buzze these things in the
ears of men, that the ruins and desolation of that kingdom is to be imputed
unto us, or that we have been the men that are worse then the Goathes, and
Donatists, in murdering those, that we found in your Temples. A poor simple
man perhaps that reads these things in your book, will thereupon gather that
you of your side, are men that can never be charged with any disorderly
insurrections, and rebellions, and that your side altogether abhors cruelty
and never practiced any, For who would think that of all other, you would be
so ready, so especially, and vehemently to charge us with these things, unless
you were the clearest men in the world in them? But understand Christian
reader, that this is but their policy to deceive thee, for there were never men
more justly and deeply to be charged with these things, then these men are.
For if we look but into the stories of our own country, we shall find
that scarce one king has passed his reign without rebellion, for a long time
together, and that chiefly by means of the Popes cursing and banning them for
money matters. This, the stories of Henry the second, king John, Henry the
third, Edward the second, Richard the second, Henry the fourth, sixth,
seventh, and eight, and of late time, the stories of Edward the sixth, and of
her Majesty that now is, Queen Elizabeth, do make most clear. For in all
those Princes times, we read of great troubles, and civil wars in this
land, and that always especially stirred up by the Popes, and their
favorers, if they had not what they would. Sure I am they will not, nor can
say, that they that were the authors and doers herein, were of our Religion,
but of theirs. The like may be said of other kingdoms, since the time that
their Religion has flourished most. And certain it is that none were ever in
these parts of the world, since they came to their height, greater troublers of
Christendom, then their Popes themselves. For in Italy under the names of
Guelphes and Gibelines, in Cicilie, Naples, and Arragon, for titles of those
kingdoms, and in Germany and France for the translating this way and that way
the Empire, they have been the cause of most long and bloody wars. And to
pass over all the most savage parts, played by these men, (that would seem
to have their hands, so free from bloodshed, especially in Churches) of late
years in France in killing and murdering of Protestants, as courageously in
Churches, as in any other places, where either by force, or subtlety they could
surprise them: let them call to their remembrance what was done by a famous
Captain of theirs, Minerius, of late under pretense of a commission from
Frauncis, the king of France, to the poor Christians of Merindoll, and
Cabriers, and the towns thereabout, and I think they shall be enforced to
confess, that they are not the men, they would seem to be. For in that story
it appears, that after they had by a decree, in the high court of Province,
for the not appearance of ten men of Merindoll, adjudged that town, houses,
and trees to be made even with the ground, and all the inhabitants thereof,
men, women, and children, to be consumed with the fire, and that after their
prelates and great men, had long labored in vain to put this decree in
execution: that in the end, this Minerius, being president in Province,
handled the matter so, by false informing of the king, that he obtained a most
bloody commission from Frauncis then king of France, through the help of the
Cardinal of Turnon, to execute that arrest. Wherein, though his commission
stretched only to Merindoll, he behaved himself so, with the assistance that
quickly he got, that in short space he utterly destroyed Merindol, Cabriers,
and other towns and villages, thereabouts, to the number of 22, giving
commission to his soldiers, to spoil, ransacke, burn, and to destroy
altogether, and to kill man, woman, and child, without al mercy, sparing none:
which commission they executed, in the cruellest manner, that their filthy and
bloody hearts could devise, rauishing both women and maidens, and putting them
to all the torments, they could imagine, cutting of the paps of some, ripping
open the bellies of other some, and so most tirannously murdering al they could
get. At Cabriers, thirty men he caused to be hewn in pieces, in a meadow near
the town, and there he took.40. women, and caused them to be put into a barn
full of hey, and straw, and so there to be kept in with pikes, whiles they and
the barn and all were burned: and there also he sent a Captain of his John de
Gay, to go with a company of ruffians to the Church; where were a great number
of women and young children, and to murder them all, which he did, sparing
neither young nor old, and so one way and other, eight thousand, were slain
in that town. And but for to much troubling of the reader, a number as
tragical stories as this, might be set down of their dealings against the
poor servants of God, in diverse and sundry other places, and namely also not
long after these things were done, in the country of Piedmont, and
thereabout: but even this is sufficient to make any man see, especially this
story being so famous, and done of so late years that your forehead must
needs be grown very hard, yet to object such things to us, whereof you your
selves have been most notoriously guilty. You have told us before, that we
must not seek to blemish your Religion with the bad fruits we find upon
you, for your Religion condemns them: which might justly have stayed you
from going about to stain our Religion, with these things, especially. For
sure I am that our Religion condemns sedition and rebellion, forbids
subjects to impeach their Princes safety, and dignity, either by word or deed,
and detesteth al kind of such barborous cruelty, and tyranny. Whereas it may
be justly doubted, that howsoever your Religion, condemn some other gross
faults, that be common in men of your side, yet it likes well of these, and
such like kind of dealings, because it is a common thing, for your great
Prelates to be the chief furtherers thereof, and to have such things,
attempted under commission from your catholic kings, and your Popes of Rome.
And therefore, though that your rule weake^, yea fully answer this objection
of yours, against us (though it were granted that these things, which you
object were true) yet it does not take away ours, in this respect, made
against you.

The XXXVI. Chapter.
YOu The answer is to your shame.
make us but a very slender answer, saying, that we were the first, and that
you do no other but that that we have taught you. That may be, but sure I am,
if you should deny it. I know, and stories to your sha^e report, that you
should say untruly.
If we should say the contrary, I know who should say the truth: but to
avoid all quarrels, the best is (following the council of our Savior) to give
you more then you demand. Let us put the case, that we should confess to be
the first, does it follow therefore, that your matter is good? No, but it
follows, that then you may be ashamed to note that as a fault in us, whereof
you are first and more guilty.
I pray do but consider the verdict that you both give of your selves and of
us. We are (according to your sacred gospel and Apostolical judgment) no
other but poor and simple infidels, and superstitious Idolaters: but
contrariwise, you are Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists, the true children of
God. Seeing then, that God has showed you so much favor, and poured upon you
the bountiful gifts of his grace, how have ye sought so cruelly to If any
of our profession have do^e so, we neither commend them, nor allow of their
manner of dealing, you do, of the like in yours.
revenge your selves against his express commandment. Is this the way of
reformation, to show your selves as il as we or worse? Seeing that the matter
falls out so plainly, I pray you be not obstinate, give place unto the best,
to reform the rest, for to be worse then you I Your opinion, God be thanked,
is no great prejudice unto us.
think none can be found. You my masters that can make such tedious sermons,
and rail at large against our Popes and Bishops, why do you pass over so
lightly the faults of your We do not lightly pass oue^ the faults of our
ministers.
ministers? you set out gloriously the titles of Apostles, Prophets,
Evangelists, and extraordinary messengers of God for your selves: as good
Godfathers ye now Christen our Popes and Bishops, calling them ravening and In
so calling them, we ca^l but a spade a spade, a fig a fig.
greedy devouring wolves. In this ye do greatly abuse the intellectio^ of the
scriptures: for if you mark well that, that our Savior does say, ye shall
find, that ye run far wide of the text, and the similitude of the wolf
does full well appertain unto your ministry. There he does declare the
difference that is betwixt the good shepherd and the bad (which he does call
Mercenarium) and the wolf. John. 10.
The good Shepherd is he, that does hazard and venture his life for his
flock: the ill Shepherd is he, that takes the milk and the woole from the
sheep, and lets the^ rome without taking any care to keep them. And this
we find, i^, and has been ^f long the very nature and property of yours
The wolves seeing the^ rome abroad, scattered from the flock, does devour
all those that are ill kept. The good shepherd is our Savior Christ and his
Apostles, and all the good Bishops that did flourish in old time, and all the
holy Confessors and martyrs that have lived in the golden age, when the blood
of our Savior Christ was yet hot boiling in their hearts. The ill shepherds
have followed after, which have not cared for their sheep. The wolves (which
are the heretics) seeing this have scattered the sheep out of the fold of
Christ, which is the catholic Church, where they had been borne spiritually,
that is to say, regenerated with the grace of the holy ghost, and the Sacrament
of baptism, to follow the sects of perdition. If al our shepherds had been as
careful to keep their flocks as they ought to have been, your Congregation
had never been so strongly builded as it is at this day in France. And
therefore you offer your Church (if it may be so called) great wrong, when you
speak against the abuses of ours, Indeed because your Religion and the
principal pillars thereof are plants h^t the heavenly father planted never,
therefore you are, and shall be rooted up by the roots.
for our sins have been and are the principal foundations of your building.
And even as the worm is nourished in the Aposteme with the ill humors, even so
you feed of our faults, and are nourished with our sins, your fire burns
with our wood You must amend both your lives and religion, or else it will be
wide with you, I can tell you.
and if we would amend our lives, I know how soon your religion would The
gates of hell shall never prevail against ours.
decay. And therefore our Pastors are not wolves, but they have permitted the
wolves to devour their sheep, and so they shall answer for them before the
throne of the eternal Judge, Your sheepherds then by your own confession,
have been lewd, idle, and negligent shepeherdes.
who does advertise them by the Prophet Ezechiel, that they shall answer for
all the mischiefs that happen unto their sheep, many of the which are
scabbed and full of diseases: and therefore I would have you to cause some body
to choose among yours and ours those that are best, to the end, that through
this division, and your aid, we may take the rest. I think, that if any
thing condemn us, it will be this cause, forasmuch as we have continued in
that doctrine which was preached unto us at the first, as you your selves Yes
that we can, and say most truly too.
cannot deny, if you will confess the truth.

The XXXVI. Chapter.
YOu would have your reader believe, that we have no further answer to your
former objection, but your example, and therefore in this chapter you bring us
in answering only for our defense, that you were the first, and that we
learned so to do of you: whereunto first you answer, that you know who should
say the truth if you should say the contrary; and then supposing that our
answer were true, you tell us that our answer will not serve, because we
should not have learned, so cruelly to revenge our selves against Gods express
commandment of you, whom we count poor simple infidels, and superstitious
idolaters. But I trust the indifferent reader may see by that which I have
written, that this is not our only answer, and that we answering thus, if you
should say the contrary, he now knows, that it is you and no other, that
therein should speak contrary to the truth. Indeed we confess, that we
should not learn of you, nor of any other, cruelly to seek to revenge our
selves, for the Lord has forbid us to revenge our selves, for vengeance is
his, and he will do vengeance. Romans 12.19. And if any of our side, have
transgressed this rule, we commend it not in them; neither do we encourage
other to follow any such example, but yet withal we tell you, and you know it to
be most true, that such may be the oppression of Gods servants, and the tyranny
of their enemies, toward them, that he may as he has done, extraordinarily
stir up some amongst them, to revenge their quarrels, and to deliver them out
of their enemies hands, though such extraordinary examples, are not to be
drawn into ordinary imitation. And though there be no reason why we should
learn to do ill of you, of whom we account so evil; yet there is reason why
you thinking so well of your selves, as you do, should not teach us, by your
often example to do that, which if we do but once, you count an heinous
offense in us. You would have the best to reform the rest, if your request
were granted, you must amend apace, or else there will none of you be found in
that degree. You are angry with us for speaking as we use to do against your
Popes, and bishops, and for that in the mean time, we give our selves glorious
titles of Apostles, Evangelists, Prophets etc, passing over the faults of our
own. Whereunto most truly I may answer, that so infinite and monstrous have
been the sins and abominations, of these your Popes and other prelates, for
this long time, that it is impossible for us all, ever sufficiently to paint
out the filthiness of them: and as for our passing over in the mean time, the
faults of our own (though indeed we never deny but that there are faults
amongst our own, for they are men, and indeed for all your saying, we are the
first censurers of our selves oftentimes for those faults) what reason is there
that you should require at our hands, that we should never tell you of your
faults, but that we must withal lay open our own? When this is your fashion,
we will learn to imitate you: and concerning titles which you say, we so
gloriously set out our ministers withal, they are yet but titles, by Christ in
his express word, left unto his Church, and of them, some we confess, were
extraordinary, and but for a time, as Apostles, Prophets, and Evangelists, of
whom only we glory in this, that our doctrine is the same yt they left us in
writing, and the other titles of bishops, pastors, and doctors, as fit for ye
true ministers of ye Gospel, we take unto us, and therwt are we content. So
that you rather have advanced your Clergy with glorious and vain titles,
the^ we, in that of your own heads, not thinking the titles that Christ has
left us glorious enough, you have your Popes, Cardinals, and diverse other such
strange and swelling names of pride and vanity. Yet it grieueth you, as it
seems most, that some of us, now and then term your Popes and bishops
ravening and devouring wolves; some labor therefore you bestow in amplifying a
similitude to prove them no wolves: but hirelings and bad shepherds, that many
of them have been a great while, yea and that their sins have been the cause
of our prospering and prevailing as we have, you will not deny us. It is well yt
the evidence of the truth, and the force thereof, has prevailed thus far with
you, to cause you to grant us thus much: I fear me if a number of your
Prelates, and Popes should come to the reading of this, you should have small
thank of them, for yielding thus far. Well, then hirelings they are, and
have been, but too much, and too long, by your own confession, and therefore
as you tell them, the judgment of God denou^ced against the^, Eze. 3, and 33,
is that, that they may make their account of; which being so I cannot see how
their veriest enemies should wish them to be worse: yet let us see what reason
you have to prove, that they may not be rightly called wolves? Your reason is,
because in the phrase of the Scripture you think there must needs be betwixt
an hireling and a woulfe, spoken of therein, the same difference that is
betwixt a naughty, careless, and a negligent shepherd, and the woulfe that
comes in the mean time to pray of his flock: whereupon the hireling with
you, is as the sheephearde, but careless and negligent in looking to his sheep,
and the woulfe is as the heretic and false teacher, that comes whiles the
other is negligent, and drives the sheep from the fold, and deuours them. But
you know that similitudes are not to be streatched further then they are
brought in, and used for, that notwithstanding, seeing you your self confess
yt ye heretic is the woulfe, we shall well enough maintain our calling of
your Popes and Bishops, wolves, I warrant you. For that is the thing especially
that we stood upon with you, and we desire nothing more the^ that you would
come once to the sound trial of that point, by the Canonical scriptures,
whither you and they have not been most dangerous heretics. Heresy we
account any opinion conceived, held, and stubburnly defended, contrary to the
sound grounds of divinity set down unto us, in the canonical scriptures. And
your Religion to stand, and consist of a great number of such, we are always
most ready to prove. It is not your saying, that your Religion is ancient, and
received and taught always in the Church of God, from Christ, to this day; nor
your bragging that we cannot deny it, as you do here again in the later end
of this Chapter, and have often heretofore; that will serve the turn in this
case; for I have diverse times heretofore proved the contrary. This is flat,
every one sees it, you can hide it no longer, that if your Religion be so in
deed, as you say, then you dare bring it unto this touchstone of the
scripture; and it will abide it; otherwise that whatsoever you say to
countenance it, with your words, or with the names, and titles, of ancient
fathers and doctors, that in deed and truth, it is not as you pretend. I
have meetly well already showed the opposition and contrariety betwixt your
doctrine and that, taught in the Scriptures, cap. 29. and elsewhere: and yet
were it an easy matter to lead on the reader, to a number of such gross
contrarieties more, betwixt the doctrine of your Popes, and Bishops, for a long
time; and that which is taught there. For it teaches that God works even in
the regenerat, both to will, and to perform, even of his own good pleasure.
Phil. 2.13. and you contrariwise teach in your doctrine of free will. That
teaches us flatly, that as there is but one God, so there is but one mediator
betwixt God and man, the man Christ Jesus, 1. Timot. 2. and you set us up a
number of mediators and advocates, of saints and Angels besides him. There we
are taught that no man can lay any other foundation, then that which is already
laid Christ Jesus. 1. Cor. 3.11. and your church has laid Peter for the
foundation of the church. And in this scripture we are taught, to worship the
lord God and him only to serve Deuteronomy. 6. and namely the service of prayer,
being one of the highest and diuinest points of service that we are to
yield unto him, there we are taught by commandment, promise, and example,
only to do unto him: and you come and teach us to worship and to serve even
with divine honor, and namely with this of prayer, not only saints and
Angels, but also their relics, shrines, and images. What should I say more?
your own consciences tell you that you have nothing in the world to escape
this, and 1000. more such contrarieties betwixt your doctrine and the reueiled
will of God in the scriptures, but by subtle sophistry, fond quiddities, and
distinctions devised of your own heads, without all warrant and ground from
thence, which in matters and questions of divinity is intolerable. These and
such like contrarieties betwixt the doctrine of your Popes and Prelates, and
the truth taught in the scriptures, we having often observed and told them of,
and yet finding them most obstinatly to persist in the same, has caused us
rather in respect of their heretical doctrine, to call them wolves, the^ in
respect of their negligence only heretics. And for this same cause, seeing
all yours are thus infected, you wish us in vain to join some of the best of
them, with some of the best of ours, to reform things amiss in both. For
there is no hope of any good reformation at all, where any such as yours, have
any thing to do therein. And seeing it is and has been so common a thing
with us (as you cannot be ignorant, if you have read any of our books written
against you) to deny, that you continue in the doctrine which was preached
unto you at the first, yea seeing you all know, that we count your synagogue
Antichristian, for her manifold Apostasies from the ancient doctrine of Christ
and his Apostles, taught first unto the Romans, I wonder with what face or
forehead, you could write as you do in the conclusion of this Chapter, that we
our selves cannot deny, if we will confess the truth, but that you have
continued in the doctrine that was first preached unto you. And therefore not
only for your lewdnes of life, and negligent sheepherds, and bad sheep, does
your kingdom decay (as you would insinuate) but especially for this also, that
in the points we strive with you about, you are quite gone from the ancient sound
Catholic faith and religion, first taught by Christ and his Apostles, and
received and continued many years in the ancient Roman church and others. The
only way therefore for you is, to prevent an utter and universal subversion
and confusion, first to return again from your new Antichristian Religion and
doctrine, to the true ancient and Catholic faith taught in the scriptures,
and the^ to amend your manners according to the direction of the same.

The XXXVII. Chapter.
ALL our ancient doctors, This is but an arrogant false brag, as we are able
to prove, come to particulars when you will.
as well of the Greek, as of the Latin church since the Apostles time, and
the Christians of all the four quarters of the world, which were in those
days, Christians have always vowed and promised lawful things only to God:
and they have had a care to make those vows and promises discreetly, and of
such things as they saw, he had made possible unto the^; which things are
neglected in the vows, that I fear you most mean.
have made their promises and vows unto God, even as we do now, and at their
baptism they did use even those very ceremonies that we do, with the
selfsame exorcismes, adiurations and annoyntings, that we do use in our
Catholic church, which you call Papisticall: and to prove this true, we will
bring the said ancient doctors as witnesses, if it please you to read the
Never man had worse hap in quoting so few places, as is evident in the answer
to this Chapter.
places that we will quote. Tertullian (who lived very near the Apostles
time) does make mention in his book that he entitled, De resurrectione
carnis, of the anointing used at the Baptism, and of the renouncing the
Devil and all his pomp. In his book de corona militis, he does speak of
the third dipping under the water, in the name of the father, the son, and
the holy ghost. S. Cyprian the Martyr, who was above. 1300. years agone, does
write in the second volume of his Epistles, Epist. 12. how they did use in his
time to give the holy Chrisme unto the children that were baptized. Origin in
his twelfth Homily, and in diverse other places of his works, does make
mention of the renouncing of the Devil at ones baptism, and of the making of
the sign of the cross upon childrens faces when they were christened. S. John
Chrysostom in his 12. Homily upon the first Epistle to the Corinthians cap.
4. And in his first Homily upon the first Chapter to the Ephesians, he does
make mention of the said renunciation made from the Devil and all his works.
Read I pray, if it be your pleasure, S. Aug. in Psalm. 31. Aug. li 15. contra
Iulia. Pelag. li. 1. ca. 2. Item de nuptiis and co^cupiscentia. lib. 1. cap.
20. in Ioannem, tract. 33. in Canonicam Ioannis, tract. 3. and tractat. 6. Et
de eccle. dogmat. cap. 31. De Simbolo, lib. 1. cap. 7. and lib. 2. cap. 11. Et
libro de his qui initiantur sacris. Cap. 1. Basilius de Spiritu Sancto, cap.
15. and 27. Arnobius in Psalm. 75. All these doctors, which were above a
thousand years agone, if you read in them the places that here I have
quoted, you shall find, that they did use at the Baptism of their children
those very ceremonies that we do now use, and that you do so mislike. And
as for confession, before the receiving of the Sacrament, our savior Christ
does teach us, that the Ecclesiastical ministers have authority to bind and
forgive sins. Saint Cyprian in his fifth Sermon de lapsis. Origin upon the
thirty and seventh Psalm, and in Leuit. Hom. 2. Saint Augustine libro 2. de
visitatione infirmorum Cap. 4. Saint Cyril. libro 12. in Iohannem, Cap. 56.
Saint Hierom in Ecclesiast. Cap. 10. All these doctors, according to the
Scriptures, in these places do confirm auriculer confession. And as for
praying unto the Saints in Paradise to help us with their prayers, read
Origin, in his third Homily upon the Ca^ticles, and in his 2. book upon Job,
and his eight book in Eccl. Read Chrysostom, in his eight Homily upon the
Epistle to the Ephesians, the fourth Chapter, and S. Augustine, in his twenty
book against Faustus, the one and twenty Chapter, and Saint Hierom against
Vigilantius. All these make mention of the praying unto the Saints. And for
praying for the dead, read Tertullian in his book De Monogonia, and in his
book De corona militis, and Saint Cyprian ad plebem Furnensem, and in the
first book of his Epistles: and Origin in Hieremiam. Homil. 12. Item in Epist.
ad Romans libro 8. cap. 11. Read Chrysostom, in his third Homily upon the
Epistle of Saint Paul to the Philippians, and S. Augustine lib. 2. de genesis
against the Manichees, cap. 20. and in the Encheridion ad Laurent. cap. 110.
Item libro de cura pro mortuis agenda. All these doctors, whose works have
continued these 1200. years, do teach us all these things that now we do
observe, the which they left in writtng by the ordinance of God, to confute
such heretics as you are.

The XXXVII. Chapter.
AT last it seems by your pains taken in this Chapter, you be thought your
self, that forasmuch as hitherto only in bare and naked words, you had
vaunted and bragged your Religion to be the ancient Religion: that it was
needful for you eue^ for shame before you made a full end of your book, to
yield us some reasons and grounds, or at least some show and color, of your so
lewd and bold boasting. And therefore here now at last, to that end you have
mustered the bare names of a few ancient fathers, very prouidently leaving your
Readers to the examining of your quotations, amongst whom not one of an
hundredth you knew, either for lack of skill or will, leisure or books, could
and would turn to the places in the authors themselves. You thought (belike)
your credit to be such, that they must needs believe that you cite the^
truly and faithfully: and that because you so roundly have huddled them
together, that therefore also out of all question they spoke and wrotefully for
you, in the points you allege them for. What small cause there is either for
you to look thus to be trusted, or for any to yield you such credit herein,
we shall see anon, when we come to the examining of your quotations. In the
mean time, what meant you by this, thus only when all comes to al, to
countenance these 4, points: your Ceremonies in baptism, confession before the
sacrament, prayers to the Saints departed, and prayer for the dead? Are these
the greatest matters of your religion in question? Or does it especially
depend upon these 4, and the cou^tenancing of these? Or was your provision
ready for no more, that but once in all your book, you seeming to set down
the authorities whereupon you ground your religion, you would take the pains
to go no further then to these 4, points? Indeed in your next Chapter you
excuse your self and say, that you would have gone likewise on to confirm the
rest, but for being tedious to your reader. Truly he is much beholden to you,
for your discreet kindness toward him, yt have not spared to be tedious unto
him in all the rest of your book, in troubling of him with such a number of
proud brags, of the antiquity and catholikenes of al your religion (as you
have) and with many needles and frivolous long discourses besides, and now when
you came to the point indeed, which of all other was most material, and
wherein both for his satisfaction and your own credit, it stood you upon most
to enlarge your self, then thus to shift him of, with as good as nothing,
bearing him yet in hand, that but for his ease, you both could and would have
said enough. This is a common trick amongst you, thus to cozen and abuse your
simple readers, to weary them with things needles, and then to slip over with
some such shift as this, matters most needful. Well concerning that which either
you have said here for these 4, points, or that which after you pretend, if
you had list you could have easily said for the rest; this I would have the
reader diligently to note and mark, that but for two places vainly alleged
to prove your confession, that you neither have alleged any testimony of
scripture at all for the proof of these, nor yet that you so much as say after
you could or would for the rest. Which argues that even in your own
conscience, the best ground and countenance that your popish religion has,
either in these points, or in the rest, is but from earth, and not from heaven,
from men, and not from the holy ghost. For if you had been able with any good
color to have cou^tena^ced either these points, or any of the rest, out of
Gods own book and written word, the reader may think that neither your zeal
to your religion, nor yet your boasting spirit, which hitherto has showed it
self ouerflowing in you, either would or could have suffered you, thus much to
the prejudice your whole cause, clean to have forgotten, so much as once to go
about it. But to say the truth, seeing it is confessed by your betters, not
only that this, but the most of all the rest of the points of your Religion,
which we strive with you for, are grounded but upon tradition (as I have showed
out of Soto against Brentius, Canisius fifth Chapter of his Catechism, and
Lyndans 100. Chapter of the fifth book of his panoply before) you are the
honester man, and ye more a great deal to be liked, for your thus secretly
confessing the same with them. Now yet by this, the Reader may plainly
understand, what has indeed been the reason, why in all your book hitherto
you have labored so much as you have, to grace and countenance tradition and
the exposition of the doctors, and withal have spent so much time, in
diswading the appealing to the Scriptures, for the ending of the controversies
betwixt us. You were wise enough (it seems) to see where your strength lay,
and from whence would rise your bane, and therefore who can blame you for
leaning, as you do, altogether to the one, and shunning the other? But then in
reason yet you should call your Religion no more divinity, but humanity, no
more Theology but patrologie: and plainly confess indeed from whence you
have all your fig leaves, rags and clouts, to cover your shame and nakedness.
Truly these you have (whatsoever in this respect you pretend) not from the
right and sound Apostolic tradition (which always was either expressed in
Scripture, or at least co^sonant unto it) nor from the ancient holy fathers
rightly understood, and when they taught (as it was of themselves acknowledged
to be their duties) with sound warrant from the scriptures (as I have sundry
times showed already) but only from forged, or corrupt tradition, and from the
fathers either misunderstood, or erring as men. So that unwritten verities or
rather forgeries, sentences of fathers mistaken, or their very errors whereof
they would have been ashamed, if they had had the means to help them to see
them that you have; are the grounds, pillars, and bewties of your church and
Religion. And this we are always ready to justify against you before the
whole world, by sound and invincible proof out of the un doubted word of God
(interpreted according to the same rules of interpreting it, that the holy and
ancient fathers themselves have followed, in confuting all heretics in their
times by, and which they have likewise commended to others always to be
observed) and out of the undoubted writings of the ancientest and best fathers
them selves. We are therefore very well content to live and die in that
Church and Religion, which we are sure we are able thus to justify, and we
envy not you, but rather heartely lament and pity you, that yours has no
better ground then it has.

But to let these things pass, and to proceed to the scanning and examining
of that which you have set down in this Chapter; you begin with an arrogant
and false brag, that all ancient doctors, Greek and Latin since the
Apostles times, and all the Christians of ye four quarters of the world, that
were in those days, made their promises and vows etc. as you do now. You are
wonderful general (Master Albine) and your words are very confident and
swelling; shall we think that you are a man of that learning and reading, yt
you speak all this upon your own knowledge? why then having such a cloud of
witnesses, and such an army royal, allege you so few of them? nine or ten be
the most whose names you have brought us in all this Chapter, and these you have
brought forth upon the stage dumb, or tongue-tied, if we will here them speak,
we must take the pains to attend upon them, by your direction, at an other
time, and surely in other places then you have pointed us, we must hear a good
sort of these speak for you, or else we shall never find them willing, to
yield either you or your cause, any one word good or bad. As for vows and
promises, which you make to God, unless thereby you mean only such vows and
promises, as both you and we make in our baptism, to renounce the Devil and
al his works etc. for then you have not so much as named us one father, Greek
or Latin, nor yet any one Christian of any of the four quarters of the world,
you speak of. And indeed you have amongst you, such rash, foolish,
indiscreet, and superstitious vows and promises a number, for the which you
could not, nor cannot truly allege any ancient and holy father or Christian
indeed, thereinto give you any countenance. Such be you vow of single and
chaste life, universally amongst you tied to holy orders, your vows and
promises to God, some of you always, and some for a time, to abstain with
opinion of holiness and merit, from flesh and whitmeate, your vows of
pilgrimage, to commit idolatry at this! Saints shrine and picture, or at that,
and a number of like stamp; of which kind of vows and promises, if you mean,
I say first, your glory in the^ is your shame, for these are but plain will
worships, condemned by Christ Mat. 15. and by Paul Coloss. 2. and the very
bronds and marks of such, as according to S. Paul's prophecy, in the later
days should depart from the faith, and give heed unto spirits of error and
doctrine of Devils. 1. Tim. 4. And further I say such vows were better never
made, the^ made, and being made, they are of ye nature, and dangerous
consequence, that the best way were first to repent of the folly and rashness in
making of them, and then rather quite to give them over, the^ with such
superstition and impiety to seek to keep them, as is used and breaks forth
thereby shamefully amongst you. For it is plentifully proved, both out of
scriptures and out of Ambrose in ye second canon of the eighth counsel of
Toledo, that oaths that cannot be performed without sin are unlawful and
not to bind. And you cannot be ignorant, that Gratian, causa 22, quest. 4,
produces many testimonies out of the fathers to the same end, and ye namely
out of Isidor there, he has noted and set down this, for a good rule in such
cases as these of yours be. In malis promissis rescinde fidem, in turpi voto,
muta decretu^, quod incaute vouisti ne facias, impia est promissio quae scelere
adimpletur, that is, in evil promises perform the^ not, in a filthy vow
change thy purpose, ye which rashly thou have vowed do not, it is an ungodly
promise wc is fulfilled with sin. And rather then men yt have vowed and promised
a single life, through the force of inward concupiscence, should burn and fall
either to fornication, adultery, or any other uncleanness or filthiness of the
flesh (with were as heaven and earth and all the world knows common fruits of
your priestly vow of single life) the ancient Doctors that you brag of here so
much, would have the^ to marry and to repent of their rash vow: as it is
evident in Cyril in his third and 16. books upon Leuiticus, in Cyprian li. 1.
Epist. 11. in Epiphanius himself co^tra apostolicos l. 2. and in August. de
bono coniugali: and de sancta virginitate, cap. 34.

But by the vows and promises that you speak of, seeing you cite no fathers
for any other, I will take it that you meant only those yt you use to make to
God in Baptism. Now the^, yet therein understand, you strive without an
adversary. For we in our baptism do as solemnly make those vows and promises
to God, to renounce the Devil, the world and ye flesh wtall their fruits, to
believe in God and serve him all the days of our life, as ever any of you did,
or do. But you say further, that al these holy Doctors and Christians you
spoke of, at their baptism did use those very ceremonies yt you do, with the
selfsame exorcismes, adiurations and annoyntings, which you do use in your
Catholic church, which we call papisticall; for the proof of the truth
whereof, you name us certain places out of Tertullian, Cyprian, Origin,
Chrysostom, Augustine, Basil, and Arnobius: what are these all the ancient
doctors and Christians, since the Apostles time that you speak of? Though it
were granted you, that these seven in these places, were for your ceremonies
which you use in baptism, yet this were far from all that you spoke of
before. Thus (to begin withal) every body may see, that you are a far
mightyer man in bragging, the^ you dare so m^^h as to make show you are, in
proving all you say. But to pass by this fault, herein you have committed a
second fault worse then this first. For whereas you allege these fathers
here, to countenance your whole pomp of ceremonies now used by you in
Baptism, there is not (you know well enough, or else you are not so cunning in
these places, as you would have men think you are) the half of your
ceremonies and fashions, so much as barely mentioned by them, in these places.
Exorcisme, abrenuntiation, crossing, thrice dipping, and anointing, are all
that I can find any of these in any of these places to have mentioned; but
that they used the selfsame exorcismes, adiurations and anointings that you
now use (as you say) I find not. Your Chrisme that you anoint withal, must
have, as you hold, balsom in it: and in them I find only mention of oil and
none of any balsom, and your forms of exorcising and adiuring, set down in
your service books, are not found in any of these places, nay it is well
enough known they are of younger years by a fair deal. But what are these
few ceremonies (the names whereof and use whereof, in some sort they had common
with you) to all the solemnity of ceremonies that you use now? To travel no
further for the matter, let us but take a view of your rites and ceremonies in
this case, as they are set down in your late Catechism, by the decree of the
council of Trent, and Pius the fifth Bishop of Rome, written and published for
the instruction of your parish Priests, what and how to teach their people: and
we shall find that these places, do not mention the one half of them, by
far. There first, they are divided in three ranks or sorts, the first is of
them that you by authority of that council, under pain of being
anathematized, must use before the party to be baptized come to the font: the
second is of such as be used in the baptizing of him, and the third is of such
as be used after. Of the first stamp be these: consecrating of the water, with
the oil of mystical unction, of Easter day and Whitsonday, that shall serve
for the whole year after, as there shall be occasion to use it, the staying of
the party without the Church door, until he either by himself or his
Godfather for him, promise the forsaking of the service of Satan, and his
yielding to enter into Gods service and family, and being asked what he would
have, answer be given, that he would have baptism: which being known, the^
it is said further, that he is to be instructed in the Cathecisme, and is to
answer it by himself, or his godfather, which done, then in religious words
and prayers, exorcisme or adiuration to expel the devil, and to weaken and
overthrow his power in him, must be used, a little salt must be put into his
mouth, the sign of the Cross is to be made upon his forehead, eyes, breast,
shoulders, and ears, and lastly with the priests spettle, his nostrels and
ears, must be anointed. Now these things thus finished, then he is admitted or
brought to the font, where next follow the rites of the second order, which
there are thus set down, then is he thrice asked whither he do abre^ounce the
devil etc. And thrice he or his godfather make answer abrenu^tio, I do
abrenou^ce; and then likewise he is asked, whither he do believe the twelve
articles of the Christian faith, whereunto answer is made, credo, I believe;
and lastly, whither he will be baptized is demanded, whereunto answer being
made, volo, I will: he is baptized in the water in the font, in the name of the
father, the son and holy Ghost, either being dipped into the water, or by
having water poured or sprinkled upon him, according to the manner and fashion
of the Church in that country, where the party is baptized. Where is also
further showed, that it was the mind of that holy council, that at the most
there should be but one godfather, and one godmother, thus to answer and
undertake for the baptized, both because the order of discipline and
instruction thorough a multitude of masters might be troubled, and also because
it was meet so to provide, least otherwise betwixt too many, such spiritual
affinities should grow, as might hinder mariadge amongst men, too much. For as
the writer of that book further says, most wisely by the Church it was
decreed, that there should grow such affinity not only betwixt the baptized
and baptizer, but also between the baptized and the sureties, and the baptized
his true parents, that thenceforth none of them might marry together. That also
may not be forgotten, that there also it is showed, that the natural parents
of the party to be baptized, may not so promise and answer for him, yt so yt
rather it we^ appear, how far this spiritual education differs from the
carnal. Belike the author of this Catechism, and the council and Pope yt
set him a work, and comanded ye publishing of his book, had quite forgotten,
that S. Paul says to natural parents, ye fathers bring up your children in
instruction and informatio^ of the Lord Ephesians. 6. ver. 4. or else they were at
a flat point, they cared not whatsoever he had taught. Now your Ceremonies of
the lust sort (as he sets the^ out) are these, baptism ministered and
finished, the baptizeds crown of the head is to be anointed with the holy
chrisme, a white garment, or at least, a white sudariolu^, that is
handkerchiefe or cloth to wipe away sweat withal, is to be given him, a
burning wax candle is to be put into his hand, and lastly, his name must be
given him. Now, I pray you, what are ye 5. things aforesaied, mentioned in
these places, to such a number as these? And yet the Tridentine counsel, whose
mind this author plainly set out, thought al these so necessary can. 13. de
Sacrame^tis, that it pronou^ceth him accursed, that shall co^te^ne, omit, or
take upon him to alter any of these. And ye more is (as it is evident by your
own doctors, Dura^d, Dorbel, Herolt and others) you observe not these rites and
ceremonies, with the opinion yt ecclesiastical co^stitutions of such matters,
ought only to be observed wtal, yt is, in h^lding stilfast ye doctrine of
Christian liberty in your co^scie^ces, and observing the^ for dece^cy, co^lines
and edification, without opinion of holiness, necessity and merit therein, for ye
better maintenance of order and peace in ye church, but most grossly,
superstitiously, and idolatrously have you taught me^ to impute to a number of
them, as na^ely to your exorcism, anointing, and crossing such force and
efficacy, as yt not only you have made the^ to encroch far upon the use and
effect of baptism it self, but also you have, and do, attribute so great, and
so many spiritual graces and effects to the^, yt little or nothing is left, as
special to baptism. Nay who is so simple, but yt he sees, yt these and such
other rites and ceremonies amongst you (though it be never so evident yt they
be but of humane devise and invention) are more carefully urged and observed,
the^ yt very order that expreslie it set down in the scriptures themselves,
about and concerning ye administration of ye sacraments: if it were not thus,
you durst not so contrary to ye doctrine and order of S. Paul 1. cor. 14.
appoint and use rather (as you do) an unknown tongue in ye ministering of the^,
then a language yt the people might understand and be edified by, and so say
ame^ with understanding to your prayers and tha^ksgiuing. Nether durst you thus
to ad to ye lords ordinances, and accurse the^ yt omit any of your additio^s,
in the mean time, take upon you quite contrary to the words of Christ, drink ye
al of this, to bereave ye common people of the cup, to the sacrament of Christ's
body and blood, wtall by your new found term and doctrine of concomitance,
perverting quite the use and end of ye sacrament, in making it a sacrament of
ye life and glory of Christ, whereas by his ordinance it is a sacrament of his
death and abasement for our redemption upon the Cross. In taking therefore
bread a part, and calling it his body broken; and afterward wine, and tearming
it his blood shed for many to the remission of their sins, it was his purpose
yt by the use of this sacrament, until his coming again, his Church should
set forth his death and passion, and so the separation of his body and blood,
the one from ye other: and you by this your devise, invented for the
maintenance of your Helena transubsta^tiatio^, make it to serve to a quite
contrary end, na^ely, to teach the coniunctio^ still of his body and blood
together, and so to be a sacrament in effect to deny his death and passion. Of
you therefore it may again most justly be said, yt once Christ said of your
right forefathers, the Scribes and Pharisees in his time, you are they y strein
a gnat and swalow a camel, and yt for your own traditions make no reckoning of
the commandments of God. Mat. 15. and 29. and Mar. 7. And certain it is, that
whiles you and others (of who^ you have learned al these ceremonies of yours)
have taken upon you, thus to add unto Christ's ordinance of baptism, such a
number of needles ceremonies, especially urging the^ and using them as you do,
al these wel^ thereupon directly follow, you seek to make the day light of the
new Testament, even as dark as the night of the old, by your new found figures
and types, you strongly lead me^ to think yt the simplicity of Christ's
institution of this sacrament was not decent and sufficiently full of majesty,
for the dignity of such a sacrament, you by the multitude and pomp of your
solemn ceremonies, darken and obscure these things yt are essential and
necessary thereunto indeed, you take the effects and inward graces,
apperteining to ye right use of baptism, from it, and communicate the^ without,
other commandment or promise from God, to things but of men's inue^tion: and
lastly, forcibly you thereby occasion me^ to think, yt the integrity, and
fulness of this sacrament depends upon these. Howsoever therefore you would
seem, from sundry places in Aug. here quoted by you, to fetch credit for them,
yet these things being true which I have said, as they are, and they well
considered, seeing in Augustines time, it is certain, that neither there were
so many, nor those that were, so superstitiouslie were then urged or used, we
may be sure that he would, if he were now alive to see and understand all
these things, most vehemently write and speak against you therein. For
speaking but of the rites and ceremonies, and the manner of using of them that
were in his time, he greatly showed his dislike then, both of the multitude
and manner of pressing them upon men: saying, Hoc nimis doleo etc. I cannot but
extremely sorrow for this, that many things, which most holesomly are
commanded in the divine books, are less cared for, and all things are full of
so many presumptions, Epi. 119. And further he adds in the same Epistle,
touching the same, and quamuis ista contra fidem non sint etc. and though these
things be not against faith, yet whereas the mercy of god would have religion
free, burdened with most few, and most manifest sacraments to be observed,
these with servile burdens to press it, that more tolerable is the state of
the Jews, who although they know not the time of their liberty, yet they are
subject to the burdens of the law, and not to humane presumptions, and
therefore his opinion in the end is flat of all such, that as soon as may be,
without all doubt, they be to be cut off, in the same Epistle also. Yea Pope
Stephanus, as he is cited of Gratian, did. 63. Quia sancta, speaking of humane
orders above the election of Popes, says plainly, that if any of his
predecessors did some things, which then might be faultles, and after they
were turned into error and superstition (which is the cause of these your
ceremonies which we mislike in you most flatly) sine tarditate antiqua, and cum
magna authoritate destruantur a poste^s, that is, without any slacknes and with
great authority let them, of them that come after be destroyed: which assertion
of his, he does ground upon ye example of good Ezechias, in breaking ye brazen
serpent which Moses had made etc. And whereas you, under your Tridentine curse,
would bind all churches to the strict observing of all these your solemn
ceremonies: you know, or at least should, that that is contrary to the ancient
doctrine of Christian liberty in such things, and to the practice and
experience of the primitive Church. Annicet and Polycarp, the East Church, and
the West (you know) a long time freely differed about the time of the
observation of Easter, and yet pacem (says Irenaeus) in vniuersa ecclesia
etc. that is, both parts throughout the whole church, kept and maintained
christian peace, Eusebius. lib. 3. cap. 23. and so likewise there he shows, that
there had been a long time great difference, about the fast before Easter,
both for the time of the continuance and otherwise, and yet that thereby rather
in his opinion, the unity of faith was commended then hindered. And of Gregory's
answer to Leander, touching the dipping of the baptized once or thrice (the
answer being as it was and is reported by your own Gratian, de consecr. did.
4. that howsoever the party was once or thrice dipped, it was to be counted
baptized, you might learn that there is no such necessity as you imagine, to
have generally throughout the whole church of Christ, one precise form of
rites and ceremonies to be kept, that touch less the substa^tial parts of the
sacrament, then this did. That Gregory could say (to fortify that answer of
his) in vna fide nihil officit sanctae ecclesiae consuetudo diuersa, that is,
the diversity of custom or fashion does not hurt the church, continuing in
one faith. And our Cronicles do plainly testify, that neither Eleutherius,
bishop of Rome, about the year 180. (though king Lucius here sent unto him for
the Roman laws to frame his people by) would bind him thereunto, nor yet the
foresaied Gregory answering Augustine the Monks question, would tie him then,
for the ordering of the church here, to the Ceremonies and customs of Rome.
But the first sent Lucius, for his direction, to the laws of God, being
without exception, and not to the Roman laws, which might (he confesses) be
reproved, and the other in his answer to Augustines third demand, how it came
to pass yt the faith being but one, the ceremonies and customs were so diverse,
as that there was one manner of mass at Rome, and an other in France, wills him
without respect of place, out of many churches, to choose the best orders. And
who so will read Socrates 5. book and the 18.19.20.21 and 22. Chapters of the
same, he shall there find not only in a number of things diverse fashions,
rites and ceremonies, noted by him to have been in the churches of Christ
(insomuch that in the 21. Chapter not only he writes, that altogether truly
and in all obseruances of godly prayers, two churches could not be found, that
did fully agree amongst themselves) but also, that this notwithstanding, ye
unity of faith, and christian peace was preserved and maintained amongst them.
The like may be seen in Zozomens 7. book and 29. Chapter. Your own
Tridentine Catechiser of your parish Priests could see (as I noted before) that
touching dipping the party to be baptized in water, pouring it upon him, or
sprinkling him with it (so that every one follow therein that order, that he
sees in use in the Church wherein he is) it is not material which way be
used, for which of them soever be used, so (says he) this sacrament may
rightly be ministered. So much the stranger is it, that both you here and he
there, and your whole Tridentine council, should so peremtorily seek to bind
all churches and persons, to the strict keeping and observing of all your
foresaied rites and Ceremonies, in the ad ministering of the same.

Further concerning this point, I must tell you, that for your pleasure I
having turned to these places, which you quote for this purpose, as I find, by
comparing of yours with them, that they me^tio^, you have many that they speak
never a word of in these places (as namely your consecrating of your water and
Chrisme so long before, your dealing with the party at the church door, your
putting of salt into his mouth, your dressing his nostrels and ears
withspettle, and your giving him a wax ca^dle burning into his hand) so
thereby and by view of some other places in them, I plainly see, that you have
now given over the use of some, which then were used, upon the like ground that
the rest were, which you would seem to have from them. For first Tertullian in
his book de corona militis (which is the second place you quote) as there he
mentions thrice dipping, renouncing of the Devil, his pomp and Angels, which
you would seem to allow and use with him, so he says, that being taken from
out of the water, we taste before hand the temper of milk and honey, and from
the time of our baptism, for a week, we abstain from daily washing, and all
these does he ground a like, saying Harum and aliarum disciplinarum etc. that
is, of these disciplines, if thou requirest the law of the scripture, thou
shall find none, tradition shall be pretended to be the author, custom the
confirmer, and faith the obseruer; and yet you have left these two last long
ago, for any thing, that I can learn. And Augustine, an other of your authors
in this case, in three of the places named by you mentio^s exufflation which
you have given over, as he does some other, that you retain. And the same
author upon the 65. Psalm shows, that in their exorcisme they used fire,
because it is written in ye Psalm, passing through fire and water thou shall
come to a refreshing: and in his 4. book ad cathecumenos, de Symbolo, lib. 4.
cap. 1. he says, that before baptism, was used beside the Catechism,
exorcisme, prayer and canticles: in sufflation, sackcloth, bowing of the neck
and humility of the feet. And Hierom upon the 55. of Esaias, and against the
Luciferians shows further, that then was used the tasting of wine and honey.
Wherefore if the doctors and fathers, mentioning of some of your ceremonies,
bind you to think the use thereof lawful and necessary still, why should
not their authority be of as great force for these, which you see, they
ground as well as they do the other? And if their mentioning and thus grounding
of these notwithstanding, you will be at liberty to leave these, why may not we
as well be at our liberty to leave off some of the other, that we find most
needles, and most to have been abused by you, to obscure and darken the simple
institution of this sacrament? Will you follow the fathers as far as you list,
and leave them when you list, and may no body but you do so? Moreover in
looking (upon this occasion) into the monuments of antiquity, and the writings
of the ancient fathers, I must needs advertise thee (Christian reader) that I
find great variety, in the enumeration of ceremonies about this sacrament in
them, and likewise great odds betwixt the opinion and conceit, that some of
the fathers show they had of them, from that that others, of as good credit as
they, had: whereby it is evident, not only yt they were not used alike al in
every place, but in some places and times more, and in some less: but also
that some used them to one end, and some to another. So that no certain rule
either for the ceremonies themselves, or for the manner or end of the use of
them, can be deduced from thence. Whereupon it must needs follow, that for any
thing written by the ancient fathers hereof (so that the essential parts and
things belonging hereunto, which have express warrant from the institution
thereof, be observed first, and then next according to the practice and example
of the Apostles, and the times next after them, necessary instruction and
explanation to and of the right use thereof, with convenient prayers and
thanksgiving, meet to be used in such an action be used, and that also in
due time and place, by, to and before fit persons) any Church of Christ in any
kingdom by the provincial authority that it has, may freely reject so many
of the other rites and ceremonies as it shall think good, and likewise retain
so many of them, as she finds may fitly be retained for order and
comeliness, without placing any opinion of necessity, holiness or of merit in
them. And therefore, forasmuch as our Churches carefully have taken this course
in these three points, and follow the same in truth, there is nothing, that
these fathers that you have named, consent upon, about the administering of this
sacrament, but we fully do observe the same. And here in England especially
what fault can you find? Of the 5. things your fathers mention we retain and
use, though not with any superstitious intention (as you do) 2 of the^: the
rest we have cut of according both to S. August. advise, and your pope
Stephanus judgment before noted, because the multitude before was too great
for the time of the Gospel, and they were grown into gross abuse amongst you.
No essential or necessary thing to be done is omitted with us, and we have
besides fully enough, for the time of the new Testament wherein we live, in
which time it is more likely in such ceremonies. rites and fashions for us to
err, rather in retaining too many, then in abolishing too many.

But because neither you shall say, nor your reader think, y these fathers,
whose names you bring us, to countenance al your ceremonies, which you use
about baptism, are so full and fast of your side therein, as you pretend: I will
vouchsafe so much further pains, as particulerly to examine al your quotations
out of them. The first man you name is Tertullian, and in him you send us to
two places; for your anointing and abrenuntiation, to his book de
resurrectione carnis: and for thrice dipping, to his book de corona militis.
Wherein it seems a little you mistook your notes: for there is no mention of
abrenu^tiation that I can find in the former place, in the later indeed there
is: but you quote the former for it and not the later at all. Whereby any man
may see, you took your quotations upon trust, and never took the pains to
turn to the places in the authors themselves, and that so it came to pass,
that that which you should have fathered upon the later place (through
ignorance) you have attributed to the former. Anointing, I find mentioned in
the former place (I grant) but neither the matter nor form of your anointing,
can I either find there or in any other place, quoted by you for it. And in the
other, I confess he me^tioneth thrice dipping, but to what purpose is yt, to
justify your ceremonies or manner of baptizing, seeing (as I have noted before,
out of your Tride^tine cathechism) in this point you are so indifferent,
whither it be ministered by dipping, pouring, or sprinkling, and never once
there prescribe, this fashion of thrice dipping as necessary? Your second
author is Cyprian, who (you say) in the second volume of his Epistles, Epist.
the twelfth does write, that the holy Chrisme was given unto children that
were baptized. Wherein your note gatherer abused you. For doubtless in that
Epistle there is not one word, either of Chrisme or any other Ceremonies
about baptism. Indeed in the 12, Epistle of his first book of Epistles, he
speaks of anointing the baptized with oil, but holy chrisme he calls it
not. But to speak the truth, both Tertullian and he, have not only in their
works sundry times mentioned Chrisme and anointing of the baptized; but they
went too far both in urging the necessity thereof, and in attributing unto it
such divine grace as they did: insomuch, that it is not without cause of the
learned thought, that therein they were both the scholars of Mo^tanus. But
certain it is, of whomsoever they learned thus to urge this ceremony, to the
obscuring and preiudicing of the use and effects of baptism, as too grossly
they did, in tying rather the gift of the holy Ghost to sanctify and
regenerate to it, the^ to baptism, they never learned it other of Christ, nor
of any sound Christian, nor may any Christian more think himself bound to urge
it, and use it as they did, because they did so, then he is bound to be a
Montanist, because Tertullian was so, or to hold rebaptization of them, that
before were baptized of heretics, because Cyprian did so. Your next man is
Origin, to whose 12. Homily, without any further addition, and to diverse
other places of his works (without naming unto us any of these places) you
send us, for abrenuntiation and the sign of the Cross to be made in the
baptized his forehead, wherein it was your hap, to show as great negligence and
ignorance as might be. For Origin wrote many times 12. Homilies (as it is to
be seen in his works) whereas it should seem by your kind of quoting of him,
that you thought he had done so but once, and yet in none of these 12. Homilies
that he wrote, find I these two ceremonies mentioned, and as for the diverse
other places in his works, that you speak of, when you shall vouchsafe to name
them, your answer will be as easily made. Next is Chrysostom, of whom you
allege two places, his 12. Homily upon the first Epistle to the Corinthians,
cap. 4. and his first Homily upon the first Chapter to the Ephesians, and both
these only for renuntiation. In the first whereof, there is mention of the
sign of the Cross made in the forehead, but not expressly in Baptism, and
in the other there is mention of renuntiation indeed, but so there is not at
al in the former: whereby again one may see, how you never turned to these
places and read them your self: and besides it is evident, that either through
ignorance or negligence, or both, you father that upon your former noted place,
which you should attribute to the later: as here, that upon Origin, which you
should have left to Chrysostom, and so show your error in both. But what were
all this (if you had not been at all thus ouerseene) against us, or for you
more, then for us; seeing both these ceremonies or rites, are retained and used
amongst us, in far better manner then with you. Now follows Augustine, out
of whom you quote us, in Psalm. 31. Aug. lib. 15. contra Iulianum Pelagianum.
lib. 1. cap. 2. Item de nuptiis and concupiscentia. lib. 1. Cap. 20. In
Iohannem tract. 33. In Canonicam Iohannis, tract. 3. and tra. 6. and de
Ecclesiast. dogmatibus Cap. 31. De Symbolo lib. 1. cap. 7. and lib. 2. Cap. 11.
and libro de his qui initiantur sacris, that is, eleven places in all, wherein
yet you have more grossly shamed your self, then in the former. For first of
all in these eleven places, there are but three, wherein I find any mention of
any of your ceremonies, and that is, in his first book and second Chapter
against Julian, in his first book and twentieth Chapter de nuptiis and
concupiscentia, and in his thirty one Chapter de Ecclesiasticis dogmatibus: and
lay all these three together, and there are mentioned only three, that is,
exorcisme, exufflation and abrenuntiation, whereof we use one as well as you,
namely abrenuntiation, and as for the other two, thereof you your selves have
but the first, and therefore why may not we as well, give over both the other,
as you have done the first of them. Secondly, you send us indefinitely to his
fifteen book (as you did before to Origens twelfth homily) not telling us
what 15. book you mean, thinking (belike) that he had never wrote but once
15. books of one title, whereas every one, that is acquainted with his works,
know the contrary. If you say you meant his 15 book against Julian, then
therein you show as much ignorance: for against him, he wrote but 6. Thirdly,
you father upon Aug. two books de symbolo, and one de his qui initiantur
sacris, whereas indeed in all Augustines tomes, there are no books yt simply and
barely bear those titles, to be found. He wrote one book de fide and symbolo:
and 4 de symbolo ad cathecumenos: but in no 7 nor 11 Chapters of any of these,
is there any thing for your purpose, but none at al he has written, that in
title comes any thing near the other, you father upon him. But I imagine,
that if your eie-sight, or memory, had not failed you, you should and would
have quoted these not in his name, but in Ambroses. But yet then you took your
mark amiss also. For he has no books neither, that simply carry these titles.
Indeed he has written five de fide ad Gratianum, and one de fide orthodoxa,
contra Arrianos, and a book he has written, de his qui initiantur mysteriis,
and five de sacramentis, but in no seventh nor eleventh Chapters of any of his
books de fide or symbolo, has he any thing to serve your turn. Never man
therefore, was so abused as you (Master Albine) were (I think) in taking so
few quotations of credit. I would therefore henceforth advise you, unless you
be even resolved utterly to leese your credit, trust no more thus either other
men's eyes or fingers. Well, Basil and Arnobius are yet behind, let us see if
you hit any rightlier of your places out of them: you cite Basils 15 and 75
Chapters de Spiritu Sancto, and Arnobius upon the 27 Psalm: Neither of which
you have rightly quoted. For there are but 30 Chapters in all Basils book de
Spiritu Sancto (as Erasmus has translated him, and caused him to be
published) and Arnobius upon the twenty seven Psalm, has not at all mentioned
any ceremony about baptism, Basil in his fifteen and twenty seven Chapters of
that book, and Arnobius upon the seventy five Psalm, make mention of
abrenuntiation, and of some other ceremonies, before mentioned by the other
fathers: but yet neither these, nor all the other laid together, that you have
named, either in the places mentioned by you, nor any where else, mention all the ceremonies which you use, by far, though you would by your loud bragging
make your reader believe they do. Thus you see, unless you had been disposed
utterly for ever to shame your self, you could not in so few quotations,
especially not set on your margent, but in your lines as they are, the better
to prevent wrong applying of them, have been taken with thus many gross
ouersightes. May not any man (worthily think you) hereby judge, that
howsoever the names of the fathers are familiar with you, that yet you are a
very stranger in their works indeed? Of twenty places, you have alleged
aright and to the purpose, scarce five, and of seven fathers (belike because
you would not deal partiallie with them) your hap has been, one way or
other, to err in quoting of every one of them. Surely you are worthy to be
trusted upon your bare word, without any further examination of your quotations
an other time, you have dealt so faithfully and vprightlie in these. And to
conclude this point withal, as though you had most rightly quoted, and that
they most pregnantlie had justified all your Ceremonies as you use them, you
confidently tell your reader, that if he will read these places he shall
find, that they did use the very Ceremonies, that you do use, and we so
much myslike. Thus yet you could set a good face on the matter, though you
could do little else.

But in good earnest, is it your meaning, by these places to make me^ before
that none are to be accounted rightly baptized, unless unto him, all these your
ceremonies, which you talk of be used? What say you then to Christ's baptism,
and the multitudes baptized by John in Jorden, and after by the Apostles,
sometimes in one day, in water that was next to hand? Sure I am, that none of
your ceremonies that you strive for here so much, which we mislike, was used
then to any of them: and yet I am sure never were any with these ceremonies of
yours, better baptized, then these were. Nay to press you a little further, if
these ceremonies were so necessary as you pretend, how cha^ceth it, that above
600. years after Christ (that is long after any of the fathers you have named
to countenance them withal) we read in Bedaes story, so often mention as we do,
of so great multitudes, here in England, by famous Bishops baptized in one day
in common rivers? It is impossible that they should baptize so many in so short
time as that story shows they did, and yet use to every one, all the solemnity
of ceremonies, that you here thus plead for. It is clear the^ by that
practice, that for all this, and whatsoever else any where, either these, or
any other doctor, before that time had written hereof, that then there was no
such danger imagined to be in omitting of these, as your Tridentine counsel
now, would make men believe there is.

But for a general answer to all that you, or any of your side, have or can
allege out of any father, either for the justifying your kind of using these
your ceremonies, or any of the other three points that follow in this Chapter
(as long as you are not able to warrant your doings and opinions therein, by the
scriptures, which we are sure you shall never be able to do) by the fathers
leave, though they were as pregnant for you as you pretend (which they are not
neither) and that by the direction and advise of the best of themselves, we
will and may choose, for all their writings, whither we will like any whit the
better of them or no. For Hierom says, that all things which me^ seek out
and invent at their own pleasure, without authority and testimony of the
scripture (as though they were the traditions of the Apostles) the sword of God
cutteth of. Upon the first of Aggei. And Origin in his first homily upon
Hierom, confesses, that their judgments without witness of the scripture were
of no credit. And Hierom again upon the 98. Psalm writes, that all which
they spoke, they were to prove by the scriptures: and upon the 23. of Mat. he
says plainly, that which has not authority from the scriptures as easily is
despised as approved. And Chrysostom upon the 2. to Tim. Hom. 9. says, if
there be any thing either to learn or to be ignorant of, we shall learn it in
the scriptures. And as for all other authority, Hilary says in his 7. book
of the trinity, that it is short, dark and troublesome. And as for Augustine,
he of all the rest, has most plainly taught us this, in his 19. Epistle to
Hierom, and also in his 111. epistle to Fortunatian, where he plainly shows,
that he gave no further credit to any man's writings, then he found them
agreeable to the scriptures: and therefore de baptismo, contra Donatistas li.
2. cap. 3. he refuses to be pressed either with the authority of Cyprian, or
any other man, or council further, then by the canonical scriptures their
judgments are approved: and he teaches Paulina in his 112. epistle, not to
follow his authority, or to believe a thing because he has said it, but to
believe the canonical scripture. We say therefore with him lib. 1. cap. 22. de
peccatorum meritis and remissione: let us yield and consent unto the holy
scriptures, which can neither deceive, nor be deceived: and again I require
the voice of the shepherd, read me this matter out of the Prophets, read it
out of the Psalms, read it out of the law, read it out of the Gospel, read it
out of the Apostles writings: in his book de pastoribus c. 14. and so likewise
conclude with him, I owe my consent without gainsaying only unto the
canonical scriptures.. cap. 61. de natura and gratia, and according to these
books of the scriptures, we have learned of him to judge freely of all other
writings. lib. 2 cap. 29. contra Cresconium. The fathers are full of such
places, whereby any man may see, that by their very good leave, we are not to
be pressed to believe or receive any thing, not taught in the scriptures, upon
their bare authority, and therefore these and such like places in them
considered, if you would have had their names, and the places you cite in them,
to have in sadness, bred any sound credit to any of these four points you
allege them for, either should you have warra^ted them, by good proof out of
the scriptures your self, or have showed us how they proved them consonant, at
the least, to the same.

Howbeit because you shall not abuse the Reader, to make him think, that the
fathers you name for these matters, are further of your opinion then they be
indeed, as I have not refused to examine your opinion, and the places you send
us unto for your ceremonies, so will I, for the Christian readers sake, take
the pains to deal with you for, and in all your other 3 opinions, of confession,
prayer to Saints and for the dead, and with it your several quotations, set down
for the proof of the same. To go on therefore according to my course begun:
for confession before the receiving of the sacrament, you say first, our
savior Christ does teach us, that the ecclesiastical ministers have
authority to bind and to forgive sins: and for proof hereof you set in your
margent John. 20. and Mat. 16. I am sure here by confession, that you speak
of, you mean your auricular confession, whereof your Tridentine council takes
such care, that that in the 6, 7, and 8, Canon thereof, touching this matter,
it solemnly anathematizeth al those, that hold auricular confession not to be
necessary to salvation, by the law of God, saying that it is but the devise of
man. Which they there have defined to be a secret reckoning up unto the priest,
of al mortal sins at the least, with all their circumstances, whereof by due
premeditation the party can have any remembrance, whereunto they bind all
persons above certain years, of both sexes, at least once in the year, and
that namely in lent, before their receiving at Easter. Now this confession,
your schoolmen and doctors do teach, must be made so fully and exactly, that
no sin nor circumstance thereof must be co^cealed, for then thereby all the
labor is lost, and the absolutio^ frustrated from all the rest. Which doctrine
cannot choose, but a number of ways prove a needles and a desperate tormenting
of co^scie^ces. For first it lays upon them an inevitable necessity, not
only to do, that which God never required at their hands, but also that,
which either is simply impossible unto the^ to do, for the multitude of their
sins and circumstances thereof: or else impossible for them to do in such
manner, as that they can satisfy themselves, that they have omitted no piece of
due premeditation to call all their sins and the circumstances thereof, that
they should confess, to their remembrance, which a number of your own side
most devoutly given to do this in ye best manner, have been enforced to
confess. Yet this confession before the sacrament (though indeed it be a
thing that has no ground or warrant at all in the Scriptures) but was (as both
Johannes Scotus libro 4. sententiarum Distict, 17. art. 3. and Anton: part 3.
histatit. 19, do confess) first imposed as necessary by the Lateran council,
in Innocent the thirds time, about the year of the Lord one thousand 2 hundred
and fifteen, you here would seem to cou^tena^ce by two places of scripture,
co begin withal. But your betters have thought otherwise, of this your kind of
confession. For your gloss de paenitentia Distinct. 5. Cap. in principio
confesses plainly, that it came in rather by some tradition, then either by
authority of the old testament or new, which tradition (he says) yet ought
to bind the West Church to use it, though not the Greeks and East Church
which have it not. And Beatus Rhenanus in his notes upon Tertullians book of
repentance, forasmuch as he finds not therein any mention hereof, not only
gathered that it was not in use then, but also he shows, that he thought it
came in after and grew of the mislike of the inconveniences of the continuance
of public confessions made in the public assembly in the hearing of all the
congregation used severally in the former times. And Soto co^tra Bre^tiu^
reckons up both your other two points following of praying to Saints, and for
the dead, and this also, amongst the things grounded but upon the unwritten word
or tradition. You had therefore dealt both more wisely and more simply and
honestly, if of these and such other great Rabbis of your side, you had
learned to fetch the ground of this your confession from any where else rather,
then from the scriptures. But seeing you will seem to have found that ground
for it there, which they could not, let us a little consider, how f^ly now the
places you quote, serve your turn. You mean, I am sure, both by your words
and quotations, that Christ's doing and saying to his Apostles set down by
Matthew and John, in the places you quote in these words: to thee (speaking
namely in the first place to Peter) I will give the keys of the kingdom of
heaven, and whatsoever thou shall bind in earth, shall be bound in heaven, and
whatsoever thou loosest in earth shall be loosed in heaven. And in the other, he
breathed upon the^ and said, receive ye the holy Ghost, whose sins ye remit,
they are remitted, and whose sins ye retain, they are retained. Whereby indeed
it is evident, that our Savior first promised to Peter in the name of all the
rest, and after gave to al his faithful Apostles, first the gift of the holy
Ghost and then power and authority to use the ^eies of the kingdom of heaven,
to bind and loose, and to remit and retain sins, which power and authority
they most faithfully and effectually used, whiles faithfully they preached
salvation to the penitent believer, and denou^ced damnation to the impenitent
unbelievers, with all duty (as they saw cause) using the censures of the
Church of admonition, rebuking, suspending and excommunicating, though they
were never acquainted with your auricular confession. And likewise the same
power is exercised by the Lords faithful ministers in his church still, not by
the help of your eare-shrist, pardons etc; but by their faithful preaching of
the will of God, sacraments ministering, and using of the other censures in due
time and place. They have a ministry of testification and declaration, by the
rule and light of the scriptures, through the shining of Gods spirit in their
hearts, to assure them that rightly understand them and believe them, of that
assuredly: which God only does properly, absolutely and principally. But you
seem in thus alleging of these places, first, so think that the power and
authority ye Christ here gave his Apostles to bind and loose etc. inuesteth
them straight with power and authority to bind every man to make unto them
your auricular confession: whereas we neither read that any did so unto them,
nor that they for all this, ever exacted any such thing at any man's hands, that
they dealt withal: and secondly, you seem to take the power given them, and
from the^ derived to other ministers here, to be such, that they properly and
absolutely should have power to pardon sin. etc. which is absurd and
blasphemous for you once but to imagine. For so can none forgive sins, but
God only. How can you say or think, that a Priest properly or absolutely can
absolve one of sin, seeing he may not so much, as pronounce or declare a
sinner to be pardoned of God, unless he be contrite, penitent, and faithful
indeed. Now God only and the party are privy to this, whither these things
be sound and right in the heart or no, for an hypocrite can make a show to
deceive man withal in these (you know) unless therefore we will think that we
have power to absolve him whom God yet condemns, our pronouncing of pardon or
absolution to those that seem such unto us, must be but conditional, if they
be such in deed as they make show for, and therefore neither is, nor can it be
proper or absolute. Ambrose libro 3. de Spiritu Sancto ca. 19. by that of John,
proves the godhead of the holy ghost, for that he can and does forgive sins:
which were no good argument, if by that place, Christ meant to give ministers
power and authority properly and absolutely to do it, unless it be lawful to
think, that they are very Gods. But mark, I pray you, your kind of reasoning
from these places: Christ gave to his Apostles power and authority (giving them
the holy Ghost) to bind and to forgive sins, ergo auricular confession before
the sacrament thereby was enioynes: this is your argument, or else you say
nothing in all this for your selves against us. For we deny not, but most
willingly confess, that by these places it is certain, that Christ gave unto
his true ministers, to whom he gave the holy Ghost, power and authority as
ministers to do this. But what is this to authorize your priests, which are
no ministers of his ordinance, and to whom he has not given that spirit to
do this? Or what is this if they had authority to do it, either to that which
they take upon them, or to enforce a necessity of such auriculer confession, as
you practice and plead for?

Herein it is with you, as it is in other points of your religion, you are
deceived, and after seek to abuse and deceive others, with the ambiguity and
diversity of acceptions of confession. For that is a common trick with you,
when you find either in scripture or father, yt there is but the word
mentioned, that by any stretching may reach to your meaning, to allege that
straight, as flat, full and pregnant for your purpose, when as indeed, if the
circu^sta^ces of the place he looked into, it is as far from countena^cing your
opinion as may be. So in this case, you finding in scripture some mention of
confession of sins, and sundry examples of the same, and likewise in the
fathers, you finding that they exhort and persuade men to confess their
sins, you by and by imagined that your auricular confession must needs be
that, that they speak of, or at least (your learning not suffering you so to
imagine) you contrary to your own knowledge and conscience (as it seems)
could be contented to do what you could, to make your Reader so to think.
Wherefore to arm him hereafter against your subtlety, or the cunning of any of
your fellows in this point, and so to give him a triacle to preserve him from
the danger of your popish poison in this case, let him know and understand,
that there have been and be, many kinds of confessing of sins spoken of,
both in scriptures and fathers, and yet you never the nearer for yours. For
Augustine, de verbis Euangelii, hom. 8. very pretily, according to his manner
says, that confession is tither laudis or fraudis, that is, of praise or of
fraud: by the former understanding that kind of confession, whereby we
thankfully acknowledging, what God has been or is unto us, we burst forth
into lauding and praising his holy name therefore, whereunto the faithful
servants of God are oftentimes exhorted in the scriptures, as for example,
Psalm 33. in these words, confess unto the Lord in harp, and in a psaltery
of ten strings sing unto him. And Dan. 3. in these, confess unto the Lord that
he is good, and that his mercy is for ever, which kind of confession in our
Churches we always publicly use, both before and in the receiving of the
Sacrament, which we teach to be a Sacrament even to provoke us so to do, for
our free and full salvation purchased for us by the death of Christ. And the
other is the general; to all kinds and sorts of confession of sins, which
he terms frawde, because by all sin God or man, or both, are wronged of
that which is due unto them. Otherwise some distinguish confession, into
confession of faith and confession of manners: of the first whereof, says
Christ ( Matthew the tenth) he that confesses me before men, I will confess
him before my father which is in heaven: and of this Saint Paul speaks,
saying, with the heart man believes to righteousness, but with the mouth
confession is made to salvation, and this is far more plainly in use with us
also then with you. For in all our public assemblies ordinarily (as it is well
known) according to the three ancient Creedes, in english, that all present
may understand us, we make confession of our faith. And as for the later,
which is confession of our manners, there is no kind of so confessing taught
and commended unto us, either in the old Testament or new, either to God or
man, private or public, but we use it, allow it, and exhort one an other
unto it, in far better sort and manner then you do. Yea to go one step
further with you, there is no kind of so confessing our faults, by the
consent and uniform practice of the ancient fathers approved unto us, but
therein also both before the receite of the Sacrament, and at other times (as
occasion serves) we are far before you, how short soever we come of you,
in allowing your auricular confession, which is the only kind of confession,
that you plead here for. For looking first into the scriptures, and then into
the ancient fathers, these are the only kinds of so confessing agrees on, and
by one consent of them, needful to be practiced. First that every one of Gods
people should by the due meditation daily of his law, so bring all his
sins original and actual, small and great, public and secret, to his
remembrance, that in truth he may say with David, Psalm fifty one, in
respect of them all, in some good measure, I know mine iniquities and my sin
is always before me: that so with a contrite heart, hope of Gods mercy, and
purpose of amendment, he may confess them unto God, both privately and
publickely, generally and particulerly also, upon just occasions we all, with
the Scriptures and fathers allow, teach and practice. For it is well known in
respect of this kind of confession of sins, we teach with Solomon, proverb.
the twenty eightth, he that hides his sins he shall not prosper, but he
that confesses them and forsakes them, shall have mercy. And therefore beside
our often confessing our sins unto God against our selves in private, in all
our ordinary prayers either at home in our families, or in public, in our
assemblies and congregations, especially before the receiving of the sacrament,
we make humble confession of all our sins and unworthiness, generally unto
God. Thus did David Psalm thirty two and fifty one, thus did Daniel, Daniel
the ninth, and Ezra: Ezra the ninth: yea thus did the publican Luke the
eighteenth, they that were baptized of John in Jordan, Matthew the third, and
the believers that we read of Acts the nineteenth, verse. eighteenth and
nineteenth, confess their sins before God. This we count a necessary fruit
of repentance, a good means to humble us in the presence of God, and a way to
advance both the justice and mercy of our God. And to this, we know both the
Scriptures and fathers all with one consent exhort us, but especially amongst
the fathers, Chrysostom is earnest to persuade this kind of confession of
sins to God, above all other, as it is to be seen in him, upon the fifty
Psalm, hom. 2; upon Matthew, hom. 3; upon Genesis hom. twenty; and upon the
twelfth of the Hebrews hom. the thirty one; and else where often in his works.
As for particulerly confessing of our sins unto God in the presence of the
congregation, (as I said before) also, upon just and due occasion, that is
urged, taught and practiced amongst us. But then it is, but when one falls
into some such notorious and great sin, publickely known to the offense of
the Church, for the which he deserves to be excommunicated. And this is
either voluntarily yielded unto, and done by the party that has so offended,
to show the better his repentance: or it is by authority imposed upon such,
for the terror of others, and satisfaction of the congregation offended. And
hereof in Scripture we have example. For Achans sin that so troubled the
congregation, once being known and so public, by Joshua he is commanded to
give glory to God, and so before Joshua and the people, he confesses his
sin at the appointment of Joshua: Joshua the seventh: it seems likewise that
the incestuous Corinth did, driven thereunto by the authority and force of
that censure that Paul and that Church laid upon him 1. Corinthians. 5. and 2.
Epist. second and seventh Chapters. And at the rebuke of Samuel the people
particulerlie confessed their sin in desiring a king. 1. Samuel and twelfth,
and at the rebuke of Ezra we read also voluntarily they came, that had contrary
to the law of God married strange wives, and publicly confessed their sins
and amended that fault. Ezra the tenth: of such examples of particular public
confessing of notorious known faults, the ecclesiastical stories are full:
whereof some yielded thereunto voluntarily, who were always best liked of, and
others by order of ecclesiastical censures were brought thereunto. And for this
kind of public confessing of our sins to God also, it cannot be denied,
but herein we are far beyond you, in conforming our selves therein far more
then you, to the ancient presidenes thereof, found both in Scripture and other
antiquity. Indeed I must needs confess, that I find in the writings of the
fathers, especially in Cyprian, sermon de lapsis, in Tertullian de
paenitentia, and in Origin upon the thirty seven Psalm, that they counted it a
commendable thing, and an argument of greater fear of God and love, if men
would not only thus confess their notorious publickely known sins, but also
their secret notorious sins, yea then very purposes only to have committed
such sins. But withal I find that they saw such inconveniences to arise
hereof, that first they counseled such therein to be directed first, by some
godly discreet minister, when they should so do and when not: and secondly are
long they were driven to think it needful, for the prouenting of some
inconveniences, only to enjoin them some public punishment, concealing the
particularity of such their sins: and thirdly I find, ye by Leo his time,
this was thought to much also. For he in his seventy eight Epistle, and as he
is alleged by Gratian de paenit. Distinct. 1. Cap. Quamuis. shows his flat
mislyke thereof, determining it to be far better, that the confession be
made only to the minister. But in the Greek Church long before Leo his time
(as it appears in Zozomen libro. 9. cap. 35. historiae tripart) this
publishing of sins by public confession, or by enduring of some enjoined
punishment publickely, was given over and one appointed in Constantinople to
hear the confessions of such as came unto him: which order also, as it there
appears was by Nectarius bishop there, caused to be given over, by occasion
that a noble woman confessed, that she had lain with a Deacon there, in the
Church, whiles she was doing there the things y her confessor had enjoined
her. So that to go on, by these and other such places more in the fathers, I
find, that secret confession of sins to a minister indeed is ancient, and
also I must needs confess, I find, the fathers often exhorting-men so to
confess their sins; but yet then (good Christian reader) thou must
understand, that it was neither used nor urged, but in certain cases, as when
otherwise the party could not tell how to comfort himself under the burden of
his sin, or to get out of the snares and fetters thereof. It was neither
taught nor urged then as an ordinance of God to be kept under pain of
damnation, as it is in the Church of Rome, neither yet were they urged to make
such an exact enumeration of all their sins, and the circumstances thereof;
as that Synagogue now teaches. For then durst not Nectarius (as is aforesaied)
have abrogated that order, and have thence forth left every one when he
communicated, iudicio conscientiae suae (as Zozomen there plainly affirms he
did) neither before that could one confessor have served for all the
Christians in that great and famous City, where I read in Justinians time,
there were sixty ministers. But this is the plain truth, it was used and
exhorted unto, as a good profitable order to be used so long, and so far forth:
as they saw it needful, and a furtherance to virtue and godliness. And this is
certain, the fathers by Albine here cited for auricular confession, speak
only either for public confession, of publikly known notorious sins,
before the receipt of the sacrament: or else only to persuade men, when they
feel themselves sick of sin, and grieved with the burden thereof in
conscience, then to confess such their sins unto some godly discreet
minister, that has both skill and will to comfort their distressed souls. In
which case and manner we allow and like as well as they, that men should so do,
and it is a thing much used and practiced amongst us. There is lastly a
confession of sin of one brother or Christian, to an other whom he has
offended, to breed reconciliation again betwixt the parties, taught by Christ,
Matthew the fifth, and eighteenth Chapters, Luke the seventeenth and James the
fifth: allowed both by scriptures and fathers with one consent: and this before
the receipt of the sacrament, and at all other times we teach and use as very
necessary. Other confessions then these we neither find taught nor practiced
in the old Testament nor new, nor yet urged by any of the ancient fathers you
name, either in the places by you remembered, or else where; and therefore you
have but been abused, and now seek by the sound of their names to abuse
others, whiles you would make men believe, because they speak of some of these
kinds of confessing of sins or other, in these places, that therefore they
speak for your Lenten shrift, or auricular confession, which was not so much as
once thought of by any of them, nor for many hundredth years after the latest
of the^, by any other writer of credit. The question indeed betwixt you and us
then in this point is not, whither sins be to be confessed at all before we
receive. For ye see most willingly we confess sundry ways they may and
ought: but this is it, whither such particular and special confession of all
our sins and the circumstances thereof, that we can possibly by due
premeditation had thereof remember, in secret to a Priest, be by Gods ordinance
absolutely necessary to remission of sins, for all of both sexes once in the
year at the least or no. We hold the negative, and you the affirmative. That
sins have been, and may again be in secret confessed to such as be
faithful ministers, and that the so doing some time, is very good and
profitable, we deny not, you see: but either to imagine such a necessity as
you teach thereof, or to bind to such a full enumeration of all at any time,
are the things we say which you can never prove, either by Scripture or
father. For your own Gratian, brings sundry authorities before that Lateran
counsel, when first this your opinion of the absolute necessity thereof, to
salvation was aggreed upon (as you may read in him de paenitentia Distinct.
1.) some for the necessity, and some to the contrary thereof, and in the end
Cap. Quamuis: concludes thus: to which of these opinions one should rather
stick, I leave to the readers judgment, for both parts (says he) has
astipulatores sapientes and religiosos viros, that is, favorers, men that are
both wise and religious: and Panormitan a great Doctor of yours disputes the
matter, that your confession is not by Gods law but by man's. And Chrysostom
that succeeded Nectarius, so liked his predecessors act, of abrogating the
order of secret confession to the confessor, that he in his fourth sermon of
Lazarus says: Cave homini dixeris peccata, ne tibi opprobret etc. that is,
take heed that thou tell not thy sins to man, lest he vpbraide thee with
them, neither confess them to thy fellow servant, that he may publish them,
but confess them to God the Lord: and the like he writes hom. 31, upon the
12 of the Hebrews, and upon the fiftieth Psalm (as he counts) and else where
often in his works. And as for your special and particular enumeration of all
sins, and their circumstances that possibly can be remembered, Beatus
Rhenanus, a friend otherwise of yours, in his notes upon Tertullians book of
repentance, reports, how that eue^ for the vexation and torment of
consciences that that bread, one Geilerius a Carthusian monk, wrote a book,
which he entitled de morbo confessionis, of the sickness of confession,
against the morosity and scrupulosity, brought in by Thomas and Scotus and
other schoolmen: of whose mind for that point, Beatus Rhenanus shows
himself to be. And howsoever a number of your Priests, by their fruits have
made it appear, that of all other they would be loath that young women should
not come to auricular confession unto them, yet I can tell you, Basil in his no
question thinks it not very decent, that such should come alone, but rather
advises that the you^ger by the grave elder women should make their state
known, that by the^ they may receive comfort or direction what to do: as they
shall need.

But yet, because I would be loath to omit any thing either to cause you (Master
Albine) to think that you have said or alleged any thing of weight to
justify this your kind of confession withal, or to cause the reader to
suspect, that these fathers, whose names you have brought us for this purpose,
in these places, say more directly for you, then they do: let us particulerly
examine your quotations, always remembering the state of the question, as it is
in this point betwixt us. Your first man is Cyprian in his fifth sermon de
lapsis: wherein his purpose was to persuade them, that had either grievously
fallen from Christianity to idolatry, or that had but a secret purpose for the
safety of themselves so to do, effectually to repent thereof, in persuit of
which his purpose in the end he comes to that (which it seems you aim
at) to note it as an argument of greater faith and better fear in such that
will (though they have but thought so to fall) yet sorrowfully and playnelie
confess the same before the Lords Priests, and so making exoniologesin, that
is, public confession of their conscience show forth the burden of their
mind, seeking holeso^e physic, though, for their small wounds in
comparison: and therefore a little after, he there earnestly exhorts every
such offender, in purpose or performance, to confess their fault therein
whiles they be here, whiles their confession and repentance may be acceptable
with the Lord. Which place serves well to prove, that then of such notorious
faults there was used and looked for public and sorrowful confession. But
what is this to the enumeration of all sins remembered in secret in the ear
of a Priest? Sure I am, in that sermon before he came to these words, contrary
to your doctrine and practice in this very point, he teaches, that veniam
peccatis quae in ipsum co^missa sunt, solus potest ille largiri, qui peccata
nostra portauit etc. that is, he only can give us pardon for our sins, that
bore our sins etc. adding straight, man cannot be greater then God, neither
can he being a servant, by his indulgence, remit or forgive that, which is
grievously committed against God, least so to him that is fallen this fault
come unto his other, that he forget that it was said long ago Hier. 17. cursed
is that man that has his trust in man. And therefore both immediately and
through that sermon, he is earnest to move them that were fallen, to fly to God
in prayer, in weeping, and mourning. Now indeed both for their better
direction to turn unto the Lord effectually, and for the further declaration
and testification of their repentance to be unfeigned, he would have confession
of such their falls to be made with all sorrowfulnes before the Lords Priests.
Let this doctrine therefore of his only be received, and your auricular
confession will come short home. For if none but such yt have so fallen as he
there speaks of, should confess such their falls: and that only to that
end that he teaches, without all opinion when they have done, that any can
absolve them but God, your confessors and ghostly fathers (as you term them)
might be set a begging for any living they could get by hearing of confessions.
The next you allege is Origin upon the 37. Psalm, and in his 2. Hom. upon
Leuiticus: wherein indeed he cou^selleth those that have fallen into any
grievous sin, though secret, yet to seek out some discreet and skilful
Physician, to open their disease and distress of mind unto that according to
his counsel and advise they may do: either in publicly confessing of them,
or otherwise in repenting of them; and this is the most that can be made of any
thing fated by Origin, in these two places: but this his counsel may be
followed thoroughly, and yet you come very short of proving the necessity, by
gods law of your auricular confession, or special and precise enumeration of
all the sins and circumstances thereof in the ear of a Priest. The physic
that they fought at the Priests hands in these cases, was direction how to
repent, and to recover comfort under the burden of their sins, by the means
of such comfortable doctrine and counsel, that he should give them out of the
book of God: and the thing that you seek for at their hands is absolution, to
be pronounced by them unto you for your so confessing. So that neither for
matter to be confessed, nor for the end thereof, have you any warrant and
countenance from them. After Orige^, Augustines 2. book de visitatione
infirmorum is produced, in which book, the author threatens da^natio^ to
such as having sinned, shunned the judgment of men, and yet took not
occasion, by the consideration of Gods judgment, which they could not shun,
to repent and amend: but if they judged and amended themselves, he does not
so. Allen will not stand to it, that those books were Augustines, writing of
this matter. And Erasmus censure thereof was, that it is sermo locutulei, nec
docti, nec diserti, that is, it is the speech of some pratler, neither learned
nor elequent: yea he adds what forehead or mind had they, that thrust upon
us, such writings under the name of Augustine. And the divines of Louain say
flatly, it was none of his, and therefore with far more credit to your cause
might you have let this testimony alone, and never have mentioned it. But
whosoever were the author thereof, no more can be grounded thereupon, but that
be thought it good, to further the repentance of the party, that he should
confess his sin, that he had fallen into and offended Gods Church withal, to
the minister, that by him he might be dealt withal by correption, admonition,
or consolation, as he saw good. And the edge of his speech is not simply
against such as did refuse to confess their sins to Gods ministers, but
only against such, as refusing so to do, did not repent, for he says si ea
confiteri aut emendare noluerint, and again, si in malo permanserint, that is,
if they will not confess them, nor amend, and if they continue in evil.
Besides, if the words in the place quoted by you, be well marked, it will thereby
sufficiently appear, in that there were then so many reasons that stayed men
(as there by that authors words, it seems there were) from confessing to
the priests, yt it was not then thought, that so to confess sins, was so
necessary as you would now pretend yours to be. If it had been either thought
to be simply necessary by Gods law, or it then had been thought and known to
be a set law of the Church, to confess sins in secret to the ministers, why
have not you, nor yet any of your side, brought us any ancient doctor, yt ever
used either of these reasons to persuade men unto it. Cyril in his 12. book
upon Ioh. cap. 56. is ye fourth man you cite for this purpose, which place if
you had ever read, you should have found him to set down this first, as a most
sure principle, that only God is he, that must loose a man from his sins, for
to whom else (says he) shall it be lawful to deliver transgressors of the
law, but unto the author of the Law himself? Which position if it were
received, there would be small have made to your ear shrift. But then indeed
it follows in him, how then did Christ give this divine power to his
Apostles? Whereunto his answer is, that he gave it them because he gave them
the holy ghost, and because the holy ghost by the^ forgave sins: which he
shows the holy ghost did, by using their ministry, to baptize men and to
bring them to repentance, by rebuking of sinners, and by showing them favor
again, as Paul dealt with the man of Corinth. So that you see his doctrine is
there, that men come to have their sins forgiven them, by the holy ghosts using
our ministry effectually to bring men to repentance: where to make auricular
confession to men of all their sins is not reckoned up as any means whereby
in the Apostles, or by the Apostles, the holy ghost forgave any their sins,
but to preach the word, to minister the Sacraments, and to use the censures of
the Church, in due season are noted to be the means. He sends us there,
you see, to the example of Paul's dealing with the man of Corinth, of whose
repentance and receiving again into Gods Church, and so to a lively hope of
the forgiveness of his sins we read, but that either Paul or any other
minister had him before them to bring him to this, by auricular confession, we
neither read nor can believe, and therefore Cyril is rather quite against you,
then any thing for you in this point, in that place. Now last of all, is Hierom
upon the tenth of Ecclesiastes, where all that he says is this, if the
Serpent the Devil privily bite any and infect him (none being privy
thereunto) with the poison of sin, if he that is stricken hold his peace and
repent not, nor will confess his wound to his brother or master, the master
that has a tongue to cure him, easily cannot profitte him: who of us deny
this, that he that will neither speak and repent, nor thus by confession
seek for better physic at the hands of the spiritual physician, then he ca^
give himself, cannot easily be profited by such a physician? Yea that more is,
we say and hold, that he that will neither repent betwixt God and himself,
nor yet seek to those to show his estate, that are appointed to teach him how
to repent, is in a most fearful case. But yet again we say, that they, that
in such secret sins, whereof Hierom plainly speaks, will with David
acknowledge their sin unto God, and not hyde their iniquity. Psalm. 32. but
forsake it, they shall have mercy, Proverb. 28. though they never bewraie
those their sins to any Priest or minister. Neither has Hierom, nor any
other of these fathers, in any of these places, said any thing to the
contrary. What are you therefore the nearer, for any thing that they have
said, to prove the necessity of universal and special enumeration of all
sins that can be remembered, with all the circumstances thereof, in the ear of
a Priest, though otherwise never so well confessed to God and repented of. Yea
what have any of them spoken in any of these places, either to prove the
necessity or universality of your kind of confession, which are the things
you should have proved by them, or else you prove nothing in question, or to
the purpose? For let confession of sins unto them be free, as it was in their
times, and in such cases, as me^ cannot otherwise so well, get ease, remedy and
comfort against their sins, we are very well contented with them, to persuade
men, that it is a very good and profitable way for them, in sickness and in
health, to confess unto some discreet minister or ministers, what sins they
be that so trouble them, that so advise by them, may be ministered unto them
accordingly. And this is the utmost that any of these places can have, so much
as any show to help you unto: which is as far from yours, as chalk is from
cheese, you having made it, as you have, a matter of absolute necessity, and
having stretched it to such a full special recital of all, and that by all
persons and sexes at an appointed time of the year, as you have also. But
enough of this matter, now therefore let us go on and see, whither you have
any better hold in the fathers, for the other two points behind.

The next is, praying to Saints in paradise, to help us with their prayers.
For the which you allege only the names of four, Origin, Chrysostom,
Augustine, and Hierom: of which there is not one indeed, that in any of his
undoubted and known works to be his, that so much as mentions praying unto
them. For whereas you here have quoted us three places of Origin, for this your
purpose, the two later, I cannot think were his. As for the last out of his 8.
book of Ecclesiast. there are no such books fathered upon him, either in any
of his Tomes, that I ever yet could see, nor yet attributed unto him by
Tritenhemius, who reckons up all that he was acquainted withal of his. And as
for that, you allege out of his second book of Job, I grant whosoever was
author of those tractes, he concludes the second tract with a gross popish
prayer to Job. But certain it is, those tracts or books were never Origens,
nor that prayer of his making or liking. My reasons are these, first, the
author thereof shows himself an Arrian in the first tract, Erasmus has
observed, that these of Job, were never but in latin, whereas he wrote all his
in Greek: and lastly, because he himself (if that prayer were his) should be
contrary to himself. For against Celsus lib. 8. (which books are his
undoubtedly) he answering the arguments of Celsus: that it cannot offend the
high God, if the inferior Gods (whom Celsus called daemones) being his friends,
be worshipped with invocation, to provoke them to solicit men's causes with
the high God (which argument that heathen wretch there cou^tena^ceth with the
fashion in Princes Courts, to solicit the Prince, by such as are about him,
even for all the world, as you use to do, your praying to Saints) tells him,
that one God is to be prayed unto in the name of Christ Jesus. And as for the
Saints and Angels (says he) though they be Gods friends, yet only God is to
be pleased: and please him, and then also ye please these, page 760. and 774.
Now in the other place, which is the first you cite, na^ely out of his 3.
Homily upon the Ca^ticles, all that he says, sauouring any whit for this your
purpose, is this, that he says, it is not inconvenient to say, they pray for
us: whereof likewise, cap. 13. upon Joshua, and upon the Epistle to the Romans he
speaks doubtfully and stammeringly, as one not fully resolved that it was so,
and therefore confidently to be aduouched and taught: which I think was the
sowing of some seed toward this opinion of yours. But who is so simple, but
he may see, that though this were granted to be an undoubted and certain
thing, that they pray for us, yet thereupon it follows not, that we here
must, or may pray unto them? And that Origin himself never gathered so
thereupon, it may appear sufficiently by his foresaied answer to Celsus. But
howsoever, it is known well enough, that Origin was not thought, of the
ancient fathers themselves an author of ye credit, that whatsoever he taught
or thought, ought straight to be received as true and sound. For it appears
plainly in Epiphanius, Tom. 2. haeresi 64. and in his epistle to John of
Jerusalem, that his opinion of him was, that he was not sound in doctrine, and
Hierom ad Oceanum says flatly of him thus, I have praised Origin as an
interpreter, but not as a teacher, his wit, not faith: and further he says
of him, Believe me that have experience, his doctrines are poisoned,
disagreeing from the scriptures, offering violence unto them. And Eusebius out
of Aegesippus lib. 3. cap. 32. notes, that unto those times (about which he
began to flourish) the Church remained a pure and undefiled Virgin, but then
errors as though they had conspired so to do, burst into the Church, as into
an empty house, with naked and bare face and head. But yet for any thing that
either you have noted out of Origin, or that I can espy elsewhere in any of his
undoubted writings, for this matter, he can be charged no further, but for
setting abroach and a foot this question, whither the Saints prayed for us or
no? Whereupon shortly after, and by observing that sundry miracles were done,
men praying unto God by the tombs of martyrs, it began more strongly to be
thought, that the souls of such in heaven, did much with God for men here in
earth, in so much that thereupon it grew to be an use, to go unto martyrs in
prison, to request their prayers, when they were departed to God. So that by
Cyprians time, which was not long after, these things began, for he died Anno
Dom. 249. (as it appears in his lib. 3. epist. epist. 18. and lib. 1. epist.
1.) it was taken for so resolute a truth of him, that they could and would
remember their old friends here, yt he in these places use there exhortatio^s
to the faithful brethren alive, that in any ease they would remember out
another, when any of them were dead. But yet for all this, find I not, yt in
any of these times, or long after, any teacher allowed and of credit in Gods
Church, was so bold, as therefore either to pray unto them when they were dead,
or to teach others so to do. And yet you confidently here further send us to
Chrysostomes 8. homily upon the epistle to the Ephesians, to Augustines to
book and cap. 21. against Faustinus (you say, but you should have said
Faustus) and to S. Hier. against Vigila^tius, there to read, prayer unto them,
by them taught and justified. I wonder that you were not ashamed thus
shamefully first to be abused your self, and then thus to seek to abuse your
Reader. For let him read, and read again and again, all these places, and I
assure him he shall not find one word or syllable uttered in any of them in
the allowance of praying unto them. In the first place, Chrysostom according
to his manner, does sollace himself much about Paul's cheine and imprisonment,
but not a word is there uttered by him of praying, either unto Paul or to any
other Saint, nor yet of their praying for us. And in Augustines twenty one
Chapter of his twenty book against Faustus (if you had taken the pains to
read the Chapter) you should not only have found no mention at all there of
praying unto them, but very much there set down by him directly against your
fashions in honoring of them. For there first, he flatly condemns as
idolatrous, dedicating altars unto them, offering sacrifices unto them, and
their shrines, and worshipping of them with any divine honor, and shows that
such as any of these ways honor them, are either by sound doctrine reproved,
that so they may amend, or shu^ned: which are most notoriously practiced by
you, in dedicating Churches and Chapels unto them, calling them by their
names, in running a pilgrimage not only to their relics, but to their
pictures, and there offering before the^ what you think good, and most
grossly in praying unto them, which if it be not a special point of divine
honor, nothing can be. And then he shows what honor it is, that is to be
given them and no other, namely, the honor of love and society, as we honor
therewith, holy men here alive (though then, therewith so much the more
devoutly, as their state is more blessed) and the keeping of their memories (to
provoke the better others to imitate them) with religious solemnity: and else
where he seems to like very well that they should be honorably both
thought of and spoken of, that they ought decently to be buried, and have
their tombs and sepulchers kept and preserved, and that it was lawful
thereby, to pray unto God for such things as were lawful, and that me^ stood
is need of: and lastly, the furthest that ever he went either in this place or
any where else was this, that he thought some good came by their prayers, to
such as thus honored them, or rather GOD in them. And further then thus never
went Hierom against Vigilantius. So that all this while, we cannot find so
much as praying unto Saints, either in Origin indeed, or in Chrysostom,
Augustine, or Hierom, once mentioned in these places you quote: that they pray
for us, and that their prayers may do us some good, is the most we find in
any of them: which though it were granted you, yet thereupon it follows not,
that we are to pray to them, as I have said. For if that be a part of their
duty, by God looked for at their hands, such is their state of perfection
there, that we may be sure that they need not (as me^ here subject unto
infirmities do) by us to be put in remembrance of their duty. And again,
seeing we have neither commandment in Gods book to direct us, example to
lead us, nor promise to encourage us to pray unto them there, especially
prayer being, as it is, a special spiritual worship, for the making whereof
unto God only in his word, we have all these three, whatsoever they do or
can do for us, we dare not without warrant from God, yea contrary to the
direction that we have from him in this point, take this honor of praying to
him alone, from him, to give it to them. Yea we cannot but see, these things
considered, that if we should, therein we should neither honor them nor GOD
aright, and that in very deed our doing so, could not be obedience to GOD, but
disobedience, not proceed of faith, but rather of lack of faith in him, and
so would be both a dishonor of GOD, and then also indeed we find, that GOD
has said unto us flatly, Call upon me in the day of trouble, so will I
deliver thee, and thou shall glorify me. Psalm 50. And that he is a Lord
so jealous of his own glory, that he will not give it to another, he has
plainly taught us, Esaie 42. And therefore seeing Christ (of whom when he
should come, the very woman of Samaria had learned, that he should teach us
all things. John. 4.) teaching his Disciples to pray ( Matthew. 6. and Luke 11.)
has taught them no otherwise to pray, but to him, to whom when they prayed,
they might first say, Our father which art in heaven, and then concluding their
prays, add, for thine is the kingdom, the power and the glory, for ever and
ever: we being sure, that without blasphemy we can neither begin nor end our
prayers thus, we dare not direct our prayers to any Saint or Angel, but only
to God. We are sure he is able both to hear our prayers, and to grant our
requests, because he is almighty: and that he is willing so to do, we have
assurance, as long as we ask according to his will: the first of John and
the fifth, because he is merciful and true, and faithful in all his promises.
And therefore we think it is a sure way, to run to him, and to trust to him,
in all our needs and necessities. If we would have an advocate either of
mediation or intercession unto him, we have one for all, even Jesus our Lord
and savior. For as Paul first teaches us, there is but one God, so likewise in
the same verse he assures us, there is but one mediator between God and man,
which is the man Christ Jesus. 1. Tim. 2. and John joining with him in his
first epistle and second Chapter, points him only unto us to be our advocate
with the father. And he being the 1 fountain of al grace and mercy, the 2
author and finisher of our faith, 3 the door of the sheepfold, 4 the way,
truth and life, his 5 name being the only name whereby comes salvation, 6 and
he being he, but by whom (he himself has told us) none comes unto the
father (1 John. 1. verse. 14. and Colos. 1.19. 2 Heb. 12.2. 3 John 10.7. 4 John.
14. verse. 6. 5 Act. 4 12. 6 John 14.6.) especially seeing he has allured all
that are heavy laden and weary to come unto him, Mat. 11.28. he being of that
property yt we know he is, not to break a broken reed, nor to quench the
smoking flax, Esa. 42. ve. 3. and yet able perfectly to save those yt come unto
God by him, seeing he ever lives to make intercession for them He. 7.25. We
know and are sure we should do him the greatest wrong that may be, considering
also, that he has upon his word assured us, that whatsoever we ask the father
in his name believing we shall obtain it, Mat. 21, 22. and John 14.13. If we
should leave him at all, one so able and willing every way to serve our turn
alone, to run unto any Saint or Angel of his. And therefore as we dare make our
prayers to none but unto God, so dare we use no other mediator or advocate
unto him, but only Jesus Christ our Lord and savior. We are sure it sauoureth
strongly of lack of faith in us in him, if not of flat Antichristian
blasphemy, once but to imagine, that any be Saint or she Saint in heaven, or
Angel, will be readier to take compassion of us, or that we may be bolder to
use any of their intercessio^s to God, the^ his. For in all things he became
like unto us his brethren, that he might be merciful, and a faithful high
Priest in things concerning God, that he might make reconciliatio^ for the
sins of the people, for in that he suffered and was tempted, he is able to
succor them yt are tempted Heb. 2.17.18. For we have not a high Priest which
cannot be touched, with the feeling of our infirmities, but was in all things
in like sort tempted, yet without sin, let us therefore go boldly unto the
throne of grace, that we may receive mercy and find grace (through him) in
time of need, Heb. 4.15.16. And let us take heed in this case, whiles we
follow your example, in leaving him and running to Saints, to pray for us, we
commit not the two evils, that the prophet Jeremy charge the people of
Israel withal, Ier. 2.12. and 13. that is, forsake the living fountain a
fountain of living waters, to dig unto our selves pits, even broken pits that
will hold no water. For as the^ he says in respect of these two faults, O ye
heavens be astonished at this, and be affraide and confounded (says the Lord)
so worthily may we say in respect of this your folly and double sin in this
point. For though to lessen somewhat your sin herein, you would seem to
plead only for praying unto the Saints in paradise to help you with their
prayers; that nothing indeed can help you. For not only for these reasons is
even that abominable and unlawful, but certain it is, that you in your
practice (as I have showed at large in my answer to your publishers preface)
most grossly and Antichristianly, pray unto the Saints themselves, thorough
their merits to procure you the things you sue for. Yea you are gone so far,
that according to the multitude of your necessities, the variety of
occupations, and the distinctions of regions and cuntries, you have appointed
the Saints to their several offices and limits, therein imitating the
idolatrous heathen, who imagining yt there were many Gods, thought it good to
know every one of their offices, yt accordingly they might use them, as August:
de ciuitate Dei, lib. 4. and 22. notes. And especially as touching the blessed
Virgin Mary, under pretense of your love and devotion toward her, you have so
forgot your duty and Religion toward her son, that all the titles proper to
her son, you have invested her withal, calling her Mediatris, Saluatris,
gate of heaven, queen of heaven, and your only hope and refuge: yea you have
not stuck, calling upon her, to cry unto her saying, command thy son, use
the right of a mother, and so show thy self to have the authority of a
mother. And yet if you would confess the truth in this point, you both should
and would acknowledge, that you have learned thus to honor her and the other
Saints, neither of scripture nor of any ancient father, but of cursed and
condemned heretics, whatsoever either you here, or any of your fellows else
where pretend to the contrary.

For Epiphanius writing first against certain heretics called
Antidicomarionites lib. 3. Tom. 2. haeres. 78. and next, against others called
Colliridians, haeres. 79. of the same book and come: he shows, how that
these heretics exceeded (even as you do) in offering unto Mary, and in
honoring and worshipping of her, against whom, he there at large inueieth
bitterly, as against most vile idolaters for the same, telling them, that so to
do, was ungodly and wicked, and strange from the preaching of the holy ghost,
yea altogether a work of the Devil, and a doctrine of the unclean spirit,
for Mary was no God, neither was she given us, says he, to be adored, though
she were a most excellent and honorable Virgin, but (says he) to
forewarnemen, of which kind of too much admiring her, Christ said unto her,
woman what have I to do with thee? And a little after in the latter place he
says, Neque Elias adorandus etc. yt is, neither is Elias to be adored or
prayed unto, though he live, nor John, nor Tecla, nor any other Saint. For the
old error shall not ouerrule us, that we leave the living God, and worship
those things that are made by him. For they worshipped and adored the creature,
praeter creatorem, besides the creator, and they became fools Romans 1. For if
an Angel will not be adored, how much more will not she that was borne of
Anna. And therefore in the end concludes Mariam nemo adoret, let no man adore
Mary, I say not a woman, but a man neither, For this mystery is due to God,
then Angels are not capable of this glory etc. And therefore the same
Epiphanius lib. 1. here is. 38. writes against the Caians, for their invocation
of Angels. It should seem therefore, that Petrus Gnapheus (who was condemned
for an heretic in the 5. general Council, was infected with some of these
heresies. For about the year of the lord 470. (as it appears in Nicephorus
15. book and 28. Chapter) he was busy in devising and urging, how Mary should
in the public Lyturgie, not only be honorably named, but also called upon
and prayed unto. But if we would know the antiquity of these heretics, and of
you their scholars, Epiphanius haeres. 79. sends us for the original of
their pedigree to the woman in Ieremies time, yt backd cakes to the Queen of
heaven, and powered forth their offerings to other Gods, to provoke the Lord to
anger; and therefore he calls for Jeremy to charm and to stay those adorers
of Mary, yt he wrote so against, yt they trouble the world no more. In deed he
says rou^dly to those idolatrous women in his time, in the person of God, Do
they provoke me to anger, says the Lord, and not themselves to the confusion
of their own faces? And so goes on in denouncing Gods heavy vengeance against
them for the same, cap. 2. Hier. And therefore seeing you are so like them in
the cause hereof, take heed you be not enforced to be as like them in the
punishment. You have heard out of Origens 8. book to Celsus, how like herein
you are to that Idolater, both for the matter of your practice and doctrine,
and for the reasons you have to confirm the same, and that he there shows
flatly, that he thought, that that was not the way to please God, but rather
to displease him, to leave him, and to run to his Saints and Angels, to
entreat them to be means unto him for them. And Chrysostom also, who is the
second man, that here you would make us believe is on your side, to clear
himself of all such impiety, de muliere Cananea hom. 12. says thus. Tell me
(o woman) how thou durst being a sinner, go unto Christ? I know what I do,
says she (as he makes her to answer him) See the wisdom of the woman (says
he) she asks not James, Peter nor John. Yea in another homily of his tom. 5.
de profectu Euangelii, he further observes, that when the Disciples came and
spoke for her, he answered, I am not sent but to the lost sheep of Israel; but
when she came her self, that then she had her request, so thereby there
laboring, and in express words in that homily, to encourage me^ directly and
immediately as plainly as we do, to make their prayers to Christ themselves,
and not by advocates. And as for Augustine the third man you name, he has
meetelie well already cleared himself, even in the very place you quote, but
to make the matter out of doubt, let us hear him somewhat further to speak for
his full purg^^ion in this point. In his fifty five Chapter de vera religione,
and in his 22. book and 10. Chapter of the city of God, he plainly
writes, that to build either temple or altar unto Saints or Angels (then
which nothing is more common with you) is flatly unlawful, and in the former
of these places he says, that Saints are to be honored for imitation, but
not for religion, adding, that which the highest Angel vvorshippeth, that must
the lowest man vvorshippe, and in the other he says, that they never
sacrificed nor builte temples to Saints. And in the place you cyted out of
him, he says, which of the Bishops said, standing at the altar, we
offer to thee Peter, or Paul etc. where, and in his 8. book of the city of
God, and cap. 27. he utterly condemns, as unlawful offering of any sacrifice
to the Martyrs. And yet more directly against you in his second book against
the epistle of Parm. c. 8. he writes thus, if John should have said, these
things wrote I unto you, that you sin not, and if any man sin, ye have me
for an advocate with God, and I will entreat him for your sins (as Parmenian
in a certain place, says he, put the Bishop a mediator betwixt the people
and God) what good and faithful Christian, says he, would have suffered him,
yea who would have taken him for an Apostle of Christ, and not for a very
Antichrist? Ambrose also upon the first to the Romans is as flat against any
mediators betwixt God and us, besides Christ Jesus, as any of these: yea there
he does as directly confute your ordinary reason, of your getting the better
to God by these, as to the Prince by his Nobles, as we; telling you first, that
that is under the pretense of humility and reverence to the Prince, to make
your selves to the peril of your salvation, guilty of high treason against
him. For it is to give that honor that is due unto the Prince unto his Nobles,
thus to leave the creator, to adore the creature: and then further answering
you, that your reason holds not from Princes Courts on earth to Gods in
heaven, For they are men, says he, and therefore to the^ men must so come,
because otherwise they know not whom to trust, but with God that knows al
things, to win his favor, Suffragatore non est opus, sed mente deuota, there
is no need of one to speak for us, but of a devout mind. And therefore he
goes on and says, that such as yet will adore their fellow servants or
creatures, turn the glory of God into the similitude of men, etc. as it
follows in the text. Again howsoever some friend of yours, under the name of
Athanasius, has caused one to speak in your language, saying: make
intercession for me, mistress, Lady, Queen of heaven, yet Athanasius
indeed, to make it appear how much he abhorred that impiety, in his orations
against the Arrians, which all men know and confess were his, first, oratione
secunda says, Sancti non postulant a creato aliquo etc. that is, the holy
servants of God, asked not of a creature to be their helper, Christ therefore
whose help they crave is true God: and then again oratione tertia, he writes
thus, creatura non adorat creaturam etc. the creature adores not the creature,
therefore Christ who is adored is god. These arguments of his had not been
good, neither would he ever have made them, if he had thought it lawful to
honor and adore Saints as you do, or as you would by fathering the former
kind of invocation of Mary upon him, make men believe he did. And indeed Paul
taking it for a thing that could not be denied him, Ro^. 10. that none might
pray unto any, in whom he might not believe, and it being most clear, that the
scriptures and all the ancient creedes grounded upon the same, together with
the very form of our baptism, allow us only to believe in God the father,
God the son, and God the holy ghost, unanswerably thereupon it must needs
follow, that it is gross idolatry, to pray unto any other. And so much in
plain terms has Sedulius, above one thousand years ago, most flatly set
down upon the first of the Romans, saying, Adorare alium praeter patrem,
filium and spiritum sanctum, impietatis crimen est, that is, to adore any,
beside the father, the son, and the holy ghost, is an ungodly wickedness.
Cyril also ad reginas de recta fide, etc. sends them that would obtain their
prayers, to God the father, in the name only of Jesus Christ, because, solus
natura and vere est Deus, he only is by nature and in truth God: and contra
Iulianum lib. 6. he flatly says, the holy martyrs, neither do we say to be
Gods, neque adorare consueuimus, neither do we use to worship the^. Yea
Remigius, who lived well nigh 900. years after Christ, shows upon the 96.
Psalm, that not only images are not to be adored, but he says plainly, no
nor an Angel is to be adored, because of that warning of the Angel to the
contrary in the Apocalips. To conclude, even Hierom himself, your own fourth
and last man, whom I have therefore kept to the last, because many of you
think that he is much of your side, against Vigilantius, writing against the
said Vigilantius to one Ripacius, clears himself to be far from this
folly and blasphemy, that you would make him an earnest procter for. For there
he has (to show his judgment in this case) written thus, non colimus and
adoramus, we worship not and adore, I say not the relics of martyrs, but
neither sun, moon, Angels, Archangels, Cherubin, Seraphin, nor any name that
is named either in this world, or that which is to come (beside the trinity,
for so he must be understood) For immediately he adds this reason, least we
should serve the creature above the creator, who is blessed for ever. We
honor (says he) the relics of the saints, that we may adore him whose
martyrs they be. And good reason had all these fathers, thus flatly to set
down their minds against you. For you know it is written, Dominum Deum tuum
adorabis and illi soli seruies, that is, thou shall adore the Lord thy God and
him only shall thou serve. Deuteronomy. 6. Matthew. 4. and with this text Christ put
the Devil to silence, when he would have persuaded him to fall down and
worship him: he had nothing to reply against it, I pray GOD you be not
grown in this point more obstinate and peevish to withstand the doctrine of
this text, and more cunning and subtle to cavil against it, for your own
defense, then he was. I know some of you, finding the Scriptures and fathers
thus directly to condemn adoration of the Saints (though they maintain still
all your practice of praying unto them) yet have not been ashamed to write (as
it appears in the censure of Colen printed there one thousand five hundredth
sixty) that amongst you it was never so much as heard, that the Saints are to
be adored, for adoration is due only to God. Whereas they could not be
ignorant that their legends, rosaries, and other their books of devotion,
public and private, are full both of the name and thing: did they not know
that the whole psalter is turned to the Virgin Mary, and that therein it is
written venite adoremus eam, come let us adore her? Howsoever they knew this or
no, they could not forget their old saying of the Cross, behold the wood of
the Cross whereon the salvation of the world hanged, venite adoremus, come let
us adore it. If these will not serve to make them better to remember them
selves, let them read their own Antonin. part. 3. Tit. 12. cap. 8. and they
shall find him, in plain words to tell them, that the Saints, by the Pope,
by his canonizing of them, are set forth unto men, not only as an example of
faith and holy life, but also abomnibus adorandi and in necessitatibus
inuocandi, that is, of all to be adored, and in necessities to be prayed unto.
Wherein to say (says he) that the Pope erred were heretical. But this is
like your other common shifts, when you say you use the Saints but as
Mediators of intercession, and not of salvation, which only belongs to
Christ; and that you: do not give them Latreian, but Douleian, that is, as you
expound the words, not divine honor, but an inferior honor, not asking at
their hands that they should either give you ye good things you would have, or
keep from you the evil, that you would not have, the falsehood and vanity
whereof I have both in my answer to the preface of your book, and also
somewhat in this Chapter already bewrayed. For let any man read over and
consider your prayers and practice, and he shall find that you make them
mediators of salvation, and not only of intercession, though that only if
you did (it being as it is, a special part of the office of Christ's
mediatorship, to be the very altar whereupon, and whereby we must acceptably,
present these our spiritual sacrifices unto his heavenly father, he being, as
he is, of himself alone thoroughly both able and willing fully to execute his
own office) you could not excuse and clear your selves, of being guilty of
high treason against Christ. And he should further find, that you give the
diuinest honor that may be, and that you do directly beg all things even at
their hands, that you can beg at Gods. For it is usual with you to sing to
Mary: salua eos quite glorifica^t: save the^ that glorify thee, that succor
the miserable, help the weak, refresh them that mourn: and you say to her,
Mary mother of grace, mother of mercy, protect us from the enemy, receive us at
the hour of death: and in the psalter now turned and put forth by the devout
servant of hers Bonauenture (as some think) you stick not to use all those
speeches to her, yt in the psalms are used to God himself, and therefore you
blush not to say unto her. Have mercy upon me O Lady, according to thy great
mercy, and according to the multitude of thy mercies blot out my iniquities.
But not only thus have you doubted about Mary, but quite contrary to your
own words, when you would use these shifts, you deal with other Saints. For
you pray to Basil, that he would look down upon you from above, and change
your whole life, and you pray Athanasius to direct the holy people, and S.
Cyprian to direct both your speech and life, and who so reads your speculum
exemplonim, your glass of examples, he shall find there, and in such other
books of yours, such stories told of things done by this Saint and that, for
such as worshipped them, as yt thereby it may most clearly appear, that you
have no stay nor moderation at all, whatsoever you say, in praying to them.

Thus then thou may see (Christian Reader) for all M. Albines sending of
thee to read Origin, Chrysostom, Augustine and Hierom, for the maintenance of
his praying to the Saints in Paradise, that not only they have quite forsaken
him therein, but that also both Scripture, they and a number of ancient fathers
besides, have condemned that their praying unto Saints, for gross idolatry.
The most (thou see) that any of the fathers quoted by him for this, have
said, that has any sound ye way, is, that they thought it was not
inconvenient to think, that the Saints in heaven, prayed for the Saints alive
yet upon the earth, and that thereby they did them some good: which, as I have
showed thee, by good reasons, proves not, that therefore they are to be prayed
unto thus of us. But to conclude this matter, even touching this point, I would
have thee to understand, that the first brochers hereof, and they of the
ancient fathers, that most seemed to be resolved of it, yet spoke thereof, but
stammeringly and doubtfully. For thou have heard Origin only say, that he
thought it was not inco^uenient to think so, and upon the second Chapter to the
Romans, moving that question, whether the souls of the Saints departed, do
any thing, and labor for us, as the Angels do, or no? he in conclusion
determines, that if they do, that yet it is amongst Gods secrets, and that
it is a mystery not to be committed to paper. And Augustine, de cura agenda pro
mortuis, inclines to the negative, and therefore to that end alleges, that
Esa. 63. Abraham knows us not, and Israel has forgot us. And though
Nazianzene seem with Origin and Cyprian to think they do pray for us and
procure us good, yet where he shows himself to be most of that mind, as in
his oration of Basil, and in his epitaph of his father, he utters it not as a
resolute truth, whereof he was sure, but aduouching it, adds, as I think, if
I be not deceived, or if it be not too much to say so: which argues, that he
was not persuaded and resolved, that it was a plain truth taught in the
word, but that only it was thought to be a thing probable and possible: and
therefore this must needs be a weak ground to build so massy and huge a
building upon, as the popish praying to Saints comes to. To conclude
therefore this point, in this case notably has Augustine said, when the
question is of a thing most obscure, the certain and plain instructions of
the divine authority not helping us to decide the matter, let man's presumption
stay it self, doing nothing by inclining rather to the one side, then another.
De pec. meritis lib. 2. cap. 36. And again, seeing it is evident that they
have no ground for it in scripture (which some of the best of themselves
confess) with Augustine let us say both of this and that which they would
build thereon, of Christ, or of his Church, or of any thing else which
apperteineth to faith or life, if we, but as Paul said, if an Angel from
heaven should preach unto you, beside that which ye have received, in the
scriptures of the law and the gospel, let him be accursed: contra literas
Petil. lib. 3. Cap. 6. And so upon these premises boldly let us conclude, and
say with him, Non sit nobis religio cultus hominu^ mortuoru^: de vera religione
cap. 55. let it be no part of our religion to worship dead men. For as he
there adds. If they lived godly indeed, they are not now in that mind, that
they would have such honors given them of us, but God they would have us
worship.

Now we are come to the last point of your 4, which is praying for the dead:
for the which you will us to read two places in Tertullian, one in Cyprian, two
in Origin, one in Chrysostom, and three in Augustine: which at your request I
having done (though I must needs confess, this your error in some of these
has more countenance and allowance given it then the former had) yet I hope by
yt I have done with you, you shall have as little cause to brag that all these
Doctors teach you your kind of praying for the dead, as any of the former
things, that you have alleged any of them for: for some of these your
authors in these places you quote, do not so much as mention praying for the
dead at all, only they speak of a certain purging pain after this life, and
that diuersely, some in one sense, some in an other. But I see, in perusing
these quotations (that your leisure could aford to set down for this point)
and others, that diverse of your side, upon deep deliberation and purpose to
handle the matter as seriously as they could, have to this end remembered: that
(to make a show of great proof when you have very small) any place that in any
sense makes mention of purging after this life, that serves (you would make
your reader believe) not only to prove your fained purgatory, but also to
prove your praying for the dead: and again, any place (in what sense soever)
that me^tioneth praying for the dead, yt must needs prove both purgatory and
your manner of praying to relieve souls there. Which, because it is the thing
whereby both you are abused, and whereby most fondly and yet absurdly, in this
case you always seek to abuse your poor simple reader, before I proceed any
further to examine your quotations, I must labor somewhat to acquaint him with.
First therefore, let him mark what force there is in this kind of arguments:
Orige^ or some other father speaks of some purging pain after this life, ergo
of the popish purgatory. Augustine speaks inconstantly or very doubtfully of
a purging pain or place after this life, ergo questionles there is such a
third place as the papists imagine, and such purging there is as they teach. And
there is such a place, ergo they that be there must and can be relieved there
by the prayers of the living: or in some sort the dead are to be remembered in
our prayers, ergo they in that place, thereby to be releiued. For these are the
very arguments, which are by the mainteiners of prayer for the dead and
purgatory co^fusedly iumbled together out of ye fathers. Secondly, for the
better espying of the weakness of al these arguments, he must understand how
variably and uncertainly ye fathers have spoken and written of purging after
this life, and how far from the popish se^ce: likewise he must be advertised
how diverse ways, remembrance may be made and has been for the dead by the
fathers, and yet not in their sense. Concerning ye first whereof, because Origin
and Augustine are two that Albin has especially here named, by their
mentioning of purging after this life, to prove both the popish purgatory and
prayer for the dead, let us but take a view first in what sense they have spoken
thereof, and how uncertainly and inconstantly. And to begin with Origin, both
because he was the ancienter, and because he was first named, in the very
second place here quoted by Albin, he speaks of purging in the fire of hell,
and in the other of purging in such fire, as will consume in them that hold the
foundation, their wood, hay, and stubble, that they built thereupon, that so
when their souls depart from their bodies, they may go to heaven, which with
those unconsumed they cannot: which consuming fire he says is God. For his
words in the latter place are these. He that despises the purifications of the
word of God, and doctrine of the gospel, reserueth himself to sorrowful and
paineful purifications, that the fire of hell in torments may purge him, who^
neither the Apostles doctrine, nor word of the gospel has purged. And in the
other (preaching I am sure they will grant to men alive and not to the dead
(his words (the better to make the^ to look whiles they were alive that they
carried no wood, hay, nor stubble with the^ unconsumed) be these: if after Christ
the fou^datio^, thou buildest thereupo^ not gold, silver, and precious stones
only in the mind (if thou have any such) but also hay, wood and stubble, what
would thou be done with thee, when thy soul shall be separated from the
body? Whither will thou with thy wood, hay, and stubble, enter in to the holy
places and so defile the kingdom of God? Or for the^ tarry without, and for the
other leese thy reward, which is not meet neither? What follows then, but the
first for these, fire be given thee to consume the^? But God is the co^suming
fire of these: whereupon a little after he exhorts al me^ that have any such
matter in them, that they would know their own faults and in time amend them.
The first place is in his 8. book and 11. chapter upon the Romans, and the
other in 12. homily upon Hieremie, even as Albine cyteth him. Now who sees not
by this, that the purging place that he speaks of in the second place is hell
it self, and that the other is in this life, whiles Gods children warned in
time, whiles they are here, do let the fire of Gods spirit both reveal unto
them, and consume in them all their vnsuteable building to the foundation,
whither it be in religion or manners? what places then were these (unless the
papists be grown now to be of opinion, that the partition wall betwixt hell
and their purgatory is quite pulled down, and al become very hell, or else
that their purgatory is in this life) to allege either for purgatory or
prayers for the dead? Further touching Origens fancies about purging after
this life, August. de ciuitate Dei, l. 21. c. 17. says, that the very devil
and his angels after certain grievous and long lasting punishments, shall be
freed and delivered from those torments and joined again in society with the
holy Angels, as Origin believed. And upon Luke hom. 14. Origin himself says,
I think after the resurrection from the dead, we al shall stand need of a
sacrament to cle^se and purge us: for none can arise again without his
defilings. And upon the 36. Ps. hom. 3. he writes that he thought, that it was
needful that all should come into the purging fire, though he were Paul or
Peter: and of the same mind he seems to be upon the Number. hom. 25. which if
you understand of any purging fire of tribulation, or of the inward effectual
operation of the fire of Gods spirit, to lighte^, and to purge and consume our
dark, sinful and erroneous hearts (for so sometime he and others of the
ancient writers speak) then these places make nothing for your purgatory,
which is after this life: if otherwise you understand him of some fire to purge
after this life, so neither is he any procter for your purgatory, to the which
you send only the middle sort, neither very good nor very bad. A man
therefore may well think, that you are near driven for proofs for your
purgatory or prayer for the dead, when you run to these, or any such places
in Origin, that speaks thereof so variablie, and not only far from your
sense, but sometimes even in your own judgment, as well as in ours, very
heretically. Now as for Augustine, if what he has written of purgatory be well
considered, your arguments from him will prove as weak, as from Origin. For
whereas some of you allege him upon the 103. Psalm. sermon. 3. for purgatory, it
is plain, that he there speaks of that purging by fire, which he supposed
would be in the end of the world, when all should be on fire, and the good
separated from the bad, which fancy he rather chused to fall into, then to
hold with Origin, that there is any purging in hell. The same Augustine most
commonly understands that place of S. Paul 1. Cor. 3. of the fire of
tribulalation and affliction, wkereby men are tried and purged, as he proves
out of the scripture, in this life, as gold in the furnace. And as for a mean
place of purging any betwixt death and ye judgment, he writes sometimes
confidently that there is none such, and sometimes he leaves it in doubt. For
in his fifth book Hypognost: against the Pelagians, he acknowledges heaven to
be the place for the godly, and hel-fire for the wicked, but a third place,
says he, we are altogether ignorant of, neither do we find any in the holy
scriptures. In like sort de verbis Apostoli, ser. 14. he acknowledges these
two again, but a middle place he utterly denies, because there is no
mention thereof in the gospel. I know it is answered, that when he says
thus, he sets himself against the Pelagians third place, which they
assigned for infants dying unbaptized. But then yet I reply and say, if he had
been resolved of the popish third place purgatory, he would and should have
said, there was no fourth place and not no third, if to this it be reioyned,
as I know it is by some, that he disputed not there whither there were any more
places then two before the last judgment, but whither there were any more then
two everlasting receptacles, after that judgment also to continue, and that in
that sense only, he was resolute there was but two: how then will they shift
yt of his de ciuitate Dei. lib. 13. cap. 8. where dividing all that die into
good and bad, immediately upon their death, he says, that the souls of the
Godly separated from their bodies are in rest, and the souls of the other are
in pains, whiles the bodies of those rise again to everlasting life, and the
others to everlasting pain which is the second death. For here they cannot
deny he speaks of the time and state of souls before the last judgment: and
yet here he finds no third sort or place for them in the mean time, no more
then in the other.

But he was not very constant herein. For in his 21, book of the City of God,
cap, 26. he says, if in this mean time, betwixt death and the judgment, the
souls of the departed be said to suffer such a fire, or there only, or there
and here, or therefore here and not there, a fire (he says) of transitory
tribulation burning up their worldly smaller faults, I reprove it not, because
perhaps it is true. and de fide and operibus cap. 14. he says likewise,
whither in this life only, men suffer these things, or after this life such
judgments do follow them (as I think) says he, this sense of Paul is not
against the truth, namely to understand him of the fire of tribulation or
trial. And in his Enchiridion cap. 68. he says, that the fire that the
Apostle speaks of 1. Cor. 3. is the fire of tribulation, through which both
kind of builders, there spoken of, must pass: and tha such a thing may be
after this life, it is not incredible and whither it be so or no, it may be a
question. cap. 69. The like he has of the 8, questions of Dulcitius, in his
answer to the first of them: wherein it appears that he was very uncertain,
whither there were or no any such fire of tribulation, after this life any
where, before the last judgment, to purge men of some kind of sins: but
what these sins were, that stayed men from going to heaven straight upon
their death, whereof after they might get some releife and ease, he says, it
was hard to find, and perilous to define, and as for his own part he
confesses, that though to that time he had labored to find out what they
were, yet he could not, lib. 21. de ciuit: Dei, Cap. 27. And how dangerous it
was and is, to fall into such doubts, we may see in him. For in the 24 Chapter
of the same book, it appears, that upon this supposition, that there might
be some such purging fire, as he sometimes doubted of, he moves this sound
question: whither they shall be saved, whom the day of judgment shall find
unpurged with this fire, which yet might have been purged with it, if it had
not come so soon? and he resolves that with an other doubtful imagination,
that they suffering for a time some pains shall have mercy, as he thought, and
not be condemned to hell, and in this said 20 book of the City of God he has
an opinion cap. 25. that in the last judgment before sentence be pronounced,
some shall pass through purging pains. And yet in the third question to
Dulcitius he determines it as a flat truth to be believed, that in the last
judgment there shall be no delay, but immediately upon the second coming of
Christ it shall be, as we are taught Matthew. 25. Hereby we see how wattering and
inconstant, even famous learned men become, when they once wander without the
light of the word, after the discourses and reasonings of the wit of man. How
much better had it been for Augustine in these questions to remember the rule,
and to have followed that which he gave others in such cases (as I showed
before in the conclusion of the former point out of his second book de pecca:
meritis and remiss. Cap. 36. Yet in none of these places or else where can I
find, yt he once dreamed of such a purgatory fire as the papists teach, which
should be material, and of the same nature that the fire of hell is, save
only that it is not eternal as that. Wherefore I conclude of him as of Origin,
these things considered, the arguments are like to be very doughty and strong,
that are brought from any mention that Augustine makes of purgation after this
life, either to prove popish purgatory or prayer to relieve the souls of them
that be there. And even as I have said of these two, so might I likewise of
most of the ancient fathers, from whence they would seem at any time to fetch
countenance for this their purpose, they are so variable wavering and
inconstant in their speeches, most of them about this matter: but this I hope
is and will be sufficient to prove the weakness of Albins arguments from
these two, to justify his praying for the dead, because these two in some of
the places quoted by him (when he can get them to come no nearer the point)
have in some sort spoken of purging of men after this life in pains.

Now therefore likewise, I am to show how weak there arguments be, drawn from
some mention found, in some of the fathers, of some kind of remembering the
dead in prayers. Which easily may be conceived, if we understand, that first
there may be an honorable mention or remembrance made of those yt are dead in
the Lord, without any praying for them at al: to show our thankefulnes to God
for the good example they left us, both of living holily, and dying
Christianly, the better to provoke others, by so remembering of the^, to imitate
their good example: and lastly so to nourish in our selves, the hope of a
ioiful resurrection, and to testify our love and Christian affection toward
them so departed: which questionles was all that was done a long time, at the
keeping of the memories of their deaths, or at any time else, and of this
very well may both Tertullian and Cyprian be understood, in the places here
quoted by Albin, as I will show anon. From such a fashion of mentioning the
dead in our prayers, every simple man may see, popish praying for them has no
countenance at all. Secondly, we ought to be advertised, that forasmuch as they
that are dead in the Lord, have not yet their consummation, nor shall not,
before the last day, that in that respect also, for such (of whom we fully are
persuaded that they so died, that they have their part in the promise thereof)
prayers may be made by the godly alive very lawfully. And therefore thus we
grant the ancient fathers might pray for the dead: and thus we our selves (as
appears here in England by the form of prayers appointed to be used at the
burial of the dead, refuse not to pray; that we with those brethren and
sisters of ours, that depart hence in the Lord, may have our perfect
consummation and bliss, at the last day, in the general resurrection. And yet
of prayers thus made, for such only, by them or us, neither popish praying for
the dead, nor purgatory have any ground. Lastly it is evident, that many of the
ancient fathers of abu^da^ce of love toward their friends departed, whose
souls they were fully persuaded were in rest, and in joy and felicity with the
Lord in heaven (as they show even in the very places when their prayers for
them are set down) prayed yet unto God for them. Thus prayed Nazianze^ for his
brother Caesarius, oratione septima, Ambrose for Valentian. de obitu
Valentiniani. And for Theodosius. de obitu eius. and Augustine for his mother
lib. confess. 9. Cap. 13. Yea (as William of Westminster reports in his story)
thus Charles ye great about 800. years after Christ, wrote to one Offa king
here of Mercta, to desire him that prayers might be made for Pope Adrian,
nullam habe^tes dubitationem beata^ illius animam esse in requie, sed vt fidem
and dilectionem ostendamus in amicum nobis charissimum: not doubting (says
he) but that his blessed soul is in rest, but to declare our faith, and love
toward our most dear friend. Wherein they did, as if a tender tutor over his
pupil, though he know the childs parents of themselves will more carefully
and tenderly look to their child, coming home unto them from the university,
then ever he, did or could, yet writing unto them, to show his love toward
his scholar, should desire them to use him lovingly and kindly. Howsoever
it cannot be denied, but that this was somewhat more then needed, and was some
occasion of further proceeding, from step, to step, until there were too too
plain grounds laid of popish kind of praying for the dead, yet every man
most easily may epsy that this kind of praying for the dead, can never
kindle, either the fire of popish purgatory, or justify their kind of praying
to relieve souls there. Indeed it should seem by Aerius his opposing himself
against praying for the dead, as it appears in Epiphanius he did, some by
that time, mistaking these kinds of praying for them, that I have spoken of,
and stretching the examples thereof further, then they should (at least as
Aerius understood them) took upon them so to pray for the dead, that howsoever
a man lived and died, yet after he was gone by the prayers of his friends, it
was thought yt he should do well enough. Against which kind of praying for
them, he inueigheth as against the bane of all godliness and religion, but
herein by Epiphanius it appears he faulted, that this being but either the
opinion of the ignorant multitude, or his own only misconstruing the Churches
fashion, in remembering of the dead in their prayers or praiing for them, he
slanderously laid that to the charge of the Church. Epiphanius therefore in
answering of him, lays this down for the ground of all the rest, that those
who^ the Church prayed for, were with the Lord in rest and joy: which flatly
shows, that the Churches praying for the dead, that he pleads for against
Aerius, makes nothing for the popish praying for them, or for purgatory. But
upon this occasion, AErius urging this question, whither the prayers of men
alive did profit the dead, and if they did, whither so far, as that thereby
they were delivered from al their sins, thereunto Epiphanius (both belike
quite to condemn the opinion of the ignorant multitude, and yet loath also to
defend that which he could not justify) first answers only, yt the prayers
made for the^ were profitable; and the^, yt yet not so profitable, as that
thereby al their sins were done away: but neither does he simply and plainly
answer, that they were profitable to the dead themselves, nor once take upon
him to aduouch, that thereby some certain sins, may be put away: but
subtlely leaving these things thus in suspense, he flies to other causes and
reasons why they are profitable. And the causes and reasons set down by him
are these: first, thereby comfortably their friends alive are occasioned, to
believe that they that are dead are not perished, but alive with the Lord:
secondly, that thereby may be nourished in the that live, this hope, that the
souls of the^ that are so dead, are as pilgrims gone out of their bodies to
be with the Lord: and thirdly, that by praying so, even for the best, as for
patriarchs, prophets, Apostles, and martyrs, it may be acknowledged that the
best were offe^ders, that so Christ alone may have that pre-eminence to be a
man without sin, that so all may see, what need they have of Christ. The
very like reasons to these, are yielded by him that bears the name of
Dionysius the Ariopagite, of the solemn prayers and solemnities remembered by
him at the burial of the dead, cap. 7. Eccles. Hierarchiae: where, of them
that die, he makes but two sorts, holy and profane, placing the holy company
all of them, as well the imperfecter sort, as the most perfect, in blessed state
in their souls, immediately upon their deaths: and the other in woe and
eternal misery. And yet, he allows, not only, for the former sort
thanksgiving, but also prayers to be made unto God, that for Christ's sake,
their sins may be forgiven them, for the comfort and commonifaction of them
that are alive, as Epiphanius did. So that though in this case it be usual
with the Papists, to make great bragges of Epiphanius, and this Demus, yet if
they be thoroughly looked into, they are more against them, then with them. The
like may be said of the rest of the ancient fathers, whom they most make
show of, in this point: for howsoever some of them, may seem to come
somewhat too near them, in seeming in some sort to imagine, that some good may
grow to the departed, toward the easing of them, of some of their sins, by
the prayers of the faithful for them, after they be gone hence (as it cannot
be denied, but that Chrysostom, Augustine and some others have thought) yet
that they either placed all, that they prayed for to have any of their sins
forgiven the^, in purgatory, or that they thought that souls so tormented
there for sins unsatisfied for here, might thereby be freed from their
sins not fully pardoned them ere they went hence; they shall never be able
to prove. And yet these are the things that they must prove, or else their
manner of praying for the dead is left unproven. For with one voice, even they
that otherwise seem most to favor them in this point, hold, that there is no
purgation or clensing from sin, but only in the blood of Christ; that here
pardon of sins is to be obtained or never; and that after this life ended,
there is no bettering or altering the state of the departed, before the last
judgment: all which are positions, whereof every one is sufficient, to quench
the fire of the Popish purgatory, and to overthrow their end of praying for
the dead. For proof whereof let us but consider of these speeches and sayings
of theirs, amongst an infinite number of like force uttered by the^.

The author of those tracts of Job (commonly fathered of Origin, from whence
often they would seem in this case to have great furniture) descrybing the
fashion of the church in his time, says in the third tract or book: we
celebrate not the day of our nativity, seeing it is the entrance into sorrow
and temptation, but the day of our death, as the very laying aside of all our
sorrows, and the banishing of all temptations, because they die not, but live
for ever which seem to die: and therefore, says he, we keep the memories of
the Saints, and of our parents, and friends which die in the faith, as
rejoicing for their rest, so begging for our selves consu^mation in the faith:
and to this end to celebrate the memory of such so departed, we call the poor
together, and satisfy the^ with victuals, in token of our joy and thankfulness
for their quietness and rest. He that gets not forgiveness of his sins here
shall not be there, and therefore, says David, forgive me, that I may be
refreshed, before I go hence, and be no more seen (says Ambrofe de hono
mortis cap. 2.) And Cyprian against Demetrian, says most flatly, when one is
gone hence there is no place for repentance, no effect of satisfaction: and de
mortalitate, again he says, what manner of one God finds thee when he
calls thee, even such an one also will he judge thee. Chrysostom is as flat
as Ambrose in these points. For upon the 4. of the Hebrewe; hom. 4. he says,
that if we come to the throne of grace now, we shall have grace, and mercy, now
is the time of gifts, after of judgment. and in his sermon de Eucharistia in
Eucaen. there is (says he) after this life ended no negotiatio^, this is the
time of suffering or striving, that of crowns; this of labor; that of ease,
this of sorrow, that of reward: and therefore in the 7. Hom: upon the 2. of the
Hebrews, showing a reason of the solemnities used at burials, he says, that
the reason thereof is, that we may glorify God and give him thanks, that has
crowned and taken to himself our brother departed, and freed him from his
labors and servitude; are not our Psalms and hymns for this and our singing,
omnia ista gaude^tiu^ sunt, al these (says he) are the doings of men that
rejoice. and de beato Philogonio, most co^fide^tly he writes, Ego fide iubeo
etc. yt is, I do pawn my credit, if any depart from his sins with his whole
heart, and truly and unfeignedly promise unto God, yt he will return no more
unto them, that God will require nothing more of him to satisfaction. But to
come to Augustine, he in his 80. epistle to Hesichius, says, in what state
soever thy last day finds thee, in the same will the last day of the world
come upon thee: for what manner of one every man dies, such an one then he shall
be judged: and upon the 25. Psa. he plainly wishes, that only the price of
the Lords blood might be sufficient to him for his perfect freedom and
deliverance. Herein we are sure they had the scriptures full of their sides.
For first they assure us, that the blood of Jesus Christ does cleanse us from
all sin. 1. John. 1. and that he so bare our sins in his own body upon
the tree, that by his stripes we are healed. 1. Pe. 2. Secondly they teach us,
that blessed are they, that dye in the Lord, for even thenceforth immediately
they rest from their labors, and their works follow them, Apo. 14. And thirdly
likewise directly they affirm, that an ill man once dead, there is no more
hope for him. Pro. 11. and that therefore we must have oil in our la^ps, in a
readiness when the bridegroom calls us, or else we shall be shut out for ever,
what stur soever we make to provide oil after, Mat. 25. And lastly in these,
upon these grounds all men are urged, whiles the day lasts, while the
acceptable time or day of salvation endures, whiles the Lord is nigh and may
be found, and whiles they have time to work: to embrace the gospel, to seek
the Lord, and to do good unto al men, as it is well enough known. And
therefore if these fathers, as me^, at any time, or any other, either by their
example or writing, have in any point, never so little in any kind of sort
crossed themselves, and the holy canonical scriptures, in any of these points,
either in praying for the dead, or in laying any ground or occasion thereof, we
may boldly leave the^, and choose rather to cleave unto the^ in these.

These things thus premised, let us now proceed to ye particular examining of
John de Albines quotatio^s, for their kind of prayer for ye dead. His first man
is Tert. for higher he cannot go to fetch any show of color for this matter,
unless he would run to Apocrypha writings, to philosophers and poets, to
heretics, or to ye notoriously known cou^terfeit writings of Clement and
such like. And out of this Tertullia^ he alleges two places, the first out of
his book de Monogamia, and ye other out of his book de corona militis, both wc
were written by him, after he beca^e a Montanist, as Beatus Rhenanus in his
arguments of those two books is e^forced to co^fes, for in ye later he
me^tioneth ye new prophecy, thereby understanding Mo^tanus fa^cies: and in ye
other he most plainly co^de^neth second marriage quite contrary to ye doctrine of
S. Paul as Hierom has truly noted upon Titus, and therefore both there he
condemns that book as an heretical book, and also in his catalogue of
ecclesiastical writers, as a book written against the Church. Albine therefore
has aptlier, then he was aware of, sought out an heretic, in his heretical
wrytings, to be the first man to speak for the patronising of this popish
heresy of his. But perhaps he will say, that he learned not of heretics to
speak for prayer for the dead. Whereunto I reply, that if ever he wrote any
thing therein to serve your turn, he learned it of no better schoolemasters
then of such, or of philosophers their ordinary teachers. For as he himself
writes, de praescript. aduersus haereticos, as the original of al truth was
doctrine received by the Apostles from Christ: so the spring of al error has
been from the devil, by philosophers. And touching this particular, in his
book de anima, he writes, that the philosophers that held the immortality of
the soul (as Pythagoras, Empedocles and Plato) assigned for souls departed,
heaven, hell and a third purifying place: and in that book he shows, that
Montanus his master held, that the Patriarchs before Christ's coming were in
hell, that Abraham's bosom was in hell, or in the lower parts, that only
perfect men and martyrs went to heaven straight, and that all small offenses
must be punished after this life to the uttermost farthing (his paraclet so
expounding that of Mat. ca. de inf. and vlt: and in that book also he tells
of a woman lying to be buried, that at the prayers of the Priest over her,
lifted up her hands etc. whereby it seems, that the heretic Montanus, and
his paraclet, might be very fit schoolmasters to teach him a great part of your
doctrine in this point. Further, that you may see not only by his own
testimony, yt he might have such school masters as I have said, to teach him
herein, somewhat to favor you and to speak of your side: Irenaeus in his first
book and 24. chapter testifies of the heretic Carpocrates, that he was a
great admirer of philosophy, insomuch, that to the images he made of Christ and
of some of his Apostles, he joined the images of Pythagoras, Plato, and
Aristotle, of whom he learned to imagine, that there was a purifying place
after this life, and so to prove purgatory out of that place of Matthew, as you
heard before Montanus Paraclet did. And the heretics Heracleones, as
Augustine writes of them, used over their dead, oil, balm, water, and
invocation in the Hebrewe tongue. Hereunto join you Virgils 6 book of his
Aeneidos and lying visions, and you have the right scholemasters, yt have
taught you, and all that favor you in this point. But concerning the places in
Tertullian, which you quote, we need not thus answer you, for they are not so
pregnant for you, as you imagined. For the words you ground on, in the first
place are these (spoken by him to the wife to teach her how in this point to
behave her self toward her dead husband) and pro anima eius oret and
refrigerium interim adpostulet ei, and in prima resurrectione consortium, and
offerat annuis diebus dormitionis eius, that is, let her pray for his soul,
and in the mean time desire refreshing for him, and fellowship in the first
resurrection, and let her offer always when the year day comes for his
sleeping: which are the words as Beatus Rhenanus confesses, that he has so
set down, acknowledging that he found it far otherwise, in all examples
before. Again, not only this obscurity of Tertullians words, and the
uncertainty what they were, disableth this place from being of any force for
you to ground upon, but also unless you must have it granted, that every woman's
husband, to whom he gave this counsel, was in purgatory, whereof there is no
ground at all in his words in that book, but rather the contrary, whereby it
should seem that he spoke of such, as were gone before in peace to the Lord:
his words, if they were these, prove not your praying to relieve souls there.
And the offering that he lastly speaks of was either the offering of thanks
to God for his quiet rest, and sleeping, or an offering or giving of alms to
the poor, in token of joy for the same, and to provoke them to be tha^keful
therefore also, as you heard me before note, the fashion was when the tracts of
Job, fathered upon Origin were written, out of the third tract of the same: and
not as you would have it taken, an offering of your propitiatory sacrifice in
your mass for his sins. For he says for his falling a sleep, and not for
his sins, and he wills the woman to offer, and not that she should get the
Priest to do it. And in answering of this place, your other is also answered,
for there only he says oblationes pro defunctis, pro natalitiis annua die
facimus, that is, we offer oblations for the dead, for their birth days,
every years day. For in that he expressly says pro natalitiis, for their
birth days, it is evident that he cannot, nor may not be understood, of any
other oblation, but of thankfulness and reioicing. But this offering for
their birth days, Beatus Rhenanus upon this place in his notes says, was
heathenish, and afterward was condemned and abolished by the Nicene council
and others. And yet for any thing that these words of Tertullian enforce in
this place, he speaks of no other oblations for the dead, but for their birth
days, so that long ago the date and credit of this testimony and fashion was
abrogated And lastly, it is not to be forgotten, that he himself within few
lines after these words, speaking of this fashion and of sundry others that
there also he had spoken of, plainly confesses, that these things had no
ground in the scriptures, but only by tradition. That which other of your
fellows allege to this purpose out of Tertullian in his exhortation to
charity, may receive the same answer with these, for it is evident, that book
also was written in his Montanisme, for there he is against second marriage as
in the first, and so against Paul, Romans. 7. 1. Cor. 7. and with Montanus: and
the words are no more pregnant to ground prayer to relieve souls in purgatory,
then the former were.

Now next is Cyprian, who was a bishop in that City, wherein so^etimes
Tertullian had lived, in him for your prayer for the dead, you would have us
read his Epistle ad plebem Furnensem, in his first book. I am sure you mean
the ninth Epistle of that book, written, as it appears there, ad plebem
Furnilanorum, though either you could not or would not (to put your reader to a
little more pains to seek it out) tell us so much. But having found it and
read it, howsoever you were persuaded of it, we find little or nothing there,
that can do you any good, for only there, of a decree made in some Africane
Synod before his time, he groundeth his persuasion to that people, forasmuch
as one Victor had contrary to that decree, made one Heminius Faustinus
minister, executour of his will and testament, therefore to stay others from
daring any more so to violate that decree, to the calling away the ministers
from attendance of their ministry; that they should execute that decree against
that their brother Victor departed: which was, that for this cause, there
should be no offering for him, nor sacrifice for his falling a sleep. For
says he, he is not worthy to be named in the prayer of the Priest, that will
so call away the ministers or Priests from the altar: and therefore seeing this
is Victors fault, let there be no oblatio^ with you for his sleeping, nor in
his name any deprecatio^ freque^ted in the Church. Do you think in good
earnest (Master Albine) that if Cyprian had thought, that his brother Victors
soul, had been in such pains in purgatory, as you teach are there, and that
these were the ordinary means to ease souls there, that for so small a
matter as this, the breaking of this positive law (which with you is usually
broken) if in your sense, these things were to be understood of oblation,
sacrifice and prayer, for the ease of the party so departed, from under the
punishment upon him for his sins: that Cyprian either might lawfully, could
without too too much cruelty, or would so without all mercy and charity,
persuade to deprive a brother departed of these things? You cannot be so
without reason, as once to think so. The execution of this Canon against
Victor, was but only a note of some disgrace and ignominy laid upon him, the
better to make others after to regard that Canon, and not any denying of his
soul any thing, so necessary for it, as you would make men believe, your
prayers for the dead be. For that had been then, furiously for a trifle to
rage against the dead. But alas (master Albine) both you and your fellows are
wonderfully deceived, in thinking that Cyprian meant here by oblation,
sacrifice and prayer as you do. For questionles, by oblation and sacrifice, he
meant but the sacrifice of praise and thanksgiving, and therefore he said,
not pro peccatis eius, for his sins, but pro dormitione eius, for his sleeping,
and by prayer, not prayer for to ease him of his sins, but the public and
ordinary prayer, wherein then they used to make commemoration or remembrance of
the godly brother departed, the better to provoke others thereby to imitate
him: which you might perceive by his saying, he deserves not to be na^ed in
the prayer of the Priest. All which you might the better have learned thus to
understand, if you had remembered that the same Cyprian in his fourth book of
epistles, epist. 5. having spoken of certain famous Martyrs, Celerin,
Laurence, and Ignatius, adds: for these always, you remember, we offer
sacrifices as often as we solemnize the passions and days of the Martyrs,
anniuersaria commemoratione, with a yearly commemoration. For I am sure you
hold that these were not in purgatory, and that therefore these stood in no
need to have an oblation and sacrifice of the mass offered for them, or
prayers in your sense to be made for them. Yea how can these otherwise be
understood, then of the oblation and sacrifice of thanksgiving, in the
memorial or remembering the godly life and constant Christian death of such? And
so we neither dislike the practice, of such thankful co^memorations of the
godly departed now, nor deny that of ancient time, for the comfort and
instruction of them that were alive, that it has been used. And of this
offering of the oblation of praise and thanksgiving for the faithful
departed, very well may and must that be understood, which usually you
allege so much out of the Lyturgies, which you father upon Basil and
Chrysostom. For you know in offering it, they teach you to offer it to God,
for those that are at rest in faith: their elders, their fathers, patriarchs,
Prophets, Apostles, Evangelists, Martyrs, and for Mary the blessed Virgin her
self. For I hope, you think not all these stand in need to be offered and
prayed for, to be eased in purgatory. And yet your praying for the dead, and
your purgatory are right Hypocrates twins, they must laugh and weep together,
they must stand and fall, begin and end both at once. I am sure you have
heard of Augustines saying, Qui orat pro martyr, iniuriam facit martyri, he
that prays for a martyr, iniureth a martyr. And therefore long after, the
council of Bracchar in Spain, mentions only a co^memoration of the dead
that die in the Lord, with Psalms of thanksgiving, which it forbids to be
used for those that kill themselves, or for their faults are put to death. can.
34. Indeed in that council, which was in the year of the Lord 630. in the
time of Honorius the first (for I speak of the first held there) I find
mention in the 39. Canon (which is the last thereof) not only of a
commemoration of the dead, but of some offering, when that was, or when the
feasts of martyrs in their memories were kept, of money or some other thing for
the relief of the needy, where order is taken for the receiving of it, and
bestowing of it: which either were the free will offerings of the living, to
testify their thankfulness to God, for the good departure of the dead, or
bequests and legacies of the dead, to the relief of the poor, and other holy
uses, against the staying and detaining whereof, the fourth Council of
Carthage, and the second of Vase sharply decreed. And it appears in Justinius
martyrs second apology, that even so long ago, after the communion, there was
an oblation of alms given for such uses, but he in neither of his apologies
(though therein he show what the form and manner of the Christians serving of
GOD then was, of purpose) once remembers so much as any commemoration then
made of the dead in their assemblies. Of such offerings and oblations at the
commemorations of the dead. I noted before what the author of the tractes upon
Job, commonly fathered upon Origin, has said. Other oblation, sacrifice, or
offering, then these two, of thanksegiuing and alms, I cannot find in any
ancient and sound writer, allowed. The more are you to blame (Master Albine)
that through the ambiguity of the words, not understood of your simple Reader,
will make him believe, that yet, because Cyprian has these words, that
therefore thereby he allows of your kind of offerings, oblations, and
sacrifice of the ^asse, for the sins of the dead. If there had been a^^ ^^ch
use of the Sacrament of the body and blood of Christ, why have none of the
Apostles or Evangelists made any mention of it? Or neither Christ nor they
having spoken one word of any such use of it, what reason is there, that if
there afterco^mers should, without all warrant from any of them, that we should
be leeue them therein? Surely whosoever he be that should, especially also
seeing we cannot find, how many kind of sacrifices soever God for diverse
occasions in the old testament appointed, that ever he appointed any, or made
any mention of any for the dead, we would learn of Chrysostom, even therefore
to say unto him, you see into what great absurdities men fall, when they will
not follow the Canon of the Scripture. Homil: 58. in Genesin. and with
Augustine, though he were an Angel, because of a matter of so great importance,
he speaks without warrant either out of the old testament or new, he would
boldly hold him accursed. Contra literas petiliani lib. 3. cap. 6. But to
avoid this, I know, because in a cause so gainefull for you, you will not
seem to be altogether destitute of Scripture, the books of the Machabees,
even to help you at a pinch, in this case, in spite of all good antiquity and
truth, shall be Canonical Scripture, and Judas Machabeus fact 2. Match. 12.
must be urged, not only as a lawful fact, but as a president to warrant your
offering and sacrificing, to relieve souls in purgatory. And yet in very
deed, when you have alleged this fact of his never so much, you shall find
your dealing herein, as void of credit out of the Scriptures of God, as
before. For first, certain it is, that these books are none of the Canon of
the old testament, as you know well enough, Origin apud Eusebium lib. 6. c. 24.
Athanasius in Synopsi. Cyril Hierosolymitanus (...). Nazianzene (...). Hierom.
in prologo Galeato, Gregorius magnus libro 19. Cap. 17. upon Job, the council
of Laodicea, and diverse others, have determined: whose judgments are
inuincibly confirmed, by the contrariety betwixt the said two books
themselves, by the authors craving to be borne withal, and by his seeming to
justify, in those books contrary to the Canonical scriptures indeed, sundry
things. Secondly, let any man read 1. Match. 7. and. 12. and the 2.4.3. and 13.
and he shall thereby most plainly see, that in those times, whereof those
books contain the story, there were wonderful gross corruptions, directly
contrary to the law of God, crept in amongst the Jews, from the Gentiles, and
yet securely practiced of them. Thirdly, this is to be considered, that neither
Josephus writing the whole story of the Machabees, nor yet the fifth Chapter of
the first book, where the same story is handled, makes any mention of this
fact of Judas. Fourthly, if we look to his fact indeed, as the author
sets it forth in Greek, we shall find, that the truth thereof was and is
only this, that he finding two thousand slain, that took upon them of their
own heads to fight with the Iannites, without commandment of their Captain,
of an ambitious mind to get themselves a name, and yt under their garments
they had things hid consecrated to the Gods of the Iannites, every man then
seeing that that was the cause they were slain, thereupon first having called
his people together, he exhorted them by that example to keep themselves from
sin, and to give glory to the Lord for his righteous judgment executed upon
them, and to pray that the rest perished not, for that their sin, be like,
having in remembrance the story of Achan, Joshua 6. And this thus according to
his exhortation done, he made a collectio^ of two thousand drachmaes and sent
them to Jerusalem, to offer a sin offering, which if he did, to appease the
Lords wrath that it should not burst out to the hurt of the rest, as it did
against the Israelites, at the besiege of Ai, Joshua the seventh, for the like
sin in Achan: as it may be he did, hitherto he did but well, and with
warrant from the twenty one of Deutronomie, and seventh of Joshua: but here he
stayed not, but as it appears by the authors own words, (...), discoursing
with himself of the resurrection, he prayed for the dead, and sought to make
reconciliation for their sin, that so they might have their part in the
resurrection of the godly, for whom very godly he thought, that there was
great hope laid up. But if he had remembered, that he had neither
commandment, example, nor promise in Gods book thus to encourage him to do,
and that the Lord had said. You shall not do every one that which seems
good in his own eyes, but that which I command thee, that only do, thou
shall add nothing thereunto, nor take ought there from. Deuteronomy: 12. he should
not have followed his own discourse and imagination, thus to have done without
all warrant from the word of the Lord. In many places of the old testament,
he might have remembered, that of purpose, the solemnity of burials are spoken
of, and yet yt never there is any mention, either of any such thing commanded
there to be done, or remembered to have been done: yea yt Tobias ye elder
(though there be much said of him to his commendation in burial of the dead in
his history) yt yet there is not any mention of any such thing done by him. And
it is worth ye noting yt from the time of Judas Machabeus, it cannot be proved
by any story after, until now of very late days, that any such thing was by
any godly man attempted again. Further yet, how can this serve to breed any
credit to popish praying or sacrificing for ye dead in purgatory? seeing the
papists themselves confess, yt there was no purgatory before the coming of
Christ: and that they yt die in deadly sin (as it appears by the story
these did) go not at all thither, but straight to hell. Lastly, for any thing I
can see in the authors words, thoroughly considered, it may be said, for his
credit, yt he shows yt Judas Machabeus did thus, yt he did very well and
honestly to think and hope of ye resurrection, and very godly to be persuaded
yt then it should be very well with those that died godly: but that upon these
cogitations he did thus for these, he does not at all justify him, but rather
show that therein he followed his own reason and discourse. And this being
thus, all the strength of this place is lost. For an historiographer may and
does set down often, as well the faults, as commendable things of famous me^,
that they write of. Wherefore to conclude this point, for all this, it
remains firm and sound that I said before, they can neither by scripture,
nor any sound ancient writer, approve their sacrificing, offering, or praying
for the relief of souls in purgatory.

Wherefore to go on, now we are come to examine Orige^s testimonies, which are
two only here cyted for prayer for the dead by Albine, namely his 12 Homily
upon Jeremy, and his 8. book upon the Romans cap. 11. in wc places, let them
be read never so often, there shall not be found so much as mention of prayers
for the dead indeed in both of them there is some mention of a purging fire,
but as I have showed before in the first entrance into this point, when I
repeated the words of the author in these places, none at all of the popish
purgatory. For in the first, he speaks of that fire that must consume our
hay, wood, and stubble, which, he tells us, is God, who is a consuming fire
of such things, and in the other he speaks expressly of the fire and torments
of hell, wherein, says he, he that would not be purged by the Evangelical
and Apostolic doctrine, reserueth himself to be purified. Thus thou may
see (good reader) that which I admonished thee of before, how they prove
praying for the dead, by mention of a purging fire: though it be mentioned
never so diversely, and far from their sense, as in these two places it is
most evident it is, whereby thou may see, how, with out all conscience, they
seek to abuse thee, with fond reasons and ambiguity of words. Belike, though
the Scripture say, in hell there is no redemption, yet Master Albine believes
by his alleging the later of these places, Damascenes tale of Gregory's
getting Traians soul out of hell by prayer, and that Saint Frauncis and others
also have done and now can do the like, or at least, that he and his fellows
have been fowely deceived, that before now made it a distinct place from hell.
In earnest let them take heed, whom they have persuaded hitherto, and do
hereafter, that they go but thither, and that they (so they will take order
they may be well paid for it) will help them to ease there, and out in the
end, that they find not indeed the popish purgatory they dreamt of, in the
end to prove nothing else but the fire and torments of hell it self, that
Origin speaks of. But to haste to an end of this point, Chrysostom and
Augustine are yet behind, it may be these speak something more directly to the
purpose: it cannot be denied they do, but the more a great deal was their
weakness and fault, and nevertheless yours even where it was. Chrysostom is
alleged only in his third homily upon the epistle to the Philippians, where
speaking, as it is evident by his words, of such as die in their sins and
infidelity, so that they go to hell, where (says he) peccata exuere non
licet, that is, they cannot put of their sins, he exhorts their friends
alive to mourn bitterly for such, because, they are with the damned all the
days of their life, that so the better they may take heed of the like sin,
so yet to show their love: and in the end adds, defleamus istos, iuuemus
eos pro viribus etc. let us mourn for these, let us to our power help these,
let us procure the^ some help, little indeed, yet let us help the^. How and
what way? praying for the^, let us exhort also others to pray for the^, and
without ceasing let us give alms for them. Habet res ista no^nihil
co^solationis, this thing has some co^solatio^ etc. What is this to ye great
and unspeakable good, yt, you fa^sie, comes by your prayers and alms giving
for the dead? Yea I wonder how you are not ashamed to quote us this place for
your praying for the dead, seeing you your selves (as justly you may) condemn
as not only fruitles, but as quite unlawful, all praying and giving of alms,
for such as he speaks of. But you will say, that going on in the same place
ere he have done, he goes further, and says, that in the celebratio^ of the
divine mysteries, it was not in vain decreed of the Apostles, that there should
a memory be made of the departed hence, they know that great good would grow
vtno them hereby: and how can it be, but that all the people and Priests
praying and lifting up their hands to heaven, and the reverend sacrament laid
there, but that we should pacify God praying for these; but that which we say
now, we speak of them that departed hence in the faith. I grant these words
there follow, but yet the most that these words prove, is, that he thought the
commemoration of ye dead was instituted by the Apostles: and that the doing
thereof at the celebration of the Lords Supper would be very accceptable unto
God, and do them some good. But in all this, if you understand him aright,
here is nothing said for your praying for the ease of souls in purgatory. For
as before he spoke of those, that were in hell, in the state of damnation, so he
speaks this of those that were in the state of salvation already, with Christ
their king in a blessed estate, and that departed hence in sure faith thereof,
as his own words entering into this matter and concluding the same make it
manifest. For all that he speaks of, yt die, or are dead, he deuideth only
into these two sorts, and having first taught what is to be done for the
wicked, unfaithful and damned ones: then he comes and shows thus, what is
to be done for ye other. And therefore eue^ by your own received doctrine,
speaking but of these, you can understand him but of a tha^keful co^memoration
of such, in their prayers. But suppose he made an other distribution of the
dead, into bad, good, and mean, as you do, and that he spoke these words of
the mean in your sense, what reason is there why you should bind us to allow
of his opinion in this, and that you your selves will not allow, neither of
that which he taught before to be done for the damned, nor of that which
immediately after these words he sets down of those that die being yet but
catechumeni, that is, but learners of the catechism, who^ he says they barred
of this comfort and left altogether destitute of all help but of one, that is,
that alms might be given in their name, whereby some refreshing might come unto
them: whereas you say that Ambrose did well in praying for Gratian, who yet
died unbaptized. Yet this you will say is somewhat, that he fathereth the
co^memoratio^ of the dead that he speaks of, upon a decree of the Apostles. I
grant it is somewhat,and more then you have heard his ancient, Tertullian, has
done, or any other before him, and yet be it somewhat or more, you are neither
somewhat, nor any more nearer your purpose then you were in the beginning. But
to conclude with him, though he and 20 more such as he, should never so often
tell us that it was decreed by the Apostles, yt in the celebratio^ of the divine
mysteries, there should such memorial or remembrance be made of the dead, they
must pardon us if we believe the^ not. For if they would be believed indeed in
so saying, we have learned to say unto the^, as Aug. said unto such, as in
his time under such colors troubled the Church with their own fancies: legite
hoc nobis de lege etc. Read us it the^ out of ye law, the prophets, psalms,
gospel, or writings of the Apostles, that we may believe it. De unit: eccles.
ca. 6. For even of Chrysostom. himself we are taught so to reverence these
canonical scriptures for their sufficiency, yt he that cannot prove that which
he says thereby, but comes in some other way not granted him, he is a
thief, hom. 58. in Johan. And therefore he is not to think much, if we refuse
to credit him in this, which he can never prove to be as he says, by any
sound proof either out of ye scripture or else where. Thus therefore to
dismiss him let us see last of al what is brought us out of Augustine to this
purpose.

Out of him three places are cited, the first is out of his 2 book de Genesi,
against the Manichees, cap. 20. where there is not a word spoken of praying for
the dead: only there (says he, speaking of such as have not whiles they were
here well tilled their field, but let it be ouergrowen or oppressed with
thorns) that such after this life shall either have the purging fire, or
eternal pain: by which purging fire what he understands, it is hard to
guess, he had so many variable opinions thereof, as I have showed before, and
therefore hence no good argument can be drawn, to prove, that he allowed the
popish purgatory. I am sure they are not so in love with this place, that to
prove their purgatory hence, they will now teach that such as he speaks of
shall go thither. For how could he have described the worst sort of men more
lively, then he does those that he speaks of. For is not he an extreme bad
one, that has so neglected here the field of his mind, that he carries it
hence men ouergrowen and oppressed with thorns? Sure such as these, go
straight to hell, or else none. In the other two places, it cannot be denied,
he both mentions prayer for the dead, and in some sort allows thereof, and
holds thereby good to come to the dead: the places are in his Enchiridion to
Laurence cap. 110. and in his book de cura agenda pro mortuis. But both in
these same places, and else very often in his works (as namely in the 1, 4.
and 18. Chapters of the later book, in his 23. sermon de verbis Apostoli, in
his 21 book of the City of God cap. 13. and 24. and to Dulcitius quaest. 2,
it appears, that herein, and hereabout, in his time, there was great
question, some, as the common people, stretching the use of prayers for the
dead even to the discharging of the worst sort, and some altogether disalowing
any kind of good to come thereby: whereupon somewhat too much carried with a
desire to appease the common people, he chose the mean betwixt 2 extremities,
which he thought in this case the safest: and so, that he seems to teach that
they were profitable for a mean sort, neither perfectly good nor extreme bad.
And that in this question of the determining the auailablenes of prayers for
the dead, he was both greatly carried, by the sway of the opinions of the
multitude, and greatly perplexed to find out, of what sins men might be eased
thereby, he himself most plainly shows de ciuitate Dei l. 21. c. 24. and 27.
in the first hereof disputing such questions thereabout as he did, and in the
other confessing that though he had searched much for that matter, yet he could
not be satisfied therein: and who so reads his book de cura agenda pro
mortuis, he shall find it wonderful full of doubts and questions about this
matter; and before I have showed how variable and unconstant he was for the
purging fire after this life: what a weak and tottering foundation or ground
then is Saint Augustines authority in this case to build upon? But if he had
been never so confident, constant, and resolute herein, seeing he confesses
as he does, that he has no warrant for it in the scriptures but the
Machabees, and yt he lays the custo^e of praying and offering for the dead as
ye very foundation of his opinion in this point, by his own leave and rules,
we may lawfully without offering him any wrong, dissent from him herein, as I
have showed sundry times before. For in his 112 Epistle, most plainly and
honestly he says, Follow not so my authority, that therefore thou should
think thy self of necessity bound to believe it, because I have said it, and
de vnitate ecclesiae Cap. 10. we must not (says he) agree to catholic
bishops, if peradventure they be deceived, or hold any thing contrary to the
scriptures: the reason is, that (as he says) contra faustum, l. 11. cap. 5.
such men's writings, are to be read, not with necessity of believing, but with
liberty of judging. For only to the scriptures without gainesaying (says he)
I owe my consent. Epist. 19. ad Hieronimum. This leave and liberty you take in
refusing either him or any other of the fathers in a number of points, where
you like them not, and why should not we then have leave to do likewise in
this, being able, as we are, to prove that herein he went further, then either
he had any warrant for out of the canonical scriptures, or out of any vnforged
and vncounterfeited president, for three hundredth years at the least, of any
ancient father. But when you have made the most of his speeches and writings
you can: you can never without doing of him most gross injury, make him to
allow of your kind of sacrificing and offering the body and blood of Christ
unto God the father, as a propitiatory sacrifice for the dead. For de fide ad
Petrum Diaconum, Cap. 10. most confidentlie he has taught, bidding us to hold
it most steadfastly and nothing doubt thereof, but that Christ offered that
sacrifice to his father himself, and that the holy Catholic Church cease
not to offer the sacrifice of bread and wine in faith and charity: which must
needs be a sacrifice of thanksgiving and commemoration of the other only
propitiatory sacrifice, and not an offering of it again, as you imagin^ for
quick or dead.

Thus at last we have viewed and scanned all your evidence (Master Albine) and
for any thing we can yet find, unless gain and commodity that comes
rolling in upon you, by the practice of this point of praying for the relief
of souls in purgatory, were a more forcible argument to continue your liking
thereof, then any thing said and taught, with any constancy by any of
these doctors, in any of these places, or any where else, to countenance it
withal, we might easily be persuaded, that you would quietly give over
standing any longer in such egre defense of it, as you do. But indeed this
argument has proved so sweet, and strong of your side, that until we be able
to weaken this, as we have done the rest, that is, to stop the passage of the
coming in of gain and commodity unto you this way, we shall never put you to
silence in this, howsoever we prevail with you in all other points. This is
the argument of arguments, the first and last, middlemost and all, that in
truth you have for this, of any weight. And this we cannot deny to such as you
be, must needs seem a most notable argument. For to make you in love with it,
and even for the sake thereof alone, to hold on your plea in this cause,
purgatory has so picked other men's purses, and filled yours; and so
dispossessed others, and possessed you: and praying for souls there, has so
brought in paiments to you, and pilled and poled the heirs and friends of ye
dead, that if you will speak for any thing, surely you will speak and never
give over speaking, for this. Ioha^nes Angelus, a man of some credit of your
side, says, that the souls that are in purgatory are of the Popes
jurisdiction: and that he, if he would, could at once eue^ empty purgatory: and
therefore (as it should seem) by his own right, your Pope Clement the 6. in
his time, by his bulls commanded the Angels to deliver thence so many souls,
as he thought good. But I pray you, this being thus, why neither did he, nor
any before him, being so holy and merciful fathers to their subjects and
clie^ts, as you pretend they are, take such compassion of the poor souls
there, as of charity and compassion to rid them all thence at once? The
reason was, that this your only argument of gain still to grow thereby, might
continue from time to time in force. For doubtless it is not to be supposed,
that such a noble raze of holy and most holy fathers, would have stayed all
this while, from doing such a wonderful work of mercy and Christian
compassion, unless there had been some such great reason of their doings. Well
then, because venture non habet aures, the belly has no ears, and a mind
desirous and greedy of gain, will never be satisfied, I will not take upon me
any further, to wrestle against this argument, only I warn you, that even in
this respect, you be not any longer found, within the number of those walkers,
that Paul told the Philippians often of, and then when he wrote unto them
told them of them weeping, which were enemies to the Cross of Christ (for they
sought their own and not that which was Jesus Christ's: cap. 1.) For then he
will go on with you, as he did with the^. and tell you, that your end is
damnation, your belly is your God, and your glory, your shame, because you mind
earthly things. cap. 2. And in the mean time, until by this warning you ca^
and will learn to take heed, for this argument sake, to give over to plead
any more for your praying for the dead, to ease souls in purgatory, amongst
an 100. other questions, that hang undecided thereabout amongst you, I pray you
learn to answer this, how it chances, that since the light of the Gospel
came amongst us in these later days, to the detection and consumption of your
glorious Antichristian kingdom, we having heard before tidings of so many,
that apparitions of souls that are troubled there, and would be eased are
grown now to gayson and rare. And if you would have your doctrine thereof run
current, as a plain and resolute point, I pray you also let us understand, how
it came to pass, not long since, that S. Thomas More, and the Bishop of
Rochester, two deep and profound learned men, and martyrs also of your Church
(as your friends account the^) agreed no better thereabout: For Sir Thomas More
held, there was no water in purgatory, because Zachary calls it a lake
wherein there was no water, and the other held there was both water and fire,
because of the Psalm which says, by water and fire thou have brought us to a
refreshing: and the Bishop of Rochester held, that their executioners there
were the holy Angels, and the other held, that out of all doubt they were
Devils. And until you have learned to answer these our questions, and to
reconcile these your own Doctors, this shall be sufficient to show, that you
have neither all the doctors, Greek and Latin, nor all the Christians of the
four quarters of the world, full and whole of your side in these four points,
as you bragged you had in the beginning of this chapter. And the rather because
touching this particular, and last point, both the vanity and untruth thereof,
you your selves have confessed in that some of you (as Alpho^sus by name) have
written yt the Greek church could never yet be brought to be of your mind for
purgatory, nor the Armenians, and that namely, as he says because there is
almost no mention thereof in the fathers especially that were Greeks, aduersus
haeres: l. 8. and 12.

The XXXVIII. Chapter.
ANd if I did not think, What are the ceremonies in baptism, auricul^r
confession, praying to Saints and for the dead, either all or the most material
things of your religion, that we oppugn, or was your provision only in a
readiness for those.
that it would be You pretend fear of being too tedious, caused you to
particularize no more. but lack of sound proof for any thing that we withstand
in you caused you both thus co^fusedly and s^amlingly to run through this, and
to pass over the rest.
too tedious for the Reader, I would set forth the rest of our Catholic
doctrine, and the confirmation of it by the testimony If you had done this
indeed, it had been somewhat, but it being the only thing, that of all other
you should have done, and thus to pass it over with a brag what you would have
don, but for had I wist, bewraieth the penury of your cause, especially, you
not so much as once bragging, that you would prove any of the^ by the
Scriptures.
of such a number, of not only doctors, but therewith all holy confessors and
martyrs, which have suffered for our religion, and that have taught us, both by
word of mouth, and by writing, all that we do use at this day, teaching us to
live and die in it and for it. You ground your question upon a supposall that
you could have been as good as your brag, which you never could have been*
and therefore at least until you had made better proof of your cunning that
way you might have spared this ^uestion.
I would have you answer me unto this. Do you think, that they be in heaven
or in hell? I know well, that mere scrupulos^y of conscience will make you not
express plainly that, that your works do teach, and that you will remitte
this question to the judgment of God. But this is not to the purpose, for I
do not demand of you any absolute answer, as if you had been in heaven or
hell to see it: but this, to utter in your conscience, what you think of those
that have holden, maintained and confessed our faith (whom you call Infidels
and superstitious Papists) are they condemned? If you say, yea, then wherefore
was the blood of Christ shed on the For all true believers, and for all such of
yours that ere they died got hold of the foundation a right, and yet for you to
say as you do, is no better the^ blasphemy, for though al dying in the grosnes
of popery were condemned, yet it is well and a happy thing that Christ died.
Cross? it had been better that he had never suffered, if this were true. If
you say, that God would be merciful to the^, because their error proceeded of
ignorance, and so, that he will have pity of us, because of ours. But I know,
that you will say, that we are now inexcusable, because that we do refuse
the truth that you do preach. By the self same reason our ancesters ca^
allege before God no good excuse, for as much as they do make no account of
the receiving of such ministers as you are, and that have preached the like
gospel that you do announce unto us These things follow not at al, for so the
foundation be held soundly, every error that a manholdeth living or dying
conde^neth not.
S. Hierom and all the Christians of his time are then condemned, because they
would not receive the Gospel of Vigila^tius, who did even as you do preach,
that we should not allow the exposition of the Doctors, nor honor the
relics of martyr; S. Augustine is likewise condemned, because he wrote and
preached against the Aeria^s you mean I think.
Arrians, who taught as you do, that it is an offense to pray for the dead.
And to be brief, if that which you do preach ought to be called the gospel
and true word of god, since the Apostles time there has been I would me^ would
and could read the^, as you wish for the^, I am sure they should find the^ to be
far more with us the^ with you.
never a Christian doctor in the Church: for they have all taught the contrary
to your forged gospel, as every man may see, that will take the pain, but to
look in their works, or to read those places that are quoted by me, and
diverse others, that have confuted your heresies many a hundred years agone by
their authorities. Let them then that have any eyes, behold the hazard that
ye run into, and so many others throughout the world, which follow your
opinion. Eue^ thus do you with us*
If one should come to accuse an other of falsehoode, and that before he be
assured of this matter, wherewith he did seek to atteinte the defendaunt,
would not one think his matter very great, or his knowledge very small, to
run headlong into the danger of that crime, which, if he could not prove, he
should be condemned for himself. What then shall become of you, O most simple
sheep, which seek with fained arguments to condemn, not one or two, These
are but words, fear the^ not: but seeing the man had nothing else, he thought
good belike to have enough of them, and those swelling enough.
but all the Christians and Catholics that have been in this world since the
passion of Christ, the which have refused and reproved your doctrine as
heretical, and have taught us this that we hold at this day? But now to
answer unto that that was mentioned a little before, and that which a number
of your flock have told me, when I have conferred with the^, which is, that We
do not hold that ignorance will excuse any, that dye out of the true faith of
Christ and therefore it is likely you tell but a tale.
the error of our predecessors was not imputed unto the^, forasmuch as these
good simple people went to work after the grossest sort, thinking to do well,
and that as then they did not understand well the truth, which is now brought
to light through your gospel. I say, that in this ye are deceived more then
half the valewe of your Religion: You would seem then belike that your sim^le
and ignorant papist^, have all been great and profound cla^ kes.
for before some of them died, they had forgotten more the^ ever you have
learned, for all that, that you know you have learned it of their books (or
stolen it, to say the truth) interpreting both their works and the
scriptures contrary to the truth of their meaning. And although it were so
that they had al erred, your colored excuse of simplicity could avail them
nothing, for the word of God would accuse them. If I am glad to hear you cite
this testimony to p^oue, that ignorance of the gospel shall not excuse any,
but why plead you then sometime, that ignorance is the mother of devotion?
the Gospel (says 2. Corinthians. 4.
S. Paul) had been hidden, it has been hidden to those that have perished,
the spirits of the which the God of this world has blinded: the^ if that those
unto whom the truth has been hidden have perished, wherefore does your
excuse serve the^? This being true, as it is most like, I mean, that they have
not erred, nor that you only shall be saved, and they all condemned. To my
judgment our ancestors with all their simplicity did never err so much as
your disciples do, to follow such masters, This brag has been used so often
without proof, that now it is stole and loathsome.
as condemn that faith that the Catholic church has taught and maintained
these 1500. years, to maintain those heresies, that have been buried in hell
many an hundred year agone, and now are called up again by Martin Luther,
Calvin and his fellows.

The XXXVIII. Chapter.
THe vanity of the brag wherewith you begin again this Chapter, by that which I
have said in answering of ye former, has appeared (I hope) sufficiently
already: but whenever it shall please you, or any for you, to think that it
will not be tedious for the Reader, to bring us forth this number of Doctors,
confessors, and martyrs, that you here boast of, and to make it appear
indeed by their own words, or other good evidence, that they were living and
dying, so on your side, as you here pretend, I doubt not, but one of us or
other, will easily make it evident unto the world, that you are far greater in
words and show, then you are in deeds and truth. You would have your reader
believe, that only to avoid tediousnes to him, you have forborne by their
testimonies living and dying, here to confirm all the rest of your doctrine,
and all that you do use at this day: but alas your own conscience tells
you, that indeed not only the tediousnes of it to your self, but the
impossibility of it altogether, drew you to be glad to use this pretty shift and
piece of cunning, to salve your credit and your causes with him. Considering
therefore what already has been answered to the fathers quoted by you in the
former Chapter (in whose evidence for those matters belike you durst be
boldest) and what otherwise upon sundry other occasions, in answering of your
book, I have set down out of the^ directly to prove the contrary to this, yt
you say you could prove out of the^; your question, with upon the supposall of
your brag here to be but a truth, you have inferred and put forth; whither
these doctors, confessors and martyrs that you talk of be in heaven, or hell,
is childish, frivolous and needles. For you know well enough, that there is
never a doctor, confessor, or Martyr, of any credit and worthy so to be
accounted, for the Catholic Religion they taught and dyed in, but (though in
some of them, we do not deny there might be found some inclinations toward
some things now held by you) that yet we hold, that forasmuch as not only
they held with us the foundation, and other principal points of Christian
Religion, wherein you are contrary both unto them and us, but that also the
Lord in his mercy toward them, kept the^ in the rest from the grossenes and
impiety that you are therein fallen into since; that they were and are ours and
not yours. And therefore, we comfortably assure our selves, that (they holding
the foundation and other principal points as they did, though they as men,
builded thereupon some wood, hay, and stubble) yet the Lord sound the means by
the fire of his spirit, and affliction, so to descrie the same unto them, and
to consume all that unsuitable building in them, ere they went hence, that we
need not through any such scrupulositie of conscience as you imagine, fear to
give our judgment or opinion of them. For we fear not their being in hell,
for being on your side, but in that they were of ours, as they were and as I
have said, we christianly persuade our selves that their souls are in
heaven. And you, fearing belike for all your cauilling, that touching these
ancient doctors, confessors, and martyrs that this would be our answer,
because you knew it might justly be so, you were content quickly to give over
the pursuit of this question, and to ask us this, what we think in our
conscience, of those that maintained and confessed your faith and Religion,
whither they be condemned or no? And to fear us, from saying they be; upon the
neck of this, you ask us, if it were so, why then was the blood of Christ
shed; affirming confidently, that if this were so, that then it had been
better that Christ had never suffered. This indeed I do know to be one of
your common bugges, whereby you seek to make the simple affraide, either to
forsake you, or to join with us: saying when you see men about thus to do,
what, will you condemn all your forefathers? And to this end with many words
you a^plifie the goodness of the forefathers, and what an unchristian cruelty it
is to condemn all our ancient forefathers? Before I come to the answering of
which objection, I cannot but tell you, that in setting down so bluntly and
boldly, as you have, that if they that confessed and maintained your Religion
be condemned, that then it had been better that Christ never had died, you
have uttered gross and intolerable blasphemy. For though none such should be
saved by the death of Christ, thousand thousands both have been and shall be
saved thereby: and better it were that al such, as you mean, should for ever be
condemned, then that this speech of yours had any truth in it. But to answer
this your objection, taken from the dangerousnes of conde^ning forefathers,
because by the name of the^ you keep men, as you do, in your Romish and
Babilonical captivity: first the reader is to understand, that an argument
taken from forefathers simply, without distinction, but as you do this of
yours, in matters of Religion, is not good. For Ez. 20. we read that the Lord
said thus unto his people, walk not in the preceps of your fathers, neither
observe their manners, nor defile your selves with their idols. And David
says, Ps. 78. Let the^ not be as their forefathers were, a disobedient, and
rebellious generation etc. And the like warning ye people had, Psalm. 95. Zach.
1. and Ier. 11. Whereupon Peter tells the Christians, to whom he wrote, that
by the blood of Christ, they were redeemed from the vain conversation of their
fathers, 1. Pet. 1. If this argument had been good, when Christ came, and sent
his Apostles abroad, to preach the gospel to al nations: our forefathers in
all nations then did ill, in receiving the doctrine of the gospel. For their
forefathers for some 1000. years before, had held, professed, and maintained
heathenish paganism. And it seems that many of the heathen then, used this
very argument of yours, to keep men in paganism still. For such an objection
I read, both made by the^, and answered by Peter as it is written, Cleme^tis
lib. 5. recognitionu^) by Ignatius, ad Philadelphe^ses: and by Augustine in
quaest. veteris, and noui testame^ti quaest. 114. By this reason, said Peter
(as Clement reports it) If a man's father be a thief, or a bawd, the child
must be no other. To such as said they would believe no other gospel the^
they found their forefathers had, Ignatius answers; my antiquity is Jesus
Christ, who^ not to obey, is manifest damnation. That which was before, says
Augustine, the Paganes say, cannot be bad. To whom he answers saying; as
though antiquity may prejudice truth. For thus might murderers, wantons,
adulterers, and other lewd livers, defend their wickednesses; because they are
old, and have been from the beginning, says he. So yt both scripture, reason
and ye ancient fathers themselves teach us, yt it is not always safe, to
continue in the Religion, wherein our forefathers lived and died; and so easily
we may perceive, yt this your argument, how common soever it be with you, is of
no force. For it has been the old argument of Pagans, and doubtless is at this
day, the chief argument yt keeps Turks, and Jews from yielding to the
Gospel, least then they should condemn all their forefathers.

But as your argument is naught, so your antecedent is false also. For albeit
that our Religion differ from yours, as it does; yet far is it from us, that
therefore we condemn all our forefathers. For, first we know, yt from Christ,
well near 1000. years, they the^ that professed Christ, for the most part,
lived and died, holding ye fou^datio^, and many other principal points of
religion with us; and therefore of their salvation, we doubt not. Secondly, ever
since, howsoever a nu^mber fell away, from the truth and seemed wholly to be
yours, yet we are persuaded, and we know it to be true; especially since Petrus
Vald his time, who was 400. years ago; there have been great and known
multitudes, openly joining with us, in the chiefest points of our religion, and
dissenting from you, as I have showed before. And when there seemed to be
fewest, yet we believe, yt that God, yt could and did preserve unto himself, in
ye little kingdom of Israel, in such a miserable time, asking Ahabs time was.
7000. yt there, had not bowed their knees to Baal: yt ye God, I say, eue^ when
popery seemed to have prevailed most, according to the comfortable visions,
that John had to that end, Apoc. 7. and 14, yet had preserved unto him, in all
the kingdoms, and provinces of the world, infinite numbers, that yet neither
in forehead nor hand, would bear the mark of the beast: and of all these we
hope well also. Thirdly, even concerning such of our forefathers, as seemed to
the world, to be of your religion, we think a number also are saved. For even
amongst them, there are.3. sorts to be considered. The first sort are they,
that lived and died in all your gross and erroneous opinions. The second are
they, that though a long time they seemed to live in them, yet ere they died,
God caused to see the vanity thereof, at least concerning your doctrine of
justification; and so through the sight of their sins, in his mercy, he brought
them to die, protesting that they trusted not to be saved in part, nor in whole
by their own works, or by any other means, but only by his free mercy,
through Jesus Christ alone. The third sort is of them, which though they were
yours for some outward ceremonies, that they were contented to use with you, and
in that they held some other fond opinions with you; yet never joined with you
indeed, in seeking for salvation, little or much by any thing that you taught
them to put their trust in, yt way; but only looked for and believed, to
attain unto it, for that which Christ had done once for all for them, in his
own body. The first sort are they only of whom there is fear. But of that
number, we hope there have been but few in comparison that is supposed. Of the
other two sorts, we have a comfortable hope, because we know our God is most
ready to receive a sinner, whenever he unfeignedly repents, Ezech. 18. etc.
And S. Paul has taught us, that they that hold the fou^datio^ Christ Jesus,
aright; though through ignorance, or other infirmity, they build thereupon,
hay, and stubble, yet in the end, they may be saved, 1. Cor. 3. Whereby every
one, may easily perceive, that we hope that most of our forefathers, by one of
these means, or other, have been saved* and that for them, the blood of Christ
was shed upon the Cross, and that to the saving of infinite thousand souls,
though never a one of them that lived and died, fully of your religion in all
points, be saved. And therefore very bad, and blasphemous is your saying, as I
cannot but tell you again, yt then it had been better yt he had not suffered
at al. Hereby also you may see, that we ground not the hope that we have (as
you imagine) concerning the salvation of our forefathers, upon their ignorance;
but upon that faith that they lived and died in, or died in at the least, to be
saved solie, and wholly, fully and freely by the sufferings and obedience of
Christ. For howsoever ignorance may excuse de tanto, yet it cannot de toto.
That is, howsoever ignorance may lessen the offense, yet it cannot make an
offense, no offense. And though we read, that he that knows his masters will,
and does it not, shall be beaten with more stripes; yet we read not, that he
that knows it not, and so does it not, shall not be beaten at all. But
rather we read, that the Lord says, Psalm. 95. They are a people that err
in their hearts, for they have not known my ways, wherefore I have sworn in
my wrath saying, surely, they shall not enter into my rest. Indeed, in that
that you have more means now, to reclaim you, from your errors and heresies,
then ever your forefathers had, these many years; we think in truth that it
will be far easier, at the day of judgment, for them, then for you: in that
you have joined wilful stubbernes, to your other sins. But, whatsoever come of
it, this is most certain, that whosoever worshippeth the beast, and his image,
and receives his mark, in forehead, and hand, and so dies; (for of such
there the holy Ghost speaks:) the same man shall drink, of the wine of Gods
wrath, and be tormented for ever, in fire and brimstone, before the holy
Angels, and the Lamb, Apoc. 14. And this must stand, that he that believes
not in the Son, is condemned already; because he believes not in the only
begotten Son, John. 3. How many soever this sentence has within the compass
of it, thus it shall go with the^. This also we may not, nor cannot deny, but
that there, by believing in him, is meant believing in him aright: and that we
do not unless we count his name, the only name whereby we come to salvation,
Act. 4. and that so, as in him, we think and believe, that al things are
already prepared, Mat. 22. and therefore do not suffer our selves, by any
persuasion, to be brought, to join any person, or thing, with him in justifying
us before God, Gal. 5. Let men therefore take heed of living, or dying, without
this true Christian faith, whatsoever they do, for without this, we are not in
Christ; and if we be not in him, we wither, and come to the fire in the end,
as fruitles and dead branches, John. 15. And indeed, if we thus have not him,
we can neither come by that life that is in him, Ioh. 5. neither can we
possibly escape damnation, which is prepared for all the^, in the just judgment
of God that do not aright embrace him, Ioh. 6. In this case therefore, in the
name of God, let us not look what our fathers have done, but what they should
have done. And let us learn rather to imitate those forefathers, yea, though
they were never so few; that have lived and died in this faith; then those
others, that have both lived and died, out of it. For we may assure our selves,
that neither ignorance, imitation of forefathers, nor any thing else, will or
can exempt us, from that condemnation, that is due to such as live and die,
thus in this foundamental error, or heresy.

It is too too childish that you infer of the condemnation of Hierom and
August* and all that were in their times, by our religion: in that you say they
preached against Vigilantius, and the Arrians; against the one, for his not
allowing the exposition of the Doctors, and refusing to honor the relics of
Saints: and against the other, for that they taught it was an offense, to pray
for the dead. For first, you see, we do not condemn any man, for every error;
nay, we condemn no^e that live and die holding aright the foundation; though
otherwise, they have had their errors. And secondly, though it were granted,
that Vigilantius and the Arrians taught these 3, points, and that we are like
them in these; and that we hold them for things well done, and taught by them;
whatsoever either Hierom or Augustine wrote against them; must it needs
thereupon follow, that either we, or they were deceived, or else that Hierom and
August. and their partakers be condemned? Nay we are not so hasty to pronounce
sentence of condemnation, of them or any other, for such errors: neither would
you be so hasty to gather such conclusions, if you were wise. For you know
well enough, that we make not these matters such, as that either we think all
must be saved that hold the one way, or all condemned, that hold the other.
But in truth you do charge both Vigilantius and the Arrians with more, then I
think you will prove in have. For neither do I read that Vigilantius was such
an enemy to the exposition of Doctors; nor the Arrians charged with denial of
prayer for the dead; neither think I, ever did you; and therefore it should
seem here, you had no quotation. Again, you injury us herein; in that you
would make your reader believe, that we refuse all exposition of the Doctors;
which we never did. This only we do, as they themselves have taught; examine
their judgments, and expositions by the Scriptures, which when we have done,
if we find them therewith to agree, we esteem of them, as it becomes us,
and as well, and more then you. But this is your fashion, upon your own head,
without proof, to pin upon them that you find spoken against, by some
ancient fathers, what you list, to make them like us. If Vigilantius taught
that neither such relickes of Saints, as you make store of, oftentimes, nor
none at all, are to be honored as you now honor them; it was no error at al
in him; and if it had been that he had held but so, I am fully persuaded, that
rather Hierom would have commended him for it, then otherwise. But indeed your
gross honoring of them, was not then so much as thought of. Vigilantius his
fault (as it seems by Hieroms charging of him) was, that he would not
allow, that there should such cost be bestowed upon their tombs, and burials,
or that any such estimation, or reverend regard should be had of their graves,
and sepulchers; as then, of love toward them, and to stir up others to
imitate them, began to be used. Wherein, if he went too far, we join not
with him. For we very well allow, that there should be a decent, and comely
burial of them, and we esteem of their graves, and other certain monumentes
of them, as of things that appertain to the dear children of God. But with
you, to tie virtue either to the place of their burial, or to any such thing
that they left behind, and that in such gross manner as you have done, we
account it both folly, and blasphemous impiety. It may be, when you named
Arrians, you meant Aerians, in whom you often tell us, that to pray for the dead,
was condemned for an heresy. But if that were your meaning, we tell you, that
Epiphanius writing of them, says flatly (howsoever they were so accounted of
some) that prayer for the dead, has no manifest ground in the Scriptures, but
rather leaned to the fashion and traditions of men (as both of this and almost
of all the points in controversy betwixt you and us, Soto co^tra Brentium,
and Lind. li. 4. suae panopliae toward the end thereof, two great champions of
your side, have also plainly confessed) and so long you shall never be able to
prove it an heresy. Again, here you must be admonished, that every thing that
an heretic is reported to have held, is not by and by heresy. For many sound
opinions often times, such have retained, and by that means, have the easilier
prevailed to seduce men, by their errors. And therefore you and your fellows
also, do your readers wrong, in making the^ to think, that because such an
heretic, and such an heretic, held this and that, wc we hold, therefore we
are heretics. For if you should speak to the purpose, you should first prove
the opinions that we hold to be heresies, and the^ show us that they were held
and condemned, in such and such: or at the least that the things that we hold
were in them heretofore condemned for heresies.

But to be brief, you say if our Religion be the truth, the^ there has been
never a Christian Doctor in the Church, since Christ: for all have taught the
contrary etc. These are but your words, and the falsehood of this, I have made
to appear in sundry points already. And I would to god, the poor simple people
could read their works indeed; for then howsoever it please you here to brag
to the contrary, they should and would perceive, yt you have in this
wounderfullie abused them. For they should see that for the most and greatest
questions, betwixt you and us, they are flat on our side: and in those things
wherein they seem most to favor you, that yet even therein, there was and is
very great difference betwixt you, and them. Wherefore, your vehement
exhortation, that men should not follow us, to condemn all Christians that
have been since Christ, which taught always yours, and condemned ours, as
heresy; is suitable to the foundation that is, nothing but false and vain. In
like manner where you bring us here, as men (to avoid your argument of the
condemnation of forefathers) that are so driven to our shifts, that we have
nothing to say for appeasing the people, but this, that their errors shall not
be imputed unto them, for that they did hold them of simple ignorance, having
no better instruction: in confuting this excuse, you might have spared your
pains. For you may remember, that otherwise I have blunted the edge of that
argument. And for my part, I most willingly acknowledge that ignorance shall
not, nor cannot exe^pt any from condemnation, that know not (if they be of
years, and otherwise capable of knowledge) the Lord Jesus Christ aright to
their salvation. For I know it is written, that Christ shall come in flaming
fire, rendering vengeance unto them that know not God, and which obey not the
gospel of Jesus Christ, 2. These. 1. and that howsoever by strong delusion
under Antichrist, me^ shall be carried to believe lies; yet in the just
judgment of God, because they received not the love of the truth, they shall be
damned, for not believing the truth, 2 Thessalonians. 2. But you say, some have used
that excuse of them, in conference with your self. I warrant you, not simply
to excuse such as lived and died, in an Antichristian faith; that is, looking
to be saved, not only through the mercy of God, in Christ Jesus; but by other
means also, which can not stand together with a sound faith in Christ: but
such only, as either amongst the fathers were preserved from ever falling into
this fou^damental error; or having fallen into it, had grown to detest it,
and to embrace a faith, seeking, and finding in Christ alone, the full cause of
their salvation ere they died: of which two sorts, besides those whom God did
clean preserve, from the infection of popery, as he did the 7000. in Elias
his time, from the idolatry of Baal; even in the greatest flourish of popery,
the Lord, no doubt of it, had infinite numbers. For I my self in my days,
have known diverse, in whom, the leaven of popery, has been so rooted, that
notwithstanding never so good means have been used in their health and
prosperity to reform them, yet they have perseuered in an opinion, that they
should either not be saved; or that partly they should be saved, for their own
merits: who yet in time of sickness, or some other misery, having thereby been
brought as it were, before Gods presence, and so to see the infinitenes of his
justice: have straight renounced all confidence in their own works, with
wonderful detestation of their own blasphemous and foolish conceit, that ever
they trusted in them, or in any thing, but only in Christ Jesus; who, now when
they knew them selves, they would confess, was he that alone must save them,
by that which he had done himself, or else it would never be. And if the Lord
thus mercifully reclaimed some that wilfully, and peeuishly a long time, had
resisted the truth, shining as it does now; why should we not much more
conceive, that he showed that mercy upon a number of our forefathers, who
dwelt in that error, of simplicity and ignorance? That therein, and in a
number of things else, they erred not; you say, but you shall never be able to
prove. Neither can you upon our holding that they did err, conclude, that
either we only are saved, or they al condemned. For I have showed how a
number, yea infinite numbers of them, might be saved, this notwithstanding. As
for your judgment, that they never erred, so much as our disciples; it is not
material. For you are no competent judge in this matter. And the reason of your
judgment; that we condemn the faith that the Catholic Church has held,
this 1500. years, and maintain the old rotten condemned heresies; is a thing
which by begging after this sort, at our hands, (though therein, you be never
so impudent, and shameless a beggar; as that way, in this your book your
greatest skill has appeared) you shall never get. And therefore set your
hearts at rest; your words though they be never so loud and stout, shall never
make us yield you this for an alms. You must therefore prove your words true,
and so make unto us evident demonstration thereof; (which you shall never be
able to do) before we may yield unto you, that you have any right at all to
this.

The XXXIX. Chapter.
IF that by a good and a right title your disciples call themselves the children
of God, this makes me believe, that the saying of our Savior is fulfilled in
them, the which is. Luc. 16.
The children of this world are wiser in their generation then the children of
light: To prove this true, we see this daily experience: for a wise worldly
man when he does put out his money to gain, he will not trust the promise so
soon of one or two or three, as he will do the bonds of a whole Town or
City that should warrant or assure his gain. But you nor your disciples have
not done thus, but rather the contrary. It had been better for you to have
first put your faith and trust in God, believing that he has given his holy
spirit, and declared the meaning as touching the Scriptures unto the Catholic
Church, We build not our faith, religion, or hope of salvation of these men's
credits, but upon the credit of the undoubted word of God, set down in the
scriptures, which is for credit to be preferred before the credit of all men
speaking beside, or contrary unto them.
and not to hazard the hope of your salvation, putting it into the hands of
Luther, Zuinglius, Oecolampadius, and three or four other such pelting
merchantes, which have newly set up shoppes at Wittemberge, Geneua and
Losane, which one of these days we shall see bankeroutes, as their
predecessors have been before them, the which after that they had deceived
the poor simple Catholics, Beware of dogs, Phil. 3. ergo take heed of this
Romish barker, the best is, he is but one that barketh, to bite and hurt, he
has small or no power.
and gained some of their souls for the devil, they have at the last sold al
their honesty and credit, so that at this day, except that it be those that
read the ancient histories, no body else does remember, that ever they lived
in the world. You are come now last of all to make up their merchandise, but
your credit can hardly be good before God: Will you never have done with this
bare and vain brag? Show this but once to be true, and then we yield, and
then brag and spare not.
for you shall have against you all the ancient Catholic Church, which has
continued visible since the coming of Christ unto this day, all the Doctors
of all the universities, all the Empires, Kingdoms and private state
thoroughout all the world, which have received and honored this doctrine, that
you call Papisticall. And if you say, that you will not trust me^, but the
very word of the Lord, we agree to the like, that we ought al to believe the
Scripture, but we vary about the interpretation, for you interpret it after
one sort, and we after another: you expound it after a new sort, and the
Catholic Church does follovv When it comes to the trial it will be found,
that our interpretation rather then yours, has continuance from all the sound
ancient Doctors, and the undoubted Apostolical ^raditions.
the old exposition of the ancient Doctors and traditions which you have
forsaken: or to say the truth, your Ministers have led the sheep astraie
from the old flock, at the departing from the which they have been al
scattered abroad, some following Luther, some Calvin, some the Anabaptists, and
so forth: for the which the Popes and kings, and others that have had the
government of the Church shall answer at the last day of judgment, for as
much as while Ergo you have had sleepy Popes
they slept, you have come and sowedweeds among the good corn. Then seeing you
are the sheep that rome astraie, what excuse can they make before God, that
wilfully follow your steps? We confess, that we are the poor sheep of God
that have continued with our old flock steadfast and whole, as touching our
religion, but very weak and sickely Amend them for shame.
as touching our manners: that is to say, But your wounds, sores and sickness is
grown so desperate, that you will account none such, but them that will tell you,
you are sound and in health, where you are most sick.
full of sins and vices, attending some sage physicians to heal us, and good
pastors to keep us, casting out the chafe from the corn, I mean, cutting
off those abuses that are offensive; not to such scrupulous consciences as you
have, but unto him that does threaten the^ for the careless lives of their
sheep, and so to continue in that Prove this once some of you, or else for
shame never say it, almost in every leaf, for lack of matter as you do,
ancient faith that by succession of pastors we have received from the
Apostles.

The XXXIX. Chapter.
In this Chapter there is nothing but your old great words, and stout begging
the maine question: that your Church is the true, and ancient Catholic
Church; that all the Christians great and small, since Christ have been flat on
your side: that you are the only men, that follow the sound sense of the
scriptures, delivered unto you, by the ancient doctors, and true pastors of the
Church: and that we are but two, or three in comparison of you; sprung up
yesterday, and such as you prophecy will shortly grow banckerout, both of
credit, and honesty. This bladder full of nothing but wind, is sufficiently I
hope, pricked, and let out already, by that which I have said in sundry places
before. Howsoever, I hope the reader is not so simple, as that (seeing in you
never so great store of these swelling words; (as long as he knows your
adversaries deny them as stoutly of the other side: and he sees you bring
nothing but bare words, without proof) he will any whit be moved therewith.
And yet as not able a discourse as this book of yours is accounted: the
greatest stuffing that it has, is only of such vain words as these above
twenty times I am sure without any proof at al therein repeated. Indeed, if in all your life, you could prove but half so much, as confidently here you set
down, then you were a notable fellow indeed, and then truly we would strive
no longer with you. But in the mean time, seeing we know your speeches are
such, as you can never prove, and that we are able against you, both to prove
the falshoode of yours, and the truth of our own; blame us not, if we
esteem not your words.

Yet, lest you should say, that these likewise are but words in us, as the
former have been in you; (though I see no reason to the contrary, but that our
words containing a just and true denial of yours, were sufficient confutation
thereof) I say, and will prove it, that you show your self a man past al
shame, in writing here, as you do; that all the ancient Catholic Church,
which has continued visible, since the coming of Christ, unto this day; all the doctors of all the universities; all the Empires, kingdoms, and private
states, throughout all the world, are against us: for they have al received and
honored that doctrine, that we count papisticall. For first, such is the
newnes thereof, as I have plentifully showed in diverse places already, of this
book; that none of all these, for sundry. 100. years, were once ever
acquainted therewith: yea that diverse of your assertions, which are the very
principallest of your opinions: as namely, your dotcrine of Transubstantiation;
of your Popes being in authority, above general Councels; and of denying the
cup to the lay people; are not yet of 400. years age, and continuance. And
it is notoriously known, that in the days of Gregory the 9, about the year
of Christ, 1230 by occasion of injury and oppression, offered by the Pope, to
that Church; that the Greek and Eastern Churches, departed quite from the
Church of Rome, and never since (though it has been often attempted) could be
brought to hold communion therewith again; insomuch that in your conuenticle
at Trent, you have condemned them, for schismatical and heretical Churches. And
these Churches, as it is noted in an ancient record, in the Church of Herford,
differ from yours, at the least in 29 articles. And they hold yours
excommunicate, and an Apostata Church unto this day. And unless your reading
be very small, you cannot be ignorant, that Math: Paris: writes, that the
Patriarch of Constantinople at the Council of Lions, shortly after this
breach, showed, that of 30. bishoprics in Greece, the Pope had not three,
that then held communion with him: and that all Antioch, and the Empire of
Romania, to the gates of Constantinople, was gone quite from him. There is also
extant in print, in ancient record, an Epistle written, about seven years after
this breach began, in the year 1237; by one Germanus, Patriarch of
Constantinople, unto the Pope; wherein not only he labors, to make him see
that the occasion thereof was, that he took more upon him over those Churches,
then he should; but amongst other arguments to persuade him, to see his folly,
he shows him, that not only the Greek Churches themselves, but that al so
the Aethiopians, Syrians, Hiberians, Alani, Gothi, Charari, with innumerable
people of Russia, and the mighty kingdom of the Vulgarians, held communion
with his Church of Constantinople; and so by occasion of this schism, had
forsaken fellowship with the Roman Church. And the Cosmographers write, that the
jurisdiction of the Patriarch of Canstantinople, reaches so far, that all
Greece, Misia, Belgaria, Thrasia, Walachia, Moldauia, Russia, Muscouia, the
isles of the Aegaean sea, and Asia the less, be under the same. It is also
reported by authors of good credit, that at this day, under the other
Patriarchs of Antioch, Alexandria, and Jerusalem, and under the other, in the
dominions of Presbyter John in Africa, there be infinite numbers of Churches,
and Christians, differing from yours, and ioining with ours in many things.
So that Churches also both in the East, North, and South, and that of very
great amplitude, within the time, that you speak of, have professed Christ,
and yet have never been acquainted with most, or many at the least, of the
points, for the which, your religion is counted of us Papisticall: in all
which there have been some doctors, universities, Empires; Princes, and
private men (no doubt) since Christ, before you wrote, that neither honored,
nor received your papistical religion. Yea, but that merueilously you ouershot
your self, you might have remembered, that within ye time limited by you in
these Western parts, there have been even under your Popes nose, and in his
greatest ruff, many doctors, universities, and some Emperors, kings, and
private estates, that have neither received, nor so honored your religion,
which we call papistical, as here, you would bear your reader in hand. For even
in these parts, and within the compass of these times, have been (you know)
Wickliffe, Hus, and Luther; and universities and kingdoms, good store, have
had both your religion and Church, in defiance long before you wrote. He that
reads but the stories of Philip, and Lodovicke the last, (French kings) of
Henry ye 4, and 5. and of ye 2. Fredericks, the 1, and 2, (Emperors) and the
Cronicles of king John here in England, and of 2, or 3, of his successors; he
shall easily perceive, that much within the compass of time, that you speak
of, both Empires, and Kingdoms, with their Emperors and Kings, have been far
from making that reckoning of your popish Church and religion, that you here
brag of: or else doubtless you must needs confess, that your Popes have
been unreasonable creatures, that have so cursed and banned these men, as they
have, and which besides have caused such infinite Christian blood to be, by
war, shed to hamper them. These things considered, even children may see not
only the vanity, but gross falsehood, of these your words. For howsoever
either here or else where, in this your book, you would cause your reader to
believe, that your Romish Church, is the catholic Church of Christ, every one
indeed may see, that in truth it is but a particular, and a petty Diocese, in
comparison of the catholic Church of Christ. For the reader must understand,
that the Church of Christ is called catholic; first, because the religion
that she imbraceth, is that which has been at al times, and will be to the
end, the true religion of God; and secondly, because the same Church in respect
of the members thereof, especially since the calling of ye Gentiles, is not to
be limited or shut up, within the compass, of any particular countries, but
may universally be dispersed amongst all nations, and in all countries, where
it pleases the Lord. In neither of which senses, can the Romish Church be
truly accounted catholic. For neither is her doctrine that which the true
Church of Christ embraced, and was in possession of for 4000 years and more:
neither are ye bounds of ye Romish Church, universal; but eue^ as the Donatists
shut up ye Church in Africa, so do the Romanists within the compass of a
corner of the world, in comparison of all the rest, which they cut of, from the
communion of ye Church. And yet there is nothing more usual with Master Ioh. de
Albine, in this his book, the^ to labor to cou^tena^ce ye Romish Synagogue, with
these two things, antiquity and universality. But as for universality, it may
appear by that which I have said, and by that which every one may easily
conceive, if he compare the^ ye profess Christ, who^ they reject as
heretics, and schismatics, with the^ that receive and honor the popish
religion; that it is now, and has been a long time, rather with the^, who^ they
thus co^de^ne, the^ with themselves. And as for antiquity, most certain it is,
that the Turks, ye Nestorians, and the Circu^cisers, may a great deal more
justly, brag thereof, the^ they. For ye Turks have been in possession of their
full Mahometisme, these 900 years, and ye heresy of ye Nestoria^s has
continued these 1200, years, amongst the Georgians. And the heresy of them
that join circumcision with baptism continues yet, in Africa, in AEthiopia
under Presbyter John, and has these 1500 years: whereas popery is not so old
as the you^gest of these, in that almost all the points thereof, wherefore it is
so called, have been devised and brought in since, the youngest of these
began. But put the case, that popish religion were ancient indeed, and had the
greatest part of the world to follow it: must it needs therefore follow, that it
were the truth, and the best way? No indeed. For who can deny that Gentilism
or Paganish idolatry, when the Apostles were sent first, to preach the gospel
to the Gentiles, was very ancient? For it had welnigh continued then, from
Noah's f^ould until that time. And never was popery, of so many nations so
universally received, as that was. And yet who is so simple, but he knows now
for all this, that that was a way that led to destruction? And if the mystery
of iniquity began to work in the Apostle Paul's time, and yet Antichrist the
father thereof, was not quite to be abolished, before the brightness of Christ's
second coming, as he plainly teaches, 2 Thessalonians. 2. it being withal
prophesied, that the whore of Babylon (Antichrists right pattern) should sit
upon many waters (that is, rule over many people) and cause the kings and
nations of the earth, to be drunk with the wine of her fornication, as it is
Reuelat. 17. who sees not that even Antichristianity may be countenanced with
great show, both of antiquity, and universality, as certain and good tokens,
as the Romanists count these two, of the true Church of Christ. Which things
considered, howsoever it pleases Master Ioh. de Albine here to jest at us, as
men like to the children of God in nothing, but in this folly, that contrary to
the fashion of the wise children of the world, we choose rather to trust a few,
then many; we are contented therein, to be like them still, and so rather to
choose to enter into the Arc with 8. persons, Ge. 7. so to be saved: then to
refuse so to do, with all the world besides, and so to be drowned. And I would
advise him for all his wisdom, to be such a fool, as rather with two or
three, to fly out of Sodom, with Lot Genesis 19; then with all the rest to tarry
behind, and to be destroyed with fire and brimstone. For howsoever he count
this folly, Christ who is wisdom it self, has charged his to strive, to
enter in at the straight gate, though few go ye way, and many the other broad
way. For that is the way that will lead unto salvation, whereas, the other
leads to destruction, Luke. 13.

But the men whom he names, Luther, Zuinglius, and Oecolampadius (though they
be men whom we think well of, and whose memories shall be famous in Gods Church
(for all his blind prophecy to the contrary) when the names of a thousand such
as himself is, shall be either buried in oblivion, or infamous for their
resisting of Gods truth) are not the men upon whom we build our religion.
These we account such as in these later days, God used to very good purpose,
to revive, and further to publish, and make known the doctrine of truth, then
it was when they began first. But the men that we trust and lean unto in
this case, are those holy men of God, and such like, as Saint Peter speaks
of, 2. Pet. 1; which spoke as they were moved by the holy Ghost: and so have
left the will of God, for our full direction unto us, in the holy Scripture.
And these, the ancient Christians and Doctors for six hundred years after
Christ, and infinite numbers since, even down unto the times of these, whom he
here names, as I have showed in the fourth Chapter of this book, and else
where, together with us, have followed. And further then these writers of the
canonical scriptures, have led any of these, we do not, nor mean not to
follow the^. You show therefore, Master Albine, but the nature of your Romish
spirit, in your confident aduouching without all proof, that these men you
name, gained souls to the Devil, and that they have so fold their honesty and
credit, that few now know that ever they lived in the world. For besides your
rash and uncharitable judging of the^ you speak that which your own heart
told you was a lie. For, you could not be ignorant, but that these men's names
are known to thousands, that never read their stories. But you say that you
agree with us in not trusting of men, but in trusting to ye very word written;
but you and we vary about the interpretation: for we interpret it after one
sort, and you after another, we after a new sort, and the Catholic Church,
whereby wrongfully still, you mean your own) does follow the old exposition
of the ancient doctors, and traditions, with we have forsaken. Herein, you say
more, then either you or any of your fellows will stand to. For when it comes
to the point, the greatest champions of you confess, that a number of the
things. that are in controversy betwixt you and us, are without the compass
of the scripture: and therefore least they should be quite rejected, they under
prop them with the rotten prop (which yet they labor to make to carry some show
of strength) of traditions, or of the word unwritten. And in the other point,
concerning interpretation; that therein we vary, it is true; but that the
variety is, as you say, it is false. For we never refused the exposition of the
Catholic Church, nor to use the help of her sound and Catholic Doctors,
or traditions agreing with the word written as helps the better to attain to
the right sense thereof by. Indeed, the interpretation of your new Apostata
Church of Rome, her false doctors and traditions, because they will not stand
with the plain scriptures themselves, we reject. Otherwise, we are ready
always to prove our sense, thereof, to agree with the ancient Church and her
doctors, better then yours can. And as for ye variety amongst us, of
interpretatio^s, which you charge us withal; sure we are, it will never prove so
great, as has been, and is amongst you, or as is betwixt your interpretation,
and that which was of them, 900. years ago: and therefore, for any thing you
have yet said, you your selves are the rouing sheep from the ancient
sheepfold; you are they which whiles men slept, have sowed cares amongst the
good corn: and which are the sheep sick in religion, as well as in manners;
and not we. And therefore they that have joined with you, whosoever they have
been, are like at the day of judgment, to smart for nothing more, then for
taking part with you. And so to conclude this Chapter, whatsoever hitherto, you
have gained at the hands of the simple, by these your vain and swelling
words: you shall hereafter loose ten times as much, amongst them that are wise
thereby.

The XL. Chapter.
I Know well, that you will take this confession of mine to your advantage,
saying, that for fear of being infected with our superstitious diseases, you
have separated your selves from the common flock: but if you do consider my
first words, they have barred you al manner of ways to reply justly: for I have
already said, that although we be sickely and weak sheep, as touching our
doings or manners, yet, in regard of our faith (thanks be to God) we are safe
and sound, keeping still Indeed you! have said, and said it again and
again, but yet you have never proved ^t, nor (...).
that integrity of religion that by succession of pastors we have received
from the Apostles, without adding or diminishing any thing to the ground of our
Catholic belief: for as for ceremonies the Church has used the ever as
touching the time and the place, to the honor of God and edification of our
neighbors Your antichristian religion is that, that has caused us to separate
ourselves from you, as we are bidde^, Reave. 18. verse. 4.
and therefore, if you did separate your selves from our kind of living, to
lead a holy solitary life, as the holy Heremites and Saints have done in
times past, forsaking the conversation of the common people, to live in
co^te^plation, without seperating the^ selves from the communion of the Church,
in the which they have been baptized, and had received their faith, your
doings had been as much worthy of praise in that respect, as now they are
damnable, considering how you forsake, the common tabernacle, within the which
both you and we have received the sacraments of regeneration, and our spiritual
food altogether. And to the end that no body run astraie from the right path
that he should follow, the good Christian ought to fix in his mind this
resolution, I mean to serve God, and to live in the catholic faith,
co^monlie or privately for when there is any question put, as touching the
life, the co^mo^n are, This is a right popish gloss, that is, a plain
perverting of Christ's meaning.
as Mat. 7.
Christ does say, does lead one to perdition, and the narrow way does guide
unto the part of salvation. But if one speak of religion, the contrary is
verified for the common way is the ways of health, and the private way is the
path of damnation And this is an other.
The Prophet David in the 24 Psalm, had a regard to this, when he prayed God,
to teach him his ways by the religion, and his paths, by the manners and
customs.

The XL. Chapter.
YOu were deceived, in thinking that we would pretend your evil manners, or your
difference in ceremonies, for the defense of our separation from you. For we
have always protested, that it was especially, your Antichristian doctrine, yt
has caused us, to account that Revelations. 18.4, Go out of her my people,
that ye be not pertakers in her sins, and that ye receive not of her plagues:
directly spoken to us, concerning your Romish Synagogue and religion. And
therefore is it, that we have so separated our selves from you as we have,
because we find, that you are apostataes, and long have been, from the ancient
Catholic Church of Christ, and from the truly commended ancient Roman Church
it self; with whom we cannot grow in common, unless we had forsaken your
fellowship. And this kind of separation of our selves from you, we know was
more necessary, and is more commendable, then all the separation, of Heremites,
or any other of your caged birds, howsoever you could have allowed that,
better then this, of ours. But you would seem to have bound us to have
continued with you, because that we received, many of us, baptism at your
hands. What? I trust you are not so mean a divine, as to think it always
best, for men to continue communion, with them in all things, that have
baptized them? You know, I am sure, that the Arrian heretics (their heresy
spreading it self, so broad as it did, and continuing diverse 100 years) and
other heretics, as well as they, baptized many, and yet I hope you will not
think, that they might not after, forsake their heresies, to turn to the
truth? You know, many did forsake them, and came to the truth, and yet, it was
counted an heresy, to baptize them again. The better yet to show that we
should not have departed from you, you tell us that you have continued, without
adding and diminishing, in that doctrine which was taught by the Apostles
first, and since from hand to hand, in all integrity, has been by the
succession of faithful pastors, conueighed down unto you: and so we had both
baptism, and all our other spiritual food with you. These are but words,
the evidence of the thing is to the contrary (as I have sufficiently made
demonstration before.) Prove this indeed, and we will repent us of our
departing from you, and most ioifully and willingly will we join with you
again. I like very well your counsel, that every good Christian should fully
resolve, and determine to serve God, and to live and die in the Catholic
faith: but then I add, that he had need well and thoroughly to be resolved,
what, and which is that true Catholic Faith. For his direction in this
behalf, how to discern, which is the right way to heaven, and which not; and
consequently, which is the true catholic faith, and which is not: you teach
him, that when there is any question put, as touching life, then the common
way, as Christ does say, Mat. 7. does lead to perdition, and the narrow to
salvation: but in religion it is contrary: whereunto you say, David alluded
Psalm. 24. saying: show me thy ways O Lord, and teach me thy paths: by ways,
meaning religion; and by paths, manners. Where learned you this divinity? If
you look upon Christ's words well, you shall find, that he counted the way
to heaven, straight, as well in respect of religion, as life: and that there is
nothing more usual with David, then indifferently without any such nice
distinction, to use these words ways, and paths, both in respect of the
one, and the other; you might easily perceive, if you were any thing
conversant in his Psalms: look upon Christ's time, whereunto he had an
especial eye, when he used these words, and you shall find, that true
religion was a thing more geyson, and rare then in the world, and had fewer
followers; then an holy and a virtuous life. For eue^ many of the Pharisees,
and Philosophers made great show of that; and that therefore, to lead us
rather, to think that in respect of Religion then manners, he had uttered those
words; immediately thereupon he adds, beware of false Prophets. And as for
David (if your argument be grounded upon that that he places the word ways,
in the first place; and paths, in the later) if you mark him well, you shall
oftentimes find him, to inuert that order in the Psalms. And Psalm 109.
because you should plainly see, that he refers ways, as well to manners, as
to Religion, he says: take from me the way of lying, and teach me the way of
thy statutes. And considering that you cannot be ignorant, that Idolatry and
Paganism, in Christ's time, was more common, then Christ's Religion, and
therefore had 10000. that took it for true religion, in comparison of one,
that took Christ's so; I wonder that you ever durst thus expound Christ's
words. For by your exposition, he told them, that it was better for them, to
embrace paganism, then his Religion: for that was the common beaten way, and
his was but a small bie-path. Again, in Liberius his time, when it was an hard
matter, to find one true Catholic, for an 100. Arrians: insomuch that
Constantine said unto Liberius, yt he alone favored Athanasius, Theodor.
Eccles. Hist. lib. 2. cap. 16. by your rule, Liberius did well, in that, seeing
Arrianisme to be the common way, and his ancient Religion, that then was but
as a bie-path, wherein few walked; that he yielded his subscriptio^, to
Arrianisme. Indeed it should seem, that this Pope Liberius was of your mind,
and so long you care not I am sure, as that you may have a Pope on your side.
Well yet, if you had but remembered yt the Turkish religion, is at this day, and
has been a long time common to more, then your own religion is, or ever was:
it might have stayed you from teaching me^, to measure religion by the
co^monnes of it, or multitude of followers, least you should have so persuaded
them to Turcisme: But it may be you had rather have it so (seeing in co^pariso^
thereof, ours is but a narrow path wherein few do walk) then that they should
follow us. If your skill in interpreting of the scriptures, and in prescribing
rules for the direction of men, be no better, then you have showed in this; you
may very well be a Doctor, and great master, in your blind and ignorant
kingdom of Popery: but in the kingdom of Christ, there is little hope, that
there will ever any great reckoning be made of you.

The XLI. Chapter.
NOw to turn to the partition that we have upon the 34. and 37. of Ezechiel,
and upon the tenth of John* it is plain, that we are the flocks of weak and
sickelie sheep: and your disciples are the sheep that run this way and
that way astraie: those that are our Howsoever that title is due unto them,
they take it not unto the^.
ill Prelates take upon them the title of Mercenarii pastoris, but unto your
ministers the titles of devouring wolves, may be applied Only of such as have
made shipwreck of conscience.
without any scrupulositie of conscience: for you watch to none other intent,
but to make the sheep run out of the fold, and to devour them, because that
our pastors have not taken care to keep them. And although they be not
excusable, as well for their silence, as for their naughty lives, I see not your
Patriarchs and zealous manifesters amend much themselves, the faults that they
find in us: for besides the true and certain experience that we have had by
the trial that we have seen to our cost in this Realm, within these five or
six years Penned then by such, that had taught their pe^s to write lies.
I have read full many a golden Legend of your sacred martyrs and holy
Bishops, which do not altogether redound to the honor of your pretended
reformed Church. And among others Theodore de Beza Caluins successor in the
Pontificate seat of the holy city of Geneua of whom such things are preached
abroad, that if the one half of them be true, Neither will ^e, nor any of us,
so compare our selves.
he is scant so good a man as S. John Baptist. And because I would not have you
to mislike the^ for their religion, I will not allege, to verify this, any
Catholic author, but so^e of Luthers successors your first fou^der, who taught
you to write so learnedly (I would say railingly) against the church of Rome.
Tilemanus Heshusius a minister of the Luthera^s, in the Jn his book of the
true body of Christ in the sacrif written in Latin.
book that I have already noted, does openly accuse the said Beza of great
infamy, that he did not only content Heat of conte^tion made the man too
credulous, and so believed your malicious parasites, that most impudently and
falsely have forged these things of him.
the fancy of his mind, with leading a luxurious and a lice^tious life, and to
stain his vow with a bilt of adulterous love, but that that is worse, he
himself has set forth in writing all his lascivious acts, the which (says
he) His lascivious songs and Epigrams he made and published whiles he was
yours, whereof he has publicly in printe testified his repentance and mislike
since he was ours.
he has song in sacrilegerime to the Instrument, to manifest his sin to the
whole sight of the world. And in that very book he does say, that Beza,
who as I have told you) is a Bishop of the holy City of Geneua, is an
infamous monster, whose naughty life any man may read set forth by him self
in his own Epigrams: and notwithstanding (says he) to hear him speak, you
would think he were Saint John Baptist, for he can talk of nothing but of
his holy life. This same very minister in the book where he writes these
things, he does lay to The more shame for him, for it is a monstrous and
notorious slander.
Bezaes charge that he took with him to Geneua another man's wife, without the
knowledge of her husband, whose name was Candida. Will an argument from one to
al follow with papists? and yet this one not proved such an one neither.
Thus seeing by the very testimony of those that are our enemies, and that
are your brethren, as touching the seeking to overthrow the Catholic church.
The principal pill^^s of your church are bawdes, thieues and adulterers,
ruffins: And yet what is more usual with papists, then to cry out against our
ill lives, though your lives be such, as you have confessed.
why do ye not, first begin to reform your selves, to this intent, that when
we see, that you have taken the black out of your own eyes, we may be the
better content, that you should spy the moate in ours. Remember that our
savior says in the gospel, that the physician ought to cure himself.

The XLI. Chapter.
WE are very well contented, seeing you so willingly confess it, and that so
often, that you be counted weak and sickely sheep; and your pastors,
hirelings. But the other part of your speech, that we are the sheep, that are
run astraie from Gods sheepfold, and our pastors are the ravening wolves:
we most constantly, in respect of our Religion, deny it: howsoever, with you,
we must be enforced to confess, that in respect of manners, there is fault, in
both. And therefore how boldly soever, you affirm this, seeing still you keep
your old woond, in having nothing to prove it, but your own bare words, our
denial of it, counteruaileth it well enough. You though you have granted your
selves, to be never so sick in manners, and have taught us, that Religion must
not be stained, and thought to be blemished, for the lewd lives of some, of
the professors; yet your stomach so ouerflowed (it seems) with choler
against us, and namely against that reverend father Theodore Beza; that you
could not be quiet, until you had cast it up, to ease your stomach a little.
You first tell us, that by experience, and reading of the stories of our
Martyrs, you are able to say so much of our lewd lives; as that we have not
much amended the faults that we find in you. And then you come to that, where
you long to be, to discredit Beza: to whose charge, you say sundry heinous
crimes, and that upon the report of Tilemannus Heshusius, a bitter and
intemperate enemy of his, for the question amongst us, for the manner of
Christ's presence, in the Sacrament. To the first, this issue I dare, and do
join with you in; whatsoever you have read, or seen of us, that we have read
and seen more monstrous and horrible sins* in the lives of your most holy
fathers, and Popes of Rome, then you are able to charge all that ever professed
our Religion withal. Was there ever like sauadge cruelty amongst us, one to
another, as I showed before, was amongst them, about Formosus? Their pride has
appeared most monstrous, in treading upon Emperors necks, and otherwise
infinitely, in misusing of them; as I have at large showed Chapter sixteenth.
Their detestable sorcery, nicromancie, and poisoning one another, to come to
the Popedom, above the year one thousand, by Siluester the second and his
followers, set out by Benno a Cardinal, in the life of Hildebrand, is such as
we never read the like amongst the barbarous heathen. Their ambition to come
to that place, and their insatiable covetousness, when they have got it, has
pass, for thereby Christendom has been more troubled, with Schisms and
wars; and Christian kingdoms otherwise, have been more impouerished, for
these five or six hundredth years: then by all other quarrels and occasions
incident whatsoever. Finally, for their filthy life, I am persuaded, that
there were few worse, in Sodom and Gomorrha, then sundry of them have been.
For Sixtus the fourth; in the year one thousand four hundredth seventy four,
builded stewe houses of both kinds: and not long after, Paul the third,
registered 45000. whors, that paid him monthly such a pension, that by the
year it came to 40000. ducats and more. And it was no small argument what
filthy fruits, their forced single life, both had and was likely to bring
forth: that in Gregory's time, in certain fishpondes, there were found 6000.
childrens heads. These things your own Croniclers, you know, do make so
clear, that now every one almost can name, and describe them, as they have
deserved. For mine own part, I am even loath to defile my paper, with the
names of such filthy wretches, as a number of them have been; and seeing the
notorious evidence of the thing is such, that you your self do not here deny,
but that diverse of them, have been lewd livers, and therefore, therein, you
have left them without defense, it is needless either to trouble my self, or
my Reader, any further, with the rauing in such a filthy dounghill.

To proceed therefore, you must remember, that you may neither draw argument
from your writers, of the lives and deaths, of our Martyrs, nor from Heshusius
an enemy to Beza, either against out Martyrs, or against him. For the report of
an enemy you know, is worthily suspected as partial. And as for that which
Heshusius objects to Beza, he had it from Baudwin and Bolsacke, and other such
impure and filthy enemies, and Apostataes: who to win credit again with you,
when for their misdemeanors, our Church had cast them of, cared not, what to
write, against Calvin and Beza, though they knew it to be never so stark a
lie. To whom, Heshusius (through heat of contention, carried to a desire, to
deface his adversary, with whatsoever he could) giving too light credit, as
the manner of me^ is to do but too too much in such cases, he wrote as he did.
As for his Epigrams, wherewith, he charge him, they were made when he was but
a youth of 16. or 17. years old, published by that he was 20. then with the
great liking of your selves. And all this was, before he was of our religion,
even whiles he was one of yours. And as he was yours, when he made them, so
since he was ours, he has diverse times himself, published his hearty
repentance for the same: and that in print, as in his preface before a tragedy
of Abraham's sacrifice, and in his preface before his poemes and epigrams, with
thirty Psalms of David, reuised and corrected, and else where in his works.
And therefore for those, the discredit is rather yours, then ours. But if he
had continued in your side, if he had gone as far as ever did any, not only
in writing filthy poemes, but also in Sodomitry, and whoredom it self; all
had been well enough. For of such, you have had good store, and yet in good
credit with you. For besides that diverse of your Popes, as namely Clement the
8, Paul the 3, and Julius the third, were all notoriously infamous in the
stories for their most filthy life: Johannes Casa your Popes Legate and an
Archbishop in your Synagogue wrote a book in the praise of Sodomitry, printed
in the year 1549, at Venice, which book since, some of you, to show what
liking you had of it, have newly published, beutified with most execrable and
filthy pictures, to set out that sin withal. And Petrus Aloysius
notwithstanding that most monstrous, and impudent Sodomitry of his committed by
force, in the sight of his men; (as both Vergerius and Sleidan report out of
certain Italian stories) upon the body of Cosmuscherius bishop of Fane, a man
then, of 30. years old at the least; was dear and highly esteemed in the
eyes of his filthy, adulterous, and incestuous father Pope Paulus the third.
And for the other point, touching Beza his wife, certain it is, that she was
an honest woman, and of good report, when he married her, and since always
Christianity has behaved her self; as becommed an honest matron^, for any
thing that I ever could either hear or read, worthy of any credit, to the
contrary. And who but they that have made a shipwreck of all shame and
honesty, would ever have broched such a monstrous untruth as this, that he
ran away with her, she being an other man's wife, to Geneua, her husband yet
living? Beza himself, in that preface that I named last of his, protests not
only the falsehood of this, but says further, that if any mortal creature
can justly touch him, with the least and lightest suspicion of adultery, he
refuses no seat of judgment* And if there were any ground of truth ^n this,
is it likely yt this matter would never have been prosecuted against him in no
court of France, or elswher, he having so many enemies? Nay, we may be sure yt
if there had been any truth, either in this, or in any such thing now said
against him, he had heard of it at Poysy. One Papist (as Parsons a father
Jesuit) telling the tale, says, she dwelt in Calendar street; and Frarin
an other, in his railing oration, says, she dwelt in Harp street: if
Daniel were alive and sat in judgment, these fellows, agreeing no better
then the two wicked judges did, in their accusing of Susanna; were like to have
(and well worthy were they) the judgment that those two wicked judges had. But
in the mean time, with patience we must possess our souls committing our
cause to God (who one day will be avenged of such lying and flaunderous tongues)
and that never looking for other, but that the Devil, as he has been a lier,
from the beginning, and a false accuser of Gods servants: so he will continue,
and show himself in his instruments, unto the worlds end. Though you have no
other ground, but the report of an enemy, which he gave forth upon the report
of most malicious persons, and otherwise diverse ways infamous, for all this
your devilish slander of Beza, which evidence you knew well enough is stark
naught: you yet proceed to your conclusion that he was such a man; yea, that
thereby we may see, that the principal pillars of our Church, are bawdes,
thieues, and adulterers, as confidently as if your evidence had been most
strong. Wherein, your fault is not only that your argument holds not, taken
from no better grounds, against the particular man himself; but that also you
reason from the fault of one, to all the chief pillars of our Church: and so
you put a great deal more, in your conclusion, then was in the premises,
which in reasoning is an intolerable fault. And if a man should reason in like
manner, Pope John the 12. was an adulterer: John the 13. was slain committing
it; John the 18. put to death, and both his eyes put out, by the means of
Gregory about it; pope Clement the 6. caused to be poisoned (as so^e write)
Lodouick the Emperor; Siluester ye second, was a notable coniurer, Vrbanus
drowned five of his dearest Cardinals: (though your own Cronicles testify
these) therefore al your Popes, the very heads of your church, were such;
would you allow of such an argument? I am sure you would not, and yet has it
an 100. times better ground, and reason in it, then yours. As yet therefore for
any thing you have said, the beam is in your own eyes; and so you are not
fit persons to go about to get the moate out of ours, before you have cleansed
your own better.

The XLII. Chapter.
YOU that can say so well, that one ought to live according to the scripture,
and that you will by it reform us, why do ye not begin with your selves,
to give us the We doe^ and yet when we have done what we can, there will be some
amongst us whom you may too justly charge with these and other sins, because
always there will be some hypocrites and time-seruers, but seeing we do by
our religion condemn such vsages, and those that embrace our religion in
sincerity, condemn these sins and abstain from them, neither we, nor our
religion are to be charged with them.
better example. From whence come so many kind of vsuries and excessive
interests, as you do use? You call our church abominable and adulterous. He
that is among you without sin, let him cast the first stone. You do abhor
our idols (as you term them, talking of our images) how comes it to pass
then, that some of yours should come so near us that are Idolaters, as to
rob our Churches, and to carry away the images and relics, and to go and
sell them in other places? But now to make an end of this discourse, although
it were so, that your works were the best of the world, yea, wholly without
spot or sin (as some of If any so affirm, we renounce them, they are none of us.
you do affirm) yet were not they sufficient to move us to change our
Religion, nor to forsake that that our forefathers have taught us: for although
it be so, that our savior Christ was as just and as innocent as any ca^ be,
has been, or ever shall be, yet neither his holy life, nor the Scriptures
that he did allege, to prove his coming by the authority of the Prophets,
nor the testimony of S. John Baptist: all these things together were not
sufficient to persuade the Jews to forsake their old laws, and to receive the
Gospel, without the testimony of the great Neither would they believe, when
he had wrought his miracles, no more would you, if we should.
miracles that he did in their presence. He does confess this plainly, where
he says: if Ioh. 15. And so he says, if I had not spoken unto the^, they
should not have had sin, but now they have no cloak for their sin. v. 22.
I had not done in their presence the works and miracles that never any had
done, they should have no sin. This sentence is most notable and worthy to
be graven in the hearts of all Catholics, to assure their consciences which
are troubled with such diversity of opinions. For although it were so, that
you, my masters, were the honestest men of the world, sent from God to teach
and preach a true doctrine, yet should we be excusable before God for not
receiving of your commission, even as the Jews had been for not receiving of
our savior Christ, It was expressly prophesied, that when the Messiah should
come, he should work such works, and therefore it was necessary, that he
should work them, and herein he had privilege and prerogative beyond all men:
the like is not prophesied, that preachers of the gospel should do always, and
therefore this is required at our hands, without all reason. And yet therefore
we have not more privilege but less, the^ Christ.
if he had not done so many miracles. For we know no cause, why you should be
more privileged then Christ. And seeing that you have showed nothing to verify
it this way, and that the Scriptures, make no mention of your vocation, nor
you show no miracles, and that your lives are at the least as ill as ours:
Thus to threate^ you we may boldly and without shame, because we are able to
prove our doctrine by the scriptures, to be the same, that Christ taught and
confirmed with his miracles.
what moves you to be so bold and so vnshamefaced, as to threaten us with
eternal damnation, if we receive not your heretical doctrine, the which is so
full of discords and divisions, that one may easily gather by this, from
whence it came, and whither it does lead one, although ye have nothing in
your mouths, but the Gospel and the word of the Lord? And as Whosoever reads
that tract of Augustine, shall find the Manichees, to whom he speaks, far
like^ you then us.
S. Augustine said unto your semblables, Sola personat apud vos veritatis
pollicitatio. I would you would go on with Augustine and say, if that be found
with you, it is more worth then all the rest, and that you would be contented to
try that, by the scriptures, as he was, and then you would sure, so many of you
as have any grace, quickly join with us.
I say no more at this time, but that I beseech God to draw you as near to
us, as you are far from us, and to inspire your minds to turn to the flock
of Christ, the which, both to your own harm and ours you have forsaken.

The XLII. Chapter.
THere is no question of that, but that every one is to begin first to reform
himself: and the Lord give both us, and you grace, effectually so to do. But
if neither side should call upon the other for reformation, until the one side
were grown wholly clear of sin: you know well enough, that then they must
never do it. For what company and society of men ever was there, but therein
was some bad, as well as good? As Adam had an Abel, so had he a Caine. There
was an Ismael, as well as an Isaac, in Abraham's house. And Isaac had an Esau,
as well as a Jacob. Amongst the eight that were saved in the Arc, there was a
Cham. In the four that left Sodom, one that looked back. And amongst Christ's
12. Apostles there was a Judas. Yea, Christ has taught us, by the parable of
the good seed, and tares Math. 13. that we are to expect no other in Gods own
field, but that even unto the harvest there will be a mixture always, of bad
with good. But you charge us further that amongst us, there are many kind of
vsuries, and interests; and that though one way, we care not for your images,
yet we love them so well an other way; that we have robbed your churches of
them. Whereunto, my answer is, that we cannot deny, but there are too many
amongst us, who by such unlawful means, seek to enrich themselves; and that
there are too too many profane, and carnal men, that have our religion in
their mouths, who by their lewd conversation, dishonor the glorious gospel
of Jesus Christ: and we are most heartily sorry for it, and daily pray unto God,
for amendme^t thereof. But this we must tell you, that we preach against al
sin and impiety whatsoever; and namely, against usury and al tumultuous and
disorderly spoiling of churches of such things as you talk of. And our
Religion, and the laws in our common weal condemn and disalow such dealing,
and therefore we are wronged, that in these things, we generally, or our
religion at al, should be charged. Surely many of our usurers and extreme
dealing men amongst us, are either men of no Religion, or yours, rather then
ours: neither do I think where your Religion is in greatest credit, that in
those commonweals, usury lies dead and buried. Sure I am, your Popes have
been for a long time, the cunningest and vnreasonablest usurers in the whole
world; in that they have sold their palles, their lead, and other their
hallowed ware, which are indeed trifles, and things of no valewe, for such
sums of money and gold, as they have.

You flatly slander us, in saying, that there are some of us, that affirm, we
are wholly without spot or sin. For we both detest that opinion, and count
them that should hold so, even worthy to be detested for their so holding. Yet
you say; if it were so, that ought not to move you, to leave your religion
taught you by your forefathers. What a sound ground of Religion, forefathers
without distinction is, I have showed sufficiently already. In which point I
would always have the Christian to learn, to distinguish, betwixt the old
and ancient forefathers, the Apostles, and their successors in doctrine and
life, in the primitive church; and the later forefathers; and never to think
the latter worthy following any further, then they have followed the former,
and then the danger of this dart is avoided. And that it is reason, we should
follow them no further, we may learn in that Paul himself 1. Cor. 11.
requires no further to be followed then he followed Christ. But you have a
further reason, not to be moved from your Religion, for our life, were it never
so Godly; because Christ, though he was without sin, and confirmed his
doctrine, both by the ancient scriptures, and John Baptists testimony: yet he
said, that if he had not done in their presence, the works and miracles, that
never man did before him; they had had no sin, John 15.24. For hereof, you
gather, that you may securely, whatsoever we say unto you, or howsoever we
live, refuse us and our Religion; and continue in your own still, as long as
we prove not the lawfulnes of our vocation, and the goodness of our Religion by
miracles. For you know no cause (you say) why we should be more privileged
then Christ. This argument you urged before cap. 30. and there I answered it.
Where I have showed you, amongst diverse other reasons, that there was this
especial reason, that Christ should work such miracles as he did; to prove
himself the Messiah: because expressly the Prophets had prophesied, that he
so should when he came: which reason you cannot show, why now we should work
miracles. For the Prophecies that were given forth by Paul 2 Thessalonians. 2. and by
John, Revel. 14. of the consumption of Antichrist and fall of Babylon, show
only, that the Lord would do it, by the spirit of his mouth, in the
preaching of the everlasting Gospel. That therefore is it only, that we are
to approve our selves by, to be the men, that the Lord will use to that
purpose. And yet herein we take not upon us, greater privilege then Christ.
For we account that an especial privilege of his, that he was so to confirm
his doctrine by miracles; as that, after the confirmation of it, so by him, and
his Apostles; and the recording of it in the new Testament, as it is; it should
thenceforth stand so firm, that it should be an intolerable sign of
incredulity; amongst them especially, that pretend they reverence, and receive
the scriptures, as you would seem to do: ever to require miracles more, to
confirm the same doctrine by. You were not best therefore to persuade your
selves in this sort, ye howsoever it be with your religion otherwise, yet you
shall be at the least without blame, for your not receiving of ours, because we
work no miracles. Deceive not your selves. It is not with you now in respect of
us, and our doctrine, as it was then with the Jews, in respect of him* and
his. Then, that he was the particular person of the Messiah, and that therefore
he being come, the ceremonies of Moses law, should cease, and give place to his
sacraments etc: was a thing to be proved, and that by miracles; because it was
before prophesied: whereas now those things long ago, have been sufficiently
confirmed, and therefore, we preaching unto you no other doctrine, but that, so
already confirmed; and requiring no further to be credited, then we can so
prove our doctrine; especially, seeing the prophecies concerning these later
days, show rather, y^ Antichrist and his Chaplains shall come, and seek to
prevail by miracles, then the Lords faithful pastors: you have no such
reason, as they had, nor indeed any at all, to require miracles at our hands.

But you say unto us, as Augustine said unto the Manichees, contra epist.
Fundam. cap. 4. sola personat apud vos veritatis pollicitatio: with you there
is no other sound, but promise that you have the truth. Whereunto add the
words that immediately follow, and you are answered. For he adds; which yet if
you can make appear, is so clear of your side, that it may not be doubted of:
is to be preferred, before all those things, that otherwise hold me in the
Catholic Church. Be you of this mind once with Augustine, and then learn
this one other lesson of him, do vnitate ecclesiae, contra Petil. cap. 3. Nolo
humanis documentis, sed diuinis oraculis ecclesiam demonstrari: I will not have
demonstration made of the church, by humane documents, but by the divine
oracles. And so say unto us, as he said there unto Petilian; let us seek the
Church, and so discuss our cause by the scriptures: behold, they are common
unto us both; behold, there we have known Christ: behold, there we have
known the church etc. Take this course once with us, and I doubt not,
whatsoever you brag to the contrary; but we shall thereby be able, to justify
both our vocation, and Religion; and to make it appear, that we have not only
a brag of truth, with you and the Manichees, but the very truth it self.
And this being proved, the^ you must yield with Augustine, that it is to be
preferred, before all other outward things whatsoever, that have kept you
hitherto, in an other Religion, and church: yea, then you must confess,
notwithstanding all your objections otherwise against us, of nouelty, paucity,
iars in opinion, and whatsoever else: yet it is your duties to join with us,
in receiving of this truth. Wherefore unless you will let all other bie
matters go, and enter once into this question with us, in earnest; whether your
Religion or ours be the truth; and for the trial thereof, will stand to the
scriptures interpreted according to the sound, and always used rules of
interpreting them; color your refusing thus to do, with what colors possibly
you can, you too too grossly be wray the badnesse of your cause: and evidently
show, that you only seek shifts, hoales, and corners, to escape as long as
you may, the discredit thereof. And your own friends will they, nill they,
shall be enforced to see the same.

You conclude with prayer, that we may draw as near you, as we are far from
you: and that we may turn to the flock of Christ, the which, both to your hurt
and our own (you say) we have forsaken. Insteede of Amen, to yours, I beseech
the Lord of all mercies, and father of our Lord Jesus Christ, that it would
please him, of his infinite goodness and mercy, even for his dear son Jesus
sake; to open the eyes of your minds, and so to touch your hearts, as that you
may have grace, with us, to come out of Babylon, and to leave that garish whore
of Rome, with all her abominations, and so to join with us, in the true
communion of Saints, and fellowship of the truth, and spirit, that both you
and we may dwell together, as brethren, in one house; agree and grow together,
as members of one body; and rest together, as sheep of one flock; under one
father, God almighty, and under one head, and shepherd Christ Jesus; through
the mighty working of the holy Ghost, to Gods glory, and our own everlasting
comfort. Amen.

FINIS.
A short answer to a new offer, not published at the first, when D. Fulke and
Master Carter answered the 22. demands, whereunto it is now annexed: the ground
and matter whereof is, an enumeration of six certain and assured signs and
tokens (as the offerer calls them) of Antichristians, false prophets,
heretics and schismatiques, mentioned in diverse places of the scripture.
COncerning these six signs (well-beloved) this is his offer, that if by the
learned protestant they can be proved, more aptly and truly to agree to him,
and his fellows, of the common known catholic church of Christ, the^ unto
the protestants of so many, sundry and diverse sects, and congregations, that
then he will submit, yield and recant, and not before. Learned protestant I
take my self to be none, howbeit, finding, as I did, when I took first in
hand to answer John de Albines former discourse, that the publisher thereof,
had therewithal published, not only the offer of a proud papist, to a learned
protestant, consisting of 22. challenges or demands, long ago answered by the
men above named, but also with this new addition of these six signs; and then
not understanding, though it had been thus abroad many years amongst us in
English, that any learned or unlearned had vouchsafed to answer it, though I
thought it needles to answer again the offer of 22. demands, so well answered
by the foresaied me^ before, that the author thereof, never since had pleasure
to reply, I thought it yet not amiss, unto my former answer to John de Albine,
to annex this short answer thereunto.

His first sign of such as he speaks of, he says is, their departure
from the common known catholic Church of Christ, wherein they were baptized,
and first received christian faith and religion, and this to be such a sign,
he proves out of the second chapter of S. John's first Epistle, where he
speaking of such, says, they departed from us, but they were not of us, for
if they had, they would still have continued with us. Whereupon he thinks, that
forasmuch (as he says) we cannot deny, but that we are the men that have
thus departed from their common known catholic Church, faith and religion,
wherein we were first baptized, and that we cannot say that they have so
departed from us, they still remaining in the same church, faith and Religion,
that they first received, that of necessity we must be enforced to grant, that
this sign agrees to us, and not to them. This (good Christian) that he has
said were of foam force, if he, any, or all his fellows together, were ever
able to prove, that they, their church, faith and Religion were such, as Saint
John spoke of, when he so taxed men for their departure therfrom: but seeing
only most beggarly all the pack of them, this being the maine question
betwixt them and us, always take this for granted them, even for their bold
impudent and importunate begging of it, which we will never grant them nor
they shall ever be able to win at our hands, all that he has said herein,
is childish and vain. For we are always most ready and willing to join this
issue with them, for and about all the controversies amongst us; that if we be
not able by due conference, of the Catholic and Apostolic doctrine, taught
by the Apostles and Apostolic men, in the primitive church, testified and
extant in their own undoubted writings, with ours, that we are of the same
common known Catholic Church, faith and Religion, that they were, and that
the Romish Church in the things, wherein we differ from them, is clean
departed from them, and from the church of Christ, her faith and Religion that
then was: that then we will (as he says) most willingly submit our selves,
yield and recant. And I hope in answering of John de Albine, upon occasion, in
sundry places, I have so showed the agreeableness of our faith and Religion
with the Apostles, and the manifold disagreements of the Church of Rome, that
now is, from them, and the ancient church of Rome, planted by them, as that
every one, even thereby, sufficiently may see, that not we, but they, are the
men, that Saint John spoke of, that have departed from the true Church of
Christ, faith, and Religion; and that therefore this sign does so far
better agree to Papists then to us, that if this offerer will be as good as his
word, he must presently submit himself, yield and recant. In the mean
time, the manifest contrariety betwixt their doctrine and Christ's, and his
Apostles, made manifest unto us by the view of ye scriptures themselves, and
the notorious difference betwixt their churches practice now, and the ancient
churches of Rome for six hundredth years after Christ at the least, made
likewise evident unto us by all sound monuments of antiquity, have assured us,
that in respect of them, and their Romish Synagogue, in these later days (to
embolden us to do as we have) God from heaven by an Angel said unto us, go
out of her my people, least you be pertakers of her sins, and so receive of
her punishments. Apoc. 18. verse. 4. And therefore as it was lawful for
Abraham, to follow the Lords calling, Gen 12. to depart out of his own
country Chaldea, and to forsake the abhominatio^ thereof; as it was wisdom
for Lot, at the admonition of the Angels, to go out of Sodom, Genesis 19. and as
it was necessary, that Christ and his, should separate themselves from the high
Priests, Scribes, and Pharisees, and their errors and superstitions, though
they then, and their followers bragged that they were the people of God and his
church: so was it meet and requisite for us, to depart, as we have, from their
Popish church, and the popery thereof. And as for our receiving our baptism
amongst them, that binds us no more to hold communion with the^ still, in their
false and erroneous religion, then the receiving of circumcision bound Christ
and his Apostles, and those of the Jews that believed by their doctrine, to
continue fellowship with the blind and superstitious synagogue of the hard
hearted Jews or the receiving of baptism in former times at the hands of the
ancient heretics the Arria^s, or any other such like, bound the^ that were
baptized by such, y^ they might not separate themselves from such, to return
home again to the true catholic church of Christ. Again, if they think
that men are bound always to live and die in that Religion, whereof they were,
that baptized them, why do they labor by their Jesuits and seminaries to
seduce to their Religion, such as we have baptized? But yet to touch them more
nearly, for all this brag of their still continuing in the faith and Religion
they first received, let even their own Baptism, and their faith and Religion
that they after profess, be compared together, and the contrary will appear.
For they being al baptized in the name only of the Father, the Son and the
holy Ghost, as it is well known they are, thereby they are bound only to
believe in this Trinity in Unity, and Unity in Trinity, and yet afterward
all the sort of them, notwithstanding the Apostles Creed, and all other
ancient Creeds teach them the same, become plain apostataes from this faith,
in believing in a number, both of persons and things, that without blasphemy
they cannot count either God the Father, God the Son, or God the holy Ghost.
Proof and most palpable demonstration hereof is their belief in their own
merits, merits of others, Popes pardons, hallowed water and other hallowed
things, and their belief in, and therefore praying unto, Saints and Angels. In
ye wonderful providence of God doubtless, this form of baptism, and these
creeds were preserved and continued amongst the^, not only to make it even
thereby evident (whatsoever any of the^ brag to the contrary never so often) that
they are ye men yt daily depart both from the faith of Christ, first taught
them and their forefathers, and after particulerly in their baptism confirmed
to every one of them: but also to make the^ before both God and man, without
all excuse; of their so gross apostasy from the same, notwithstanding. Whereas
they know, and all the world else, yt knows us, know, yt we simply continue in
this faith, first delivered vntd us briefly by ye holy catholic church in
these creeds, and daily sealed unto us in our baptism, and that even for that
it is, that we are so hated, and persecuted of them, that with them we will not
run out from this church and faith, to believe in a 1000. things that are not
God, as they do. And therefore, these things considered, by this note they are
proved to be the Antichristian false prophets, heretics, and schismatiques,
that he speaks of, and not we.

His second sure mark, sign and token of false prophets etc. is (says he)
that they being departed from the catholic church, do of themselves, and of
their own authority, without warrant, being not sent, set up a new gospel, a
new faith and Religion, and so by preaching a new doctrine, assemble and set
up a new church and congregation. And to prove this, Heb. 5. Romans 10. and
Exodus 4. are quoted, whence only we may learn to this purpose, that none may
take upon them an office in Gods house, without lawful calling and warrant
from him. Yet hereupon, as though these were most pregnant places to prove,
that to be necessary to a lawefull calling, which the learned protestant can
never prove to be in our calling, he promises likewise to yield, and to
recant, when we shall be able to prove our just and due vocation, ordinarily
or extraordinarily, to proceed of God and not only of me^. By his own words,
in describing this note or mark, two things must concur to the making of it,
namely, the preaching of a new Religion or Gospel, and the doing of it
without a just and due vocation from God: and yet in the proving it to be such
a mark, and in the applying it to us, he forgets altogether the former, and
makes only show of proof for the later. Belike his own conscience told him,
that howsoever it was an easy matter to insinuate, that our religion was new,
that yet he was not able so much as to make any show, that he could prove it so
to be indeed. And touching the other, howsoever the places quoted by him, serve
to prove a lawful calling or sending by God to be necessary for and to all
such, as shall take any office upon them in his Church, yet they prove not at
al, that there is any thing needful to the proving of our vocation to be such,
wanting in ours, neither does he name any thing required in any of these
places to be in ours, which he could say we wanted: which it is likely he would
not have omitted to have done, if he had seen, that with any probability he
might have done it. And therefore any man may see, that even in this sign (as
in the former) his only ground is a false supposition, that those things must
needs be granted him all, which both most justly and confidently we always
deny. For without any proof or shadow of proof, he in one periode assumeth
three things against us, most untruly and slanderously, (as at large in sundry
places of my answer to Albine I have made it manifest) namely, that we are
gone out of the true catholic Church, that we have set up a new faith and
religion, and that we have assembled a new Church and congregation Yea
(christian reader) if thou would but vouchsafe, by the table annexed unto
this answer of mine, to turn to the places in the said answer, where these
points be handled, the antiquity of our church and religion, the newnes of
popery, and the contrariety betwixt the Romish church, that now is, and ye
scriptures, fathers and councels, in the true catholic church of Christ, and
the lawfulnes of our calling to the ministry and the unlawfulness of their
priesthood and vocation thereunto; and unto other prelacies amongst them, and
when thou have found them, to read over without partiality, what I have written
hereof, I doubt not but thereby thou would see, not only, that he unjustly
has here charged us with these three faults, but ye most justly we may charge
the^ with the^ al. And therefore thereunto referring thee for further answer unto
this threefold charge of his in this place, upon that which there thou shall
find (I hope) with me thou will conclude, that this being a mark and a most
certain sign of antichristian heretics (as he says) yt it stands fair
upon the^, and not upon us, and therefore he should reca^t.

The third sign and toke^, yt the offerer talks of, is, that such, over and
above the properties touched in the two former, do preach and teach
contentiously and seditiously, against the doctrine before time, taught of the
common known Catholic Church of Christ, as namely (says he) against the
sacraments of Christ's Church by a flat denial of many of the^, against the real
presence of Christ's body in the holy eucharist, against the blessed sacrifice
of the mass propitiatory both for the live and the dead, against penance and
the worthy fruits thereof, by fasting, watching, and prayer and al straightnes
of life, against vows, invocation of Saints, prayer for souls departed, and
finally against the Church it self, flatly denying, that Christ has here upon
earth any spouse or visible Church to be heard speak, perceived or seen. The
ground of which sign, he makes that saying Hebrews 13, be you not carried away
with diverse and strange doctrines: so termed of the Apostle (as he expounds
him) because they agree not, but are contrary to the received and common known
doctrine of Christ's holy catholic Church: whereupon he grows to his
conclusion, that when the learned protestant shall be able to prove, that they
and not we, are by our preaching of these strange doctrines the raisers up of
these strifes and contentions, then he will recant and not before. Whereunto I
answer, that understanding by the common known catholic Church, the true
Church of Christ, which is known and acknowledged so to be always of him and
his faithful members, then we grant that this is a right mark of such as he
would have it to be a mark of, and that worthily in the thirteenth of the
Hebrews, all men are warned to take heed, that they be not carried away with
diverse and strange doctrines, from that, which she has universally taught and
received. But so taking the common known catholic Church of Christ* and not
otherwise, I say it, and have proved it in my answer to Albine, that the
Church of Rome, that now is, has too long and does still, not only
co^tentiously and seditiously, but also furiously, tirannically, bloudely, and
every way antichristianly, preach against the doctrine before time taught by
her, and commonly received and professed by hers, touching the true use of the
law and the gospel, the office of Christ and faith in him, the doctrine of
faith and works, and of prayer and the sacraments, and almost of all other
principal points of the true Christian religion. And thus I am sure he must
understand the church of Christ, if either he would have this to be a certain
sign of heretics, or to be thought rightly to have expounded the 13. to the
Hebrews. And therefore understanding by the common known catholic Church of
Christ, that which he should, this mark is evident upon them, and not upon us.
But if by the common known catholic church of Christ, that he talks of
here and always else, he understand (as it is apparent that he does) their
Roman church that now is, most beggarly still he beggeth that alms, that
never an honest and wise man in the world would give him. For in all these
points here named by him, that Synagogue a long time has taught, and does
still, so contrary to the true and chaste spouse of Christ, that though nether
seditiously nor contentiously, yet vehemently and earnestly, it is the part of
all skillful, painful and faithful ministers of the Lord, to cry out against
her, and her so doing. And thus only have we and do we, labor to manifest
unto the world their corruption in doctrine in these points, least thereby to
their perdition, they should be seduced by them. Otherwise, whatsoever he
says, neither he nor all his faction, shall ever he able to prove against us,
that we either deny any thing, or hold otherwise of any point here reckoned up
by him, then we have most sound and good warrant for, both out of the
scriptures, and out of the ancientest and soundest monuments of antiquity. But
where as he says, that we flatly deny that Christ has here upon earth any
spouse, or visible church to be heard speak, perceived or seen, he
shamefully and untruly reports y^ of us. Only concerning the visibility or
not visibility of. Christ's church, this we hold and teach, that who be the
right members thereof, whereof properly she does consist, it is not
discerneable by humane sense, but known only unto God, and unto those to whom
God gives spiritual senses to discern it withal: but if otherwise by the
church of Christ here upon earth, be understood generally all those that by
outward profession seem unto men to be thereof, then we hold and confess,
that Christ has always had here upon earth, since the beginning, and will have
to the end, a visible spouse and church to be both heard speak, perceived and
seen, though not always alike, nor of al sorts and kind of men, as I have
showed at large in the first and fourth chapters of my answer to Albine. The
only thing that we deny is, that it always has been, and ever must be so
visible and apparent, both for multitude and government, that every one should
be able thereby not only to discern it, but from time to time, down from
Christ to the end of the world, to name the principal persons, by whose
orderly succession one to another without interruption, it has been continued in
one place or other. Now hereupon to infer, that we simply deny it to be heard,
seen or perceived, argues, that they that do so, are grown so gross, that
they can neither hear, see nor perceive, that there is any difference betwixt
the manner of being of a thing; and the simple being thereof. John, that never
taught that the Church of Christ here upon earth should neither be heard, seen
or perceived, yet teaches Re. 12. yt she would be driven by persecution of the
dragon, into the wilderness, where for a time, in comparison that she was
before, she should be hidden. Christ, yt has taught us, that hell gates shall
never prevail against his church Mat. 16. yet foresheweth, that toward his
second coming, true faith should hardly be found upon earth Luke 18. And do
we not read 2 Thessalonians. 2. and 1. Timothy 4. to that end, that before that
day, there shall be a great departing from the faith, which by that which we
read Revelations 17 and 18. we may understand shall be so great and so far
prevail, that the whore of Babylon, there figuring unto us Antichrist and his
kingdom, shall have universality and all outward pomp that may be, so on her
side, that she shall make kings and people, yea all nations, drunk with the
wine of her fornications. During the fulfilling of which prophesies, if it be
hard for some, either to hear or see the Church, or to understand where she
is, so that they cannot name the persons successively, that she consists of,
no marvel. For distance of time and place, and ignorance, or unfaithfulness
in Croniclers, joined with a special care, that Antichrist would always, by
all likelyhoode have, to keep from men, all means to make the^ to have
knowledge of these things, least thereby in the end he should fall into his
co^sumption; in respect of sundry former times and us that live now, might make
this impossible. And yet he that should say so, does not simply say, as he
here charge us. But Gods name be blessed for it, the Church yet, was never so
driven into the wilderness by the dragon, or oppressed by Antichrist, but as I
have showed in my fourth Chapter of my foresaied answer to Albine, some have
so heard, seen and perceived where she was, and who were her true members at
al times, that there was never time or state of the Church so bad, but yt we
are able to name some of her friends and where they lived or died in the
profession of her truth against antichristian abominations. As for ye other
points here reckoned up by him (gentle reader) though he would make thee
believe yt they are such, as in every point (as they teach the^ now) have
always before been taught of the true Catholic church of Christ, it is
nothing so: as in great part I have showed in answering of Albine, and as
others thoroughly and universally have showed of them all, in several books
written against them, for their Antichristian doctrine therein. Howbeit least by
his words, in the mean time whiles thou gettest leisure, to peruse what we
have written, concerning these points, thou should conceive worse of our
doctrine, the^ in any show we deserve: understand, that we preach against none
of Christ's sacraments, neither do we deny any sacrament of his, in that sense
to be a sacrament, that he appointed it, neither do we deny Christ's real,
true and most certain presence in the eucharist, to the soul of ye right
receiver, only a gross presence of his body, to the mouth of every receauer,
fancied by the^ contrary both to scripture and the nature of a sacrament, and
of Christ himself, is the presence that there we deny. Indeed we as zealously
as we can, preach against their mass, denying it to be any propitiatory
sacrifice, either for quick or dead, much less for both, because we have
learned out of the epistle to the Hebrews, that only Christ is consecrate of
his father, as the fit Priest of the new testament, in his own person once for
all, to offer propitiatory sacrifice for the redemption of mankind, and that we
learn by the words of the institution of this sacrament, that it was never
instituted, to repeat that, but with faith and thanksgiving to make a
commemoration thereof, and rather to offer and deliver Christ to us, the^ to
offer him again to his father. If by penance, he understand repentance, we
neither preach against it nor against any worthy fruit thereof. For we most
earnestly call for both, but if by penance, be understood, either voluntary or
enjoined penance (as they commonly take it) joined with an opinion, thereby
either to satisfy for sins past, or to merit at Gods hand, because we know,
that such penance, and all the fruits thereof are abominable before God,
because thereby Christ is robbed of that honor of a full and perfect savior,
in and by himself alone, that is due unto him, then we grant (as we have just
cause) we preach against it. Otherwise, fasting, straightnes of life, watching,
and lawful vows, to make us more ready and fervent in holy prayer, we commend
and urge. Indeed praying to Saints, because we have neither example,
commandment, nor promise in Gods book to encourage us thereunto, but all to
the contrary, we condemn as gross idolatry: and likewise prayer for souls
departed, as they use it, to relieve fowls in purgatory, for the same reasons,
and sundry other, we preach against. But what we teach of these two points, and
what not, and what reasons we have for our so doing, and how quite void they
be of all ground for theirs, I refer thee to the 37 Chapter of my answer to
Albine, where I have at large, showed these things. And thus much therefore for
this 3 sign.

The next is, to bring a schism into the Church, contrary to Paul's exhortation
1. Cor, 1. and that such a schism, as whereby, not only one member shall be
separated from an other, but the whole mystical body from the true head Christ
Jesus: which we to have done, in seperating our selves from their Church, and
not they, he assumeth, and so concludes when the learned protestant can show
the contrary, that he will recant and not before. Still thus thou may see
(good reader) that this man is no changling. For unless that be granted him,
which is the maine point betwixt us, that their Church is the true Church of
Christ, and their doctrine the sound catholic faith and religion, he has no
ground or foundation, for any thing he says. For he cannot be so ignorant as
to imagine, that every one straight is author of such a schism, as he here
speaks of, that by doctrine draws others from every society or company,
inuesting themselves with the name of the Church, and bragging that they have
the truth. For what would he then make of Christ and his Apostles, who in
their time drew so many after them from holding any longer co^m^^tion with the
Synagogue of the Jews, that then, I am sure, bragged as confidently of both
these, as this man and his fellows do now? Or what would he say to those
ancient catholics after Liberius time, that when Arrianisme had in great part
over run the world, and the Arrians for many years together bragged themselves
to be the only (...) catholics, disgracing the^ that were so indeed with the
name of Omousians, that yet, (though they had got both bishops and emperors so
many and so fast of their opinion, that they had in ten several councels go
sentence of their side) ceased not laboring and traueling, until they had
drawn men again to break from them, and to join with the poor persecuted
and contempt the number, that then yet persecuted in the truth? I am sure they
(...) not for shame for all this, count either Christ and his Apostles, or
these ancient catholics; antichristian heretics or schismatiques. And our
drawing of me^ by our doctrine now, in these later days from them, is nothing
else in truth, but an imitating, as nigh as we can, these renoumed and
undoubted good presidents and examples, that so, the kingdom of Antichrist
according to Saint Paul's prophecy, might fall into consumption 2.
Thessalonians, 2 and that great Babylon might yet at length (as it was revealed
unto Ioh. Revelations cap. 14.) fall and come down. For not only we saw, that
the Church of Rome had made a schism, but such an apostasy, even in the
fundamental points of Christian religion, from Christ and his Church, that
there was no remedy, but that we must break of from her, as we did, or else we
could never have communion indeed in Christ with his true Church. Though
therefore we know, and at the first knew, that peace, unity, and concord, were
precious things, and by all lawful means to be labored for, yet knowing
withal, as we do, and did, that it is unity in verity, and not in error and
impiety, with Christ and not with Antichrist, that is so much to be set by, blame
us not, for choosing rather according to these good examples, to have war with
men, then with God, and discord with Antichrist and al hes bread, then with Christ
and his members. We grant them therefore, that to bring into the Church, such a
schism, as shall make division not only amongst Christ's members, but also of
the body from the head, is indeed an undoubted sign of antichristian
heretics: but whereas he takes this for granted, that this we have done, in
departing from the^ as we have: that we deny. For we teach men to hold, and
hold our selves; that faith and religion (as we are always ready to prove by
the canonical scriptures of the old and new testament) that always the true
Church of Christ has held, and therefore which when hardly both holds the
lively members amongst themselves is unity, and also knitteth the^ and their
head Christ so fast together, as that no popish or antichristian tyranny, shall
ever be able to sever them. And howesoeuer this proud challenge^ thought with ^^
impossible thing for the learned protestant, to prove that they have brought
into the Church, such a schism as he speaks of, I the vnlearnedst often
thousand, doubt not, that I am very well able to do it. For this is most
certain and clear, Jesus Christ the Savior of the world indeed, is at this
point, being every way so able and willing as he did, in his own person, and
by himself alone, to go through with the office of a most perfect Savior of
mankind, that either so he must be believed in, and trusted unto for that
matter, or else he takes himself antichristianlie robbed of that (...) and
glory, that is due unto him, and therefore will be no part of a savior at all
to such. That this is most true appears, because it is writed, that God is so
iealouse of his own honor and glory, that he will not abide, that any should
therein be pertaker with him, or rob him of any io^t thereof. Esaias. 42. that in
him all things are already prepared, Matthew the twenty two, that his name is
the only name whereby comes salvation, Acts. 4. that he is (...) and
(...), Reu. 1. that he is the author and finisher of our faith, Heb. 12. that
by one offering he has consecrated for ever those that are sanctified, Heb.
10. that he is able to save perfectly, those that come unto God by him, He. 7.
that as there is but one God, so there is but one mediator betwixt God and
man, the man Christ Jesus, 1. Tim. 2. and that S. Paul most confidently told
the Galathians, that if with that opinion that the false Apostles had taught
them they would be circumcised, Christ should profit them, nothing at all, they
were fallen from grace, Gal. 5. And yet notwithstanding, the most clear and
plain evidence of these scriptures, and sundry other places to the like
effect, so given is the church of Rome that now is, and has been a long time,
to spoil Christ of a great part of this special honor and glory, that is due
unto him, that it can abide nothing in the world worse, then that men should he
driven by the schoolmaster the law, out of themselves quite, in Christ fully
and freely, soly and wholly by faith, to seek for their justification here, and
salvation hereafter. And therefore in it, that in the deep policy of Satan,
to blunt the edge of the law, that it have not this force to break and make
contrite the heart of man, with the ougly sight of his own infinite sins and
punishments due unto him for the same, to drive him to hunger, and thirst after
that effectual justification and salvation, offered unto men by the gospel in
Christ, they teach that man has free will to good, that concupiscence or the
first motions to sin, rising in man not consented unto, are no sin, that
many sins, even for their own littlenes, are ve^iall, that by good deeds
man may satisfied God for his misdeedes, that man may fulfill the law, yea that
man may have works of supererogation, more then he needs for his own
salvation, and that men by their works may merit a great part of their own
salvation, yea have merits both before justification, flowing from their pure
natural faculties and powers, to provoke GOD to think it congruum, that is,
meet and convenient, that even therefore he should bestow his grace upon
them, and after merits de condigno, that eue^ for their very worthiness, deserve
an everlasting reward of bliss at Gods hand, both for themselves and others.
And when they would seem to be come unto Christ and to believe in him, yet in
no case, will they trust to him alone, and that that he has done and still
does for them, but then his sufferinges and their own, his merits and their
own, and their friends, his sacrifice and their own in their mass, his
mediation and the mediation of Saints and angels, and an hundredth things else,
even childish and rediculous, for the matter of salvation, must be trusted
unto. That it is thus, all the world sees, and they themselves in printed
books stand upon it, that it must be thus, and that we are heretics, because
we will not let them alone, in thus apparelling themselves, their friends, and
their toies, with the spoils of our Christ, and so their very glory, is their
shame. A Christ that is so base minded, in the office of justifying and saving
of men's souls, thus to be iumbled and joined, with so many partners and
helpers, is a Christ of their own devising, such an one doubtless, as we can
hear no news of, either in old or new testament. And therefore out of all
question, they shall find, that whiles they run a madding after this fansied
new Christ of their own, the old true Christ will profit them nothing at all,
and that they are quite fallen from grace. No man whose eyes God has opened
aright, either to understand the law or the gospel, but seeing and knowing
these things to be true of them, he must needs think and be resolved, that
popery is even that mystery of iniquity, that Saint Paul speaks of 2 Thessalonians.
2. and that the papists be flat, those flase teachers that Saint Peter speaks
of 2. Epistle chap. 3. Which privily should bring in damnable heresies, even
denying the Lord that has bought them, and so bring upon themselves swift
damnation, whom yet many should follow, and by whom the way of truth should
be evil spoken of etc. It is needful therefore, I would think, especialy
considering, how earnest Saint Peter is there to persuade men to shun such, for
us to leave them and forsake them, as we have: the thing which in this behalf
we have especially to mourn for, is, that we forsook them no sooner.

Howbeit, though the better to countenance their Church and religion, and to
prove us in thus forsaking of them, to have brought in such a schism, as he
talks of, he would make thee (christian reader) believe, that all the world
were at unity with them in their faith and and false brag, as if thou read
the fourth chapter of my answer to Albine, and the 11. and 37. thou shall most
plainly see. It seems the man was very impudent, or very childishly ignorant
of histories, that would thus write. For who of any learning or reading is
ignorant, that not only the Greek church and other Eastern Churches, some
hundredth years before the time that he speaks of, brake of communion with
them, but that also, even here in these Western parts, in France, Bohemia,
here in England and elswher, long before this time, Petrus Valdus, John
Wickliffe, John Hus, and Hierom of Prage, had so many followers and pertakers,
against them and their abominations, that for all the tyranny and most savage
persecutions, that they have used to root them out by, from time to time, that
yet notwithstanding, they have continued, do and will still, in one place or
other, maugre all their malice, even to recompense that whore of Babylon, as
she has deserved at their hands? As for the variety of opinions amongst us,
that he vpbraydeth us withal, it is an objection, yt John de Albine often
harped upon, and therefore which in answering of him, I have sufficiently (I
hope) answered. Only this therefore to y^ I further say here, that though they
be more and greater then we like of, yet they are nether so great nor many, as
these our adversaries, by amplifying of this objection, and by multiplying of
names, would seem to make the^, nor yet in such points, but that
notwithstanding, we all agree in the fundamental and most principal points of
christian religion, whereby, we hope, it will through Gods goodness come to
pass, that we shall shortly also, grow to unity in the rest. In the mean time
sure I am, that they whom by any reason he may say be of us, for our holding
fellowship and communion together in our confession of the christian faith, are
all amongst our selves, at far more unity then such as he likes of, and at
far better unity, then they be or ever have been, since they departed from us.
As for the Anabaptists and diverse others whom sometime they charge us, in this
case also withal, they know well enough, we defy and detest the^, and their
frantic opinions, as much as any, and of all men we have been the forwardest,
in writing against them. And therefore they do us the more wrong, when at any
time, they aggrauate this objection against us, by charging us to have such
amongst us, whom thus we shun and mislike as well as they. Thus much therefore,
let suffice for answer to this fourth sign, and now let us proceed to the
next.

The next is, not to obey, but resist the Prelates of the Church, which he
would prove so to be by Paul's saying 2. Tim. 3. like as Iannes and ^ambres
resisted Moses, so do these resist the truth, being men of corrupt minds and
reprobates in faith, of which fault when the learned protestant can prove them
guilty, and us clear, he promises to recant. It seems the man in alleging
this text, did trust his memory too much, for twice he has written Ma^bres for
Ia^bres, but if that were all his fault here, it were a small matter. But here
again, according to his old wont, he must have it freely given and granted
him, for he brings nothing at all to prove it, that their Bishops and
Prelates are all such, as Moses and Paul was, yt is, faithful in teaching only
Gods people the truth. For unless this be yielded him, it neither may be granted
him, that he rightly applies his text, nor this sign against us. But he
knows well enough, and so do all the pack of the^, that we are so far from
being so prodigal in our gifts unto them, that we hold their prelates, bishops
and Priests, to be very Ia^nes and Iambres in resisting our Bishops and
ministers, in teaching the same truth, that they have learned of Moses and
Paul, and that therefore we think no better of them, then of men of corrupt
minds and reprobate in the faith. For which cause we are sure, we both may and
ought to disobey them, and resist them, as we do. For so we find, that Esaias,
Hieremy, Amos, Michaiah, Christ and his Apostles, in their times, refused to
obey, and resisted the false doctrine, of the false Prophets, and high Priests,
that the^ were. What a vanity is it therefore, in this man to trouble his
reader, with such cold and poor stuff as this is.

And truly he has no better hap in the last, then in any of the former.
For setting it down, that fickleness and slipperinesse of errors and
heresies, is a sign and sure token to bewray the authors thereof, and that the
catholic faith or truth, is likewise to be known, by the constant stability
thereof, he says that which we grant to be very true, as willingly as he, or
any of his side. Insomuch that commonly it is one of the principal reasons,
that we use to prove their opinions, that we strive against them for, to be
errors or heresies, and themselves for now holding them so obstinatly, as they
do, heretics, for that we are able to show, how by stealing and soft paces,
stily they began first to creep in, and so went on from worse to worse, until
(to use his own term) they came ad prosu^dum maloru^, that is even to the
depth of all evil, that they are now grown unto therein. Who so reads my
answer to Albines publishers preface, and the 37. Chapter of my answer to
Albine himself, shall find, that in a good sort of their opinions, I have
showed this. But to prove this, that it is the property of heretics to be
fickle and moving, and so soon to perish and pass away, he alleges S.
Peter, saying, that lying masters do bring upon themselves swift damnation,
and their destruction sleeps not: which he spoke of gods judgments y^
undoubtedly should overtake such me^, and not as he understands him, to show
yt their opinions always should soon pass away and vanish. In the former
sense it is always found true, that S. Peter writes, either here, or else
where, or both: but take it in the later sense, then Peter shall often be found
to have prophesied of such, untruly. For who knows not, that the gross
errors of Turcism are of very long continuance, and that the error of the
Aethiopians for circumcision is far more ancients, and that yet it continues?
And must not of necessity the errors and heresies of Antichrist be of very
long continuance, seeing Paul (as we have heard) confesses, that the mystery
of that iniquity began to worken in his time, above 1500. years ago, and that
it should not quite be abolished, before Christ's second coming, who then
should yet by the brightness of his coming abolish it 2 Thessalonians. 2? The truth
of whose prophecy in that place, is the very true ground of the antiquity,
universality, and continuance of the popish and Antichristian Religion. So that
howsoever it has fallen out in some heresies, that they have in Gods most wise
providence, even quickly brought themselves to an end, by their ficklenes and
moving, yet it appears, in that place the sin of not believing the truth,
so notably taught and confirmed by Christ and his Apostles, in the just
judgment of God, by Antichristianity is so severely to be punished, that
therewith, even from the Apostles days to the end of the world, they that
commit that sin, shall be in danger to be deluded and seduced most
dangerously. Which I say, and sure I am I can prove it, has been and yet is,
most notoriously verifyed by popery, to the wonderful hurt and destruction of
souls. Howbeit this man would feign apply this sign unto us, for that amongst
us (as it pleases him to write) here in England, for the love we bear to the
doctrine of the Zwinglians, Oecolampadians and Caluinists, the Lutherans have
taken their just overthrow, and for that now here, Precisians and Puritans (as
he says) through the affection of the common people, and so winking at them,
by some magestrates, have brought the Zwinglians and Caluinists, to be ready to
yield up the ghost, and to tilt up their heels. But these are but vain words,
and prove not his purpose. For all these, howsoever in other matters of lesser
moment they too much disagree, yet as I have said before, and as it is
notoriously known, for the principal articles of religion, concerning faith
or manners, they are in constant unity, holding the same all of them, that they
have learned in these points out of the Canonical scriptures, as the harmony of
their confessions extant to the world in print, make it evident.

As for the several and private opinions of Luther, and his too earnest
followers, which we now mislike, we have likewise always misliked, and
therefore in that respect they have no other overthrow amongst us, then they
always since we first heard of them have had, and howsoever in these points,
we rather prefer Zuinglius and Caluins judgment then theirs, yet certain it
is, that we build not our faith of them; nor of them, or by them, delight we to
be called; we protest and profess our selves to be christians, and of him
only and of his undoubted spirit, speaking unto us in the canonical
scriptures have we learned our religion, with which, as far as we find any man
to agree, we reverence him, as it becomes us in the Lord, and further we take
not our selves bound to follow any man, whatsoever he be. That Puritans and
Precisians, have brought the ancient Protestants of this land of all sorts to
any such point, by any such means as he speaks of, he speaks both untruly
and slanderously. For such, as for their preposterous zeal and factious
turbulent spirits, amongst us deserve so to be called and accounted, neither
are for number so many, nor for credit so affected of the common people, nor
wincked at of the magestrats, as he pretends. But if there were as many fond
sectaries that have arisen up amongst us these late years, as this man and
other of his fellows sometime would have men to believe, as long yet, as we
for all that, continue constant not only in the very same religion that we
were of, when we first broke of from them, but also in that which has
plentiful and most plain warrant both from the canonical scriptures and al
sound antiquity, as we have a thousand times showed, and yet still are willing
and ready always to do, why should they thus odiously be objected against us,
to disgrace either us, or our religion, especially seeing we are sorry for it,
and show our mislike thereof as we do? May any man justly disgrace the
Apostles, and the Apostolic churches, for that even in their times, there
arose so many sectaries and heretics, amongst the Churches planted by them,
as both by their own writings and other Ecclesiastical histories it is
notoriously known there did? Has not Christ even of purpose, to prevent all
offense taking hereat, compared his kingdom Matthew. 13. to a field wherein the
good seeds-man having sown good wheat, the envious man so sows his tares,
that they come up together with the wheat, and so will do unto the harvest? To
let vain words and brags go, let the^ prove but once any of them, or all of
them together, either that their religion is the plain way of salvation,
beaten by our forefathers for these 1500. years past, or that ours is not that
very truth, yt Christ and his Apostles taught, as a perpetual truth, for the
true church constantly to hold to the worlds end, and we will strive with them
no longer. But as this is a matter too hard and heavy for them, so they are
content to let it alone, and with fallacies and vain words, to try if they
can beguile the simple people, and bring them to a misliking of that, which to
mislike indeed they are not able to give them one sound reason. And therefore
to conclude, that both beginning, ending, and always, this man may be like
himself, he takes it for granted, that their religion is the sound
catholic faith, that the martyr Sebastian meant by his loaf, which broken
and broken again, after it was once well made and baked, by sectaries and
heretics (as he told Genserichus the tyrant) would never become better: and
that ours is but a breaking of it, to make it better again, wc will never be.
Whereas we constantly hold and affirm, that we may justly say to all papists,
even as Sebastian said to that tyrant. For the loaf that we feed on, and
would have all others to feed on, with us, we are able to prove is that, the
grain whereof Christ himself, by his faithful servants, has sown in the
sound field of the canonical scriptures, and which he himself has ground,
kneaden, and baked for us and for all his children. And likewise we are able to
prove, yt this fine white loaf of the Lords own preparing, always lying ready
in the storehouse of his written word, ye Romish church has a long time and
does still as much loath, as ever the children of Israel did Manna. And
therefore as they preferred in their conceits, garlic, leekes, and onions,
and the fleshpots of Egypt, before that heavenly food, so has she and does
she a massiue loaf, the corn whereof must not come only out of the foresaied
field of the Lord, for then it would have no favor with them, but in great
part, out of the rotten field of men's traditions and inventions, before the
pure white loaf of the lords own making. Wherefore to conclude, all his speech
or exhortation, grounded upon this story out of Victor de persecutione
Vandalorum, any man may see, we might far more justly, use against themselves
of the Romish Church, to persuade them as they regard their own salvation,
etc. to content themselves with us, with this Sebastians loaf, of the first
and best making.

I have thus, thou see (good reader) but briefly past over these things: and
the rather I have so done, first, because I found no matter in them, but
grounded upon shameless begging of that which is most in question: and secondly,
because in my answer to Albine, I had upon occasion given me by him, already
answered al, or most of his assumptions against us, in the applying of these
signs unto us. But lastly, by view of an answer made at large, by master
Crowley, both to the 22. demands and these six signs also, that came to my
hands since my finishing of this answer of mine, I see, if it had been
undone, I might well have spared al my labor herein. If therefore thou
desire any further answer, concerning any of these, I refer thee to him. And
thus I take my leave of thee, beseeching the Lord now and ever to bless both
thee and me, and heartily praying thee to remember me always in thy godly
prayers to God: to whom be all glory, praise, and dominion now and ever.

Thine in the Lord: Thomas Spark.

A Table whereby readily to find out the principal matters contained in the
former answer to Albine, or any of his favorers, wherein because until thou
come to the answer to Albine himself, the pages are not figured in the
top, as in the rest: for any thing before handled, the page of the letter in
the bottom of those leaves, whereof there are 16 for every letter, is noted
for thy direction.
A.
Abbeyes why and how suppressed, pa. 287. Albine convicted of blasphemy, p. 95.
96. 186. 375. 378. Albine shows himself to have been of a profane spirit.
269. Albines publishers method in his epistle to the reader discovered. b. p.
11. 12. and 13. Albines own method and the folly thereof laid open. E.4. 5.
6 Albines cunning in running from the question. 6 7 9. 10. 11. etc. Albine
notorious in abusing scriptures. 2. 3. 36. 37. Albine worthy to be famous for
abusing of fathers. 47. 51. 85. 86. 119. etc. 126. etc. 131 134 156. and ca p.
37. through out. Antiquity protestants rather have then papists and true
antiquity protestants stand unto. 102. 158. etc. Auricular confession
dangerous. E. p. 9. and p. 322. Auricular confession confuted at large.c. 37.
p. 322. etc
B.
Baptism and the ceremonies at large spoken of. 308. etc. Baptism that is
outward sometimes separate from regeneration. 280. etc. Baptism binds not
always the baptized to be of his religion that baptized him. p. 395. 410. Bad
always intermingled with good. 404. Beza defended against Albines slanders.
400 Bondage under popery as great as Isreal's under Pharao. 170. etc. Bohemians
doings considered and defended. 291. etc.
C.
CAluins argument against the popish priesthood, that it is not of God
unanswered by Albine. p. 5. Ceremonies popish how and when many of them came in
and how withstood, C. p. 15. and 16. Colliers faith what it is. 222 Christ will
be a whole and sole Savior or else no Savior at all. 419. Christ's Church
perpetual, but not always visible in the popish sense. 37. etc. and 122. 413.
etc. Church why called catholic and so the popish church is not catholic.
p. 360. Contentions and varieties of opinions amongst Christians no news, and
they ought not to prejudice the truth. 68. 69. 250. Contentious popish many
and great. 70. 71. 97. 252. etc. Corpus Christi day when and by whom it came
in. 161. Caiphas had not the spirit of prophecy as Albine would seem he had.
94. 95 Cruelty of papists in seeking to prevail and to stand by force. 155.
etc. 291. etc. Cathechising in popery how bad it has been 179. etc. Councels
have erred, and that even papists confess. 230. etc. Communion under one kind
is but a new devise. 159. Christ was to prove his calling by miracles and yet
not we. 188. etc. and 403.
D.
DEdicating of books to great persons has good and ancient presidents. A. p.
11. and 12. Departure from the Roman Church, that now is, lawful. 149. 394.
417. etc. 409. etc.
E.
EDucation binds not the party to be always of their religion that brought
him up. 181. (...) to be read, but not so, as to discourage the simple from the
study of them, 205. 208 etc. Scriptures alleged in their true sense the
ground that protestants stand upon 205 etc. Scriptures though never so much
abused by heretics, yet by them they must be confuted. 226. Scriptures must
expound scriptures. 47. 210. 224. Scriptures they which allege best they are
to be followed, 245 etc. Scriptures must try who has the spirit of God, 222
etc. Scriptures are to be studied and read of all men, 209 etc. Scriptures
shamefully spoken of by papists, the better to shun trial by them, 82 etc. 212
etc. Scriptures fondely all^adged and applied by Papists, 35 etc. 218.
Scriptures in some sense may well be understood according to the tradition of
the Church. 87. 393. Scriptures whither rightlier alleged by protestants or
papists examined, 215. 216. etc Scriptures are so alleged by protestants, that
they therefore are to be believed and neither papist nor heretic 215 etc.
Scriptures are both, judge and witness. 262. Scriptures are the only sound
touchsto^e both of truth, church and al. 33 etc. 46 etc. 244 406. Scriptures
by Papists thought never to be soundly interpreted, but according to the
present practice of the Roman Church, 214. 219. Sin is more strictely
condemned by protestants then by papists, 285. 404. Succession papists have
neither Personal, 25 etc. Succession papists have neither Local, 25 etc.
Succession papists have neither not real, 21 etc. 27 Succession Popish we
reject not so much for their bad lives as doctrine, 92. 301. Succession neither
local nor personal any certain note of truth, 27 etc. Succession in the
truth, the only succession indeed, to be stood simply upon, 31 etc. Supper
of the Lord wonderfully perverted of the Papists. 31. 416. Supremacy of the
Pope, new, how and by who^ it came up, and by whom still resisted, p. 11. etc
161. etc.
T.
Traditions beside the word written countenanced by abusing of Irenaeus and
others, p. 1 and 2. 76 etc. Traditions vnwrite^ the ground of popery. C. p. 5.
p. 82. Traditions beside and contrary to the word written rejected by the
fathers, C. 2. p. 46 78. etc. 224. etc. Traditions spoken for and allowed by
the fathers, always warranted by the scriptures, C. p. 2 and 3. Traditions
unwritten heretics commonly fly unto, eue^ as the papists do, p. 5 and 6 33.
Transubstantiation when it came in and how confuted, D. 7 and 8. p. 109. Tree
that is good brings forth good fruit, and in what sense that is to be taken.
274 278. etc. Truth is to be preferred before custom and all things else. C.
p. 7. 86. 100. 406. Truth is not tied to bishops mouths and chaires. 28. 29.
94. 95. 151. etc. Truth is most ancient, and that is it that came from the
Apostles, 102. Turks and Jews take occasion the more to be hardened for the
popish doctrine of Images and transubstantiation. 217.
V.
VIsible and demonstrable succession is neither certai^e note of Church not
truth. 28, ^7. etc. 51. Unity and Christian peace may and ought to be kept in
the Church, though the rites be diverse. 312. etc. Unity unless it be in
verity men are not to continue in. 417. etc. Unity in every thing follows not
upon right praying for the spirit. 247. etc. Unity papists have not though they
brag thereof never so much 70. 71. 97. 246. 252. Vn^uersalitie indeed the
Romish Church has not. 388, etc. Vocation ordinary has not always been
found in them that, have been means of the conversion of nations and that
have profitably preached. 30. 123. etc. Vocation may be good and lawful,
though the called have faults. 131. and Vocation of what sort popish prelates
have 14 etc. Vows in popery foolish and superstitious. 306. etc.
W.
Wants and faults of the Church to reform men are not bound only to use
prayer. 141. Way that is narrow both for life and religion is to be preferred
before the broad way. 395. etc. Works that are good indeed rather found with
protestants the^ with papists. 280. etc. 286. 404.
FINIS.
Faults escaped in printing, through the absence of the author, the hardness
and smalnes of the hand, wherein the copy was offered to the press, and the
vnacquaintance of the overseers with the same.
A. p. 1 l. 26. ^: why for when. 4. 16. before for unto. B. 1. 7: the for that.
l. 33. the for their. 15. 16: for second 11. and l. 20: when for whom l. 35:
for the their. C. 1. 12: pruning for proving. 7. 12: them for them. and l. 25:
put in, I say, next therefore. 12. 23: for first sixth 15. 11: put out of
desposed the first s. D. 2. 9: Paula for pacta. and in Armonians, e for o: and
in Moralia, is for l. 6. 9. put in next them, they do. 7. 1: that for the 9.
34: but chose for choosing E. 1. 26: them for then. 8. 31: them for then. 9.
29. pal for paul. p. 15. of the book. r: Lando for lando, and so ever, 17. 12:
Bale for he, and l. 20: Boniface for Gregory. and. l. 21: Sicilia, and so
always. 30. Constantius for Constantine and l. 35. 25: for 15. 47. 13:
Portunatian and Paulina. 64. 32: Aelfricke for Alcuinus and l. 34: put out
Ael^ricke, 78. 14: quam for quae. and l. 28. wrote for wrought. 81. 16: for he,
r: Aug: most truly. 89. 25^ for it, does. 101. 19: put out, all, 111. r: 24.
for 4. and 1. for 4. l. 29. 131. r: Bath^heba. 133. 7: r: loialty. 142. 31:
whom for when. 146. 9 for, for from. 156. 29: r: of for if. 162. 28: r:
Tatianists 170. 9: r: as for and. 171. 8: put in been, next have. 172. 33.
shun for show. 180. 26. your for you. 181. 1. put in, you cast before Call. 189.
25. need for have 190. 11. answered for enforced. 202. 3: the for that. 203. r:
phygelus, and l. 35: thus for this. 204. 33: do for to. 213. 34: of for often.
215. 12: next truth, put in that. 216 21: r: and, next followed. 218. 27: r:
etc. for and. 220. r: Marcionites l. 38. 229, 13: the for their. 230 r:
Selencian, l. 33. 232. 11: put in and next held: 240. 38: r: 18. for 15. 245.
25: next confute put out them. 246. 25: after for after, 253. r: Peucer for
pencer. and l. 37. so for to. 262. 23: r: scriptures. 284. 20: for it next
else, r: the spirit. and l. 21. put in in, next except. 306. 26: r: them for
then. 110. 40: r: taking for take. 311. 22. evils for well, and l. 30. either
for other. 312. 10: so for to. l. 23. case for cause. l. 21. aliqua. for
antiqua. 317. 8. either for, other. 320. 35: Hieremy for Hierom. 322. 2: with,
for which it. and l. 30. put out, this. 323. 11: r. severely for severally.
331. 27. us for us. l. 29. put out ere. 339. 21 but for both. and l. 34. put
in, to them, before thus, 342. 33. women for woman. 344. 34. ask for asked.
347. 11. put in them next before the. l. 14. put out that. l. 23 r: d^ated for
doubted. 348. l. last, put next to life not only. 350. 33. thy for the. l.
39. that for the. 353. 14. r: that for the, and l. 29. r: fond for sound. 355.
r: Mercia for Mercta. 357. r: Dennis for Demus. 362. 11. chastity for charity.
and l 22. r. Furnitanorum. and l. 29. r: Geminius for Heminius. 365. 24. r: we
for he. 369. 15. knew for know. 374. 15. so for to. 377. 37. fear for sear.
394. 31. communion for common. 396. 21. Constantius for Constantine. p. 240. l.
last, next faith and, put in, religion until within these 60. years or
thereabout: it is but a vain.

Some other small faults in the notes upon Albine, in pointing and otherwise,
especially in taking one letter for another in some proper names there be: but
because they are such, as either will not trouble the reader at all, or that
most easily of himself he may correct, they were not here set down.

This only further (Christian reader) the author desires thee, that in
steed of the 8 and 9. lines of the 112. page, thou would read 2. book to
king Trasimund and Aug. ep. 57. ad Dardanum, and Vigilius against Eutiches lib.
4. cap. 4. so urge the verity, localitie and circumscriptible^es of Christ's
(...) ma^e body, that therewith, by no means your doctrine of
transubstantiation can stand.


