Prothalamion Or A Spousall Verse made by Edm. Spenser. IN HONOR OF THE Double
marriage of the two Honorable and virtuous Ladies, the Lady Elizabeth and the
Lady Katherine Somerset, Daughters to the Right Honorable the Earl of
Worcester and espoused to the two worthy Gentlemen M. Henry Gilford, and M.
William Peter Esquyers.

AT LONDON. Printed for William Ponsonby. 1596.

1 Prothalamion.
Calm was the day, and through the trembling air.
Sweet breathing Zephyrus did softly play
A gentle spirit, that lightly did delay
Hot Titans beams, which then did glyster fair:
When I whom sullein care,
Through discontent of my long fruitless stay
In Princes Court, and expectation vain
Of idle hopes, which still do fly away,
Like empty shadows, did aflict my brain,
Walked forth to ease my pain
Along the shore of silver streaming Themmes,
Whose rutty Bancke, the which his River hemmes,
Was painted all with variable flowers,
And all the meades adornd with dainty gemmes,
Fit to deck maidens bowres,
And crown their Paramours,
Against the Brydale day, which is not long:
Sweet Themmes run softly, till I end my Song.
2 Prothalamion.
There, in a Meadow, by the Rivers side,
A Flock of Nymphs I chanced to espy,
All lovely Daughters of the Flood thereby,
With goodly greenish locks all loose vntyde,
As each had been a Bryde,
And each one had a little wicker basket,
Made of fine twigs entrayled curiously,
In which they gathered flowers to fill their flasket:
And with fine Fingers, cropped full feateously
The tender stalks on hye.
Of every sort, which in that Meadow grew,
They gathered some; the Violet pallid blew,
The little Dazie, that at evening closes,
The virgin Lilly, and the Primrose true,
With store of vermeil Roses,
To deck their Bridegromes posies,
Against the Brydale day, which was not long:
Sweet Themmes run softly, till I end my Song.
3 Prothalamion.
With that I saw two Swannes of goodly hew,
Come softly swimming down along the Lee;
Two fairer birds I yet did never see:
The snow which does the top of Pindus strew,
Did never whiter show,
Nor Jove himself when he a Swan would be
For love of Leda, whiter did appear:
Yet Leda was they say as white as he,
Yet not so white as these, nor nothing near;
So purely white they were,
That even the gentle stream, the which them bare,
Seemed foul to them, and bad his billows spare
To wet their silken feathers, least they might
Soil their fair plumes with water not so fair,
And mar their beauties bright,
That shone as heavens light,
Against their Brydale day, which was not long:
Sweet Themmes run softly, till I end my Song.
4 Prothalamion.
Eftsoons the Nymphs, which now had Flowers their fill,
Ran all in haste, to see that silver brood,
As they came floating on the Crystal Flood,
Whom when they saw, they stood amazed still,
Their wondering eyes to fill,
Them seemed they never saw a sight so fair,
Of Fowls so lovely, that they sure did deem
Them heavenly borne, or to be that same pair
Which through the Sky draw Venus silver Teeme,
For sure they did not seem
To be begot of any earthly Seed,
But rather Angels or of Angels breed:
Yet were they bred of Somers-heat they say,
In sweetest Season, when each Flower and weed
The earth did fresh array,
So fresh they seemed as day,
Even as their Brydale day, which was not long:
Sweet Themmes run softly till I end my Song.
5 Prothalamion.
Then forth they all out of their baskets drew,
Great store of Flowers, the honor of the field,
That to the sense did fragrant odours yield,
All which upon those goodly Birds they threw,
And all the Waves did strew,
That like old Peneus Waters they did seem,
When down along by pleasant Tempes shore
Scattred with Flowers, through Thessaly they streeme,
That they appear through Lillies plenteous store,
Like a Brydes Chamber flore:
Two of those Nymphs, mean while, two Garlands bound,
Of freshest Flowers which in that Mead they found,
The which presenting all in trim Array,
Their snowie Foreheads therewithal they crowned,
Whilst one did sing this Lay,
Prepared against that Day,
Against their Brydale day, which was not long:
Sweet Themmes run softly till I end my Song.
6 Prothalamion.
Ye gentle Birds, the worlds fair ornament,
And heavens glory, whom this happy hour
Does lead unto your lovers blisfull bower,
Joy may you have and gentle hearts content
Of your loves couplement:
And let fair Venus, that is Queen of love,
With her heart-quelling Son upon you smile,
Whose smile they say, has virtue to remove
All Loves dislike, and friendships faulty guile
For ever to assoile.
Let endless Peace your steadfast hearts accord,
And blessed Plenty wait upon you board,
And let your bed with pleasures chaste abound,
That fruitful issue may to you afford,
Which may your foes confound,
And make your joys redound,
Upon your Brydale day, which is not long:
Sweet Themmes run softly, till I end my Song.
7 Prothalamion.
So ended she; and all the rest around
To her redoubled that her under song,
Which said, their bridale day should not be long.
And gentle Echo from the neighbor ground,
Their accents did resound?
So forth, those joyous Birds did pass along,
Adowne the Lee, that to them murmurde low,
As he would speak, but that he lackt a tongue
Yeat did by signs his glad affection show,
Making his stream run slow.
And all the foul which in his flood did dwell
Began flock about these twain, that did excel
The rest, so far, as Cynthia does shend
The lesser stars. So they enranged well,
Did on those two attend,
And their best service lend,
Against their wedding day, which was not long:
Sweet Themmes run softly, till I end my song.
8 Prothalamion.
At length they all to merry London came,
To merry London, my most kyndly Nurse,
That to me gave, this Life's first native sourse:
Though from another place I take my name,
An house of ancient fame.
There when they came, whereas those bricky towers,
The which on Themmes broad aged back do ride,
Where now the studious Lawyers have their bowers
There whylome wont the Templer Knights to bide,
Till they decayed through pride:
Next whereunto there stands a stately place,
Where often I gained gifts and goodly grace
Of that great Lord, which therein wont to dwell,
Whose want too well, now feels my freendles case:
But Ah here fits not well
Old woes but joys to tell
Against the bridale day which is not long:
Sweet Themmes run softly till I end my Song.
9 Prothalamion.
Yet therein now does lodge a noble Peer,
Great Englands glory and the Worlds wide wonder,
Whose dreadful name, late through all Spain did thunder.
And Hercules two pillors standing near,
Did make to quake and fear:
Fair branch of Honor, flower of Cheualrie,
That fillest England with thy triumphs fame,
Joy have thou of thy noble victory,
And endless happiness of thine own name
That promises the same:
That through thy prowess and victorious arms,
Thy country may be freed from foreign harms:
And great Elisaes glorious name may ring
Through all the world, filled with thy wide Alarmes,
Which some brave muse may sing
To ages following,
Upon the Brydale day, which is not long:
Sweet Themmes run softly till I end my Song.
10 Prothalamion.
From those high Towers, this noble Lord issuing,
Like Radiant Hesper when his golden hair
In the Ocean billows he has Bathed fair,
Descended to the Rivers open vewing,
With a great train ensuing.
Above the rest were goodly to be seen
Two gentle Knights of lovely face and feature
Beseeming well the bower of any Queen,
With gifts of wit and ornaments of nature,
Fit for so goodly stature:
That like the twins of Jove they seemed in sight,
Which deck the Bauldricke of the Heavens bright,
They two forth pacing to the Rivers side,
Received those two fair Brides, their Loves delight,
Which at the appointed tide,
Each one did make his Bryde,
Against their Brydale day, which is not long:
Sweet Themmes run softly, till I end my Song.
FINIS.

