A BROTHERLY PERSUASION TO UNITY, AND UNIFORMITY IN IVDGEMENT, AND PRACTICE
TOUCHING THE RECEIVED and present Ecclesiastical government, and the
authorized rites and ceremonies of the Church of England. Written by Thomas
Spark Doctor in Divinity. And seen, allowed, and commanded by public
authority to be printed.

ROMANS 12.18. If it be possible, as much as in you is, have peace with all men.

COR. 11.16. If any lust to be contentious, we have no such customs, nor the
Churches of God.

printer's device of a pair of compasses, associated with Nicholas Oaks
(McKerrow 334) LABOR ET CONSTANTIA



LONDON, Printed by Nicholas Oaks for Roger Iackson, and are to be sold at his
shop in Fleet Street near to the great Conduit. 1607.

blazon or coat of arms of the British royal family, encircled by the Order of
the Garter, crowned HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE



TO THE MOST HIGH AND MIGHTY PRINCE, JAMES BY THE GRACE OF GOD, OF GREAT
BRITAIN, France and Ireland King, and over all persons, and in all causes as
well Ecclesiastical as civil, in these his dominions, next and immediately
under God, Supreme Governor, and defender of the ancient, Catholic and
Apostolic Faith.
HIgh and mighty Monarch, and my most dread and gracious Sovereign, being one
of them, that by your most Honorable Councels letters, in your Majesty's name,
were called to be before your highness, at the conference at Hampton Court, and
receiving there such satisfaction as I did by your excellent Majesty's own
most ready and apt answers to the doubts and objections there and then
proposed: as I could not but then greatly rejoice in my heart, and praise and
magnify the Lord for the same, so ever since, though to the better satisfying
of all others, I have not only in my practice accordingly yealded universal
conformity, but privately by word and writing also have labored to persuade
all whom I have met with, to do likewise: yet seeing and observing so many still
to refuse, I could not but think it my bounden duty to God and his Church
first, and then to your highness, by writing some short Treatise to do the
best that I could, to further your most gracious and christian purpose,
resolution, and determination in the said conference, which was (as I conceived
it) by your most princely moderation, and resolution, first of al in our home
controversies amongst our selves about our Churches Liturgy or Hierarchy, so
to knit us all together in unity, and verity, as that al our forces hereafter
might more strongly be bent and employed against our common adversaries, so the
better also after to draw them to conformity with us in the exercises, and
profession of our true and pure religion. And therefore now well nigh two years
ago, having writ this Treatise, and finding that the private use thereof, though
it has done good with some, yet to that purpose could reach but to a few, it
having in this time comd and been in the view of some of the most reverend
Bish. and so having also got allowa^ce by authority to be printed, and hereupon
having been by the^ and many others which have seen and read the same, much
urged to publish it, I am bound thus to dedicate it to your Majesty, and so to
offer it to the sight of all, who shall be pleased to read it. And the rather I
thought justly I might so do, for that the ground of most of that I have said
therein to the satisfying of my brethren, arises from the speeches, answers, and
determinations that your highness self gave in the forsaid conference. But
indeed I must needs confess, I durst not yet thus far have adventured, but
upon comfortable remembrance of your May. vouchsafing the next morning after
the said conference to send for me, and the^ to give me that most gracious
cou^tena^ce and most princely kind words that you the^ did, in consideration of
a book that your highness understood I had written, and bin in some trouble for
in her Ma. time that last was, touching succession. Pardon me therefore most
gracious soueraign if to testify in some measure my loyalty and thankefulnes
for the same, I venture now again into your highness presence, with so small
a present as this. For you being pleased to accept the same, and to give it
passage thus under your most roial patronage and protection, to the end
aforesaid, undoubtedly it will and may much the sooner get liking and
entertainment withal, and so also give the better satisfaction and contentment
to all them whersoeuer it finds the same. Thus therefore once again most
humbly craving pardon for this my great boldness, and hoping of your Majesty's
favorable acceptance hereof, and most instantly upon the knees of my soul
begging of the almighty, that your Highness and your most royal issue may most
happily and prosperously reign and rule over us, while the Sun and Moon endure,
to his most gracious protection I commend your Majesty now and ever. From
Bletchley in Buckinghamshire. 1607.

Your Majesty's faithful and humble subject. Thomas Spark.

The Epistle to the Christian Reader.
I Am not ignorant (well-beloved in the Lord) that I have and do undergo
already the hard censure of many for conforming my self as I have to the
orders of our Church, and that I am like to endure harder for the writing and
publishing of this Treatise following, to persuade others so to do likewise.
And all this the rather, for that either through ignorance what my judgment in
former times has been of these matters now in question, or misconstruction of
some of my former actions, many as it seems (have conceived) that heretofore
I have not been the same man, that now in this my dealing I manifest my self
to be. To satisfy therefore all men (if it may be) in this respect; first they
are to understand that though there be now, upon occasion of the manner of this
new urging the rites and ordinances of our Church as they are, some difference
in outward show, betwixt my former courses, and this which I now take, that yet
that proves not (circumstances duly considered) any alteration of my mind or
judgment at all touching these things: For I always before, as occasion
served me, both in Pulpit, and otherwise in private conference with many,
manifested my self to be of that opinion, that I always thought they were
rather to be yealded unto, being but of the nature they are, and being urged no
otherwise then in deed and truth they be, by our Church, then that any minister
should for his refusing conformity thereunto, suffer himself to be put from the
use of his gifts, place and ministry, for such a necessity is laid upon us
that be in the ministry, (I always knew and remembered) to preach the Gospel,
that woe is to us if we do not so: 1 Cor. 9.16. And with Archippus I ever
understood, that Paul had said to every one of us, take heed to thy ministry
that thou have received in the Lord, that thou fulfill it. Coll. 4.17. And
therefore I could never think (and so my usual saying has been always to my
friends and fellow ministers talking with me of these things) that at the last
day it would or could be taken for a sufficient excuse or reason in any of us,
before the great Judge of quick and dead, and the chief Bishop of our souls,
of and for our surceasing therefrom, to say and plead we could not be suffered
to continue and to go on therein unless we conformed our selves in these
things, as this our Church requires now at our hands. And therefore also
howsoever otherwise weak brethren were not wilfully and needlessly in such
things to be offended by us, yet if after so many years instruction, they
would be so weak still, as that they would rather wish us to leave our
ministry, what mischief or inconvenience soever thereby should grow, either to
them, or to our selves and ours, and to the whole Church by our so doing, then
to yeald to the use of these things, I could never yet persuade my self that
we were bound, to prevent the not offending of such, by suffering our selves to
be run upon these so dangerous rocks. But indeed I always rather thought,
that that was to redeem the not offending of them in such things, at a far
higher and costlier rate and price, then either we were bound to give for it,
or it were worth: and therefore that in this case, the only thing that
remained for us to do, was, holding on still our ministry, better to instruct
them, and to pray for them that God would make them wiser and stronger, and so
to leave them to him. And the rather have I been confirmed in this my opinion,
because I plainly find, that Master Cartwright himself (as desirous as he was
otherwise, that they that are in authority would have rather been pleased to
remove sundry of the^) was yet in this case of the very same judgment, as any
man may see he was in his second part of his second reply, chap. the last. Then
secondly, though when I have been called by lawful authority to some
conference about these matters (as sometimes I have been; and by the same had
leave then freely to say my mind touching these things) I have not refused in
dutiful manner to lay down my reasons, why they that were in authority
(having questionless thereby power as well to remove or alter such rites and
ceremonies, as to continue them, as that plainly is confessed they have, both in
our Common Book it self, and in the book of Articles) might well be pleased,
for the better encouraging of many, both to enter into the ministry, and the
quieter to continue therein, as also thereby the sooner to breed peace, unity
and love amongst our selves, and to remove offense from the weak and tender
consciences of many, to use their power and authority, rather to remove, or
alter certain of them, then to continue and urge them as they were: yet even
then also (as it is well known, as occasion was offered) I sundry times
plainly protested, that for my own part, those reasons notwithstanding, I
thought it not fit, if authority would not yield therefore so to do, but for
other reasons seeming of more force thereunto, should choose rather to continue,
and so to urge them still, that any man therefore either should shun the
ministry, or suffer himself to be deprived thereof. For I never thought
them, but waied and understood as they are with us, either of themselves simply
unlawful, or any way so inconvenient, that any should therefore run upon
either of these rocks. Much more therefore I have wondered at those men, and
greatly always in my mind have I misliked them, who for things of no other
nature then these (about which our domestical controversies have been) have
yet even therefore grown unto such a mislike of the state of our Church, as
that they both in pulpit and print, have thought they might, not only most
bitterly seek the disgrace both of it, and the governors thereof, but also
make (as they have too to many of them) a plain and open schism therein, yea
and an utter rent and breach therfrom. And (I praise God for it) the fear
thereof from the beginning, and the falling of it out so when it did, together
with the serious consideration of the nature of the questions themselves, have
so always kept me in love and liking of the present government and the orders
thereof, that hitherto ever peaceably and quietly, I have lived under, and in
the practice thereof, and never yet could be brought (how well soever I have
liked of some that have seemed zealous and forward in wishing as they counted
it, reformation of and in certain things, for their painfulnesse in their
places, and fruitfulness of their labors otherwise in their ministry) either
to be present at any of their meetings and consultations to that end, or to
yeald them my hand at any time, to any thing concluded therein by them: yea
always as I have said, I have not only misliked, (to the disturbance and
disquiet of so famous a Church of Christ as this of ours is) all those their
exceptions against it notwithstanding, that any should seek either in Pulpit
or Print, to deface it and disgrace it, as I saw too many did: but also what
credit soever at any time God has given me with any, especially of any great
place, I have used it to the best of my skill, and credit with them, to breed
and to nourish in them a good liking of our present Church-gouernment, and so
in time and place to be as they might, Patrons for it, rather then any way to
suffer themselves to be drawn to join with them that sought the subversion
thereof, and to bring in an other. Insomuch that thirdly I may with a safe and
good conscience both before GOD and man proteste, that I never yet could be
brought by any thing that I have ever heard or read to that purpose these four
and thirty years that I have been in the Ministry (and yet I think I have
read most, if not all that has been since written to that end) either to
think that form and plott of Church government so much admired and magnifyed
as the perpetual and only fit government for Christ's Church by a paritie of
Ministers and their Presbiteries, either fitting for such a Monarchye as this
is, or any way in deed so aunswerable or conformable to the perpetual
government used by GOD for and in his Church, either since Moses or Christ,
during the Story, either of New Testament or Old, as this by Archbishopps,
Bishops, and Pastors of ours is. And hereupon it has been, that being a
great part of my time Bishop Coopers Chaplain, to my good liking, and
contentment, I have not only always ever since I was Minister, lived as an
ordinary Pastor, ever also discharging the office of such an one, in my own
person, in and under this government, without being at any time once, either
presented or conuented, for the omission or transgression of any of the orders
thereof; but also for sundry years was I by the said Bishops gift
Archdeacon of Stow in Lincolnshire, and so had been still, but that it was so
far from me, that I found I could not do that good therein that otherwise I
might, and in conscience took my self bound to have done. Likewise hence it
has been, that never to this day was I so much as made privy too, or
acquainted with any petition or supplication exhibited to Prince, Parliament,
or Convocation tending to any alteration of this present government. And
lastly, certain it is, that I never ministered the Communion but I received it
kneeling, and as for the surplesse I have long ago, and very often worn it,
neither ever refused I the wearing of it, where or when I had one to wear, and
when it was either by my people, or by the Ordinary of the place required at
my hands, or when I my self saw the use of it would open unto me any wider
door, or procure me any more opportunity to do good with any: and when I
least used it, yet even then also I had a care, when my Text gave me any
occasion, so to acquaint my people with the doctrine of Christian liberty, and
to teach them the free use of such indifferent things, that it should not any
way be justly offensive to any of them, when at any time for order sake, upon
occasion they should see me most formally use them. And touching subscription
if I would or should deny it, sure I am the Bishop of Lincolnes records
would prove it, that twice or thrice I have heretofore upon occasion
subscribed, in effect even as now it is required. Finally, I must needs say
(whatsoever other men have fancied of me) though with Bucer in his opinion
given of our Common Book, I have thought certain things therein so set down,
as that Nisi candide intelligantur, that is, unless they be favorably
vnderderstood, they seem to carry some show of contrariety to the word of
God, yet in very deed, I never thought any thing therein, or within the
compass of the required subscription such, but that the same by such a
charitable and favorable construction, and that also but well standing with
the professed, and publicly established doctrine of our Church, and with the
best and true meaning of the Books themselves whence the objections to the
contrary did seem to arise, might with a good conscience for the peace and
good of the Church be quietly yealded unto. And in that best sense, as I knew
charity did bind us all to take every thing, so I could never be persuaded,
but that with a very good liking, and allowance of the state, we freely might.
And therefore that is all that ever I desired, if to them that were in
authority, in peaceable manner by conference with or before them, when it
should or did please themselves to call or admit men thereunto, it could not be
persuaded, for the reasons and respects aforesaid, that it were best to alter
those things, whereupon some took occasion to shun the ministry or to
leave it, that otherwise were likely to be profitable for their gifts therein,
that yet they would be pleased, (as by law already established I know they
might) to allow every thing within any of the books whereunto that
subscription reaches, to be construed and taken of every one, in the best
sense they could, and for the better and more certain direction thereunto, to
publish the same as thereby allowed so to be taken. And so to conclude my
judgment always has been and is of this present Church government, and the
orders thereof, if they that be in place of government therein, every one of
them would do but that good in his place, which by the laws thereof already
made he both might an ought, it would be so happy and blessed every way as
none should justly have cause either to complain of the old, or to seek to
bring in a new. And before the last conference before his majesty at Hampton
Court, it is well known in the country where I dwell, that in a public
meeting of the ministers before the commissarie and many ministers, upon
occasion there given me, I made it publicly known that I was, and ever had
been of this judgment that I have said, and therefore then further I show
(as elsewhere sundry times before others of greater place, and namely to my
own Diocesan also, before the said conference had) how unwilling I was, either
there, or elsewhere, to be drawn to stand in any opposition or contention with
the reverend fathers, about any of these matters: For my judgment is that
never that (...), but dutiful joining with them is likely any way to be the
means to procure the Churches good. Being therefore thus persuaded, and
therefore so thinking of the lawfulness of my own course, as also taking the
inconveniences of the other to be so many and great sundry ways as I do,
(the times now also considered wherein we live) how can I but in Christian
charity, in this manner do the best that I can, both thus to make my mind
known in these things, and also by this ensuing Treatise, to seek to persuade
others to be like minded as I am, and for the reasons therein set down to
yealde to do as I do. The best and most favorable construction therein, I
have given of the things that men use to stick at, and yet with all I trust I
have made it appear that the same stands very well with the true meaning of
the books themselves whence the doubts arise, and with the publicly received
doctrine of this our Church: This Treatise therefore being seen and allowed
thus to be printed and published according to the order in that case provided,
may the rather I hope draw men to uniformity and conformity, for that even
thereby they may see, that thus both in their practice and subscription, they
are by public and sufficient authority allowed, to take and construe every
thing in the best sense that may be. And the rather that it might so do,
(because amongst brethren I thought that the likeliest way to persuade) I have
studied to deliver my mind in as loving and brotherly a phrase and manner as I
could. Wherefore hoping that all reasonable men herewith will be satisfied, and
so be content and willing without any prejudice from my person, to read and
consider what I have set down in this Treatise following, I bid thee Christian
Reader heartily farewell in the Lord. 1606.

Your loving brother unfeignedly, Thomas Spark.

The Contents of the Treatise following.
Chap. 1. The preamble or preface thereunto. Chap. 2. The sum and division of
the whole. Chap. 3. The main proposition of the whole, and seven grounds
thereof. Chap. 4. Of kneeling in the receipt of the Communion. Chap. 5. Of
conformity in apparel, and namely touching the surplesse. Chap. 6. Of the
use of the sign of the cross in baptism, in general Chap. 7. Answers to
obiectio^s against the same, some old, some new. Chap. 8. Answers concerning
some men specially touching these rites Chap. 9. Of the order and practice of
the book in reading the scriptures Canonical. Chap. 10. Touching the reading
as the book appointes of the Apocrypha. Chap. 11. Concerning the
interrogatories in Baptism. Chap. 12. Answers touching diverse other obiectio^s
against the book Chap. 13. Touching subscription: and certain objections
against the same. Chap. 14. Answers to more objections made against the same.
Chap. 15. Answers to certain objections against the book of ordination. Chap.
16. The conclusion, and an exhortation to unity.
A PERSVVASION TO UNIFORMITY Unto his Christian brethren:
The Preamble, Chap. 1.
THough I must needs confess (well beloved) that none that with any diligence
have read the Ecclesiastical stories, and the monuments of the ancient
councels and fathers, but that therein they must needs see and find, that
always there have been diversities of opinions in causes Ecclesiastical, even
in the best times sinse the Apostles, and that amongst the best and most famous
Christians otherwise, especially about the outward orders and customs of the
Church: yet no small grief has it been unto me, to see and behold now for
these 34. years (that I have been in the ministry) the original, growth,
and continuance, of these our domestical controversies amongst our selves,
about the outward policy and rites of our Church. For whiles men have spent
their times and zeal in the pursuit thereof, as of both sides they have very
much, so much time, leisure and opportunity has Satan got, to sow and water
his tares of Atheism, Papisme, and of sects and schisms amongst us. Insomuch
that the sight and consideration therereof, has often made me to think and
say, as occasion has served me, to men of both sides, as Moses did to the
Israelits, Exodus 2. Why smitest thou thy fellow, being thy brother: and as Paul
said to the Galathians: Gal. 5. If ye thus bite one another, take heed, ye be
not consumed one of another. For always it has been, and still is my opinion
in such cases: Conferant fratres, sed non contendant: for doubtless in such
matters as these especially, S. Paul has told us, if any list to be
conte^tious that we have no such custom, nor the Church of God, 1. Cor. 11.16.
Foreseeing yet what further inconvenience might grow of these controversies in
the end, if it were not in time prevented, I have long and much wished and
prayed, that God would raise us some one, that both for authority, skill and
will, were fit to be a moderator therein, and so an effectual composer
thereof. Wherein (his name be blessed for it) at the last he has granted that
my desire, in sending us him to be our sovereign Lord and king whom he has,
who accordingly upon his first entrance into this his kingdom, most
religiously, and christianly has sought by a solemn conference to end and
determine the same, by letting both parties therein see, wherein they had gone
too far, and what was the Medium in which they were both to meet and agree.
Wherein his Majesty so carried himself, that verily I think I may boldly
speak it in the name of all that were then present thereat, that never any of
his place before, in such variety of questions and matters, showed himself
more worthy of admiration and applause of all, either for his indifferency in
deciding, or for his judicious kind of examining of every thing that then came
in question. Insomuch that without all doubt, if once whatsoever then and
there, his Majesty resolved of might take effect, and accordingly be put in
execution (witness but the report of the said conference already with
allowance published in print) great hope there would be, that the unity that
thereby his Highness aimed at, would quickly be attained and happily
continued. For even thereby it appears, that an universal learned and
preaching Ministry through his dominions, and that also by all good means
provision should be made for the same as soon as might be, was then yielded to
be fit and very necessary: Page 52. 96. The carelessness and negligence of
sundry ministers in this Church also was therein by his Majesty inueyed
against and condemned: Page 52. And that stricter order should be taken for the
due sanctifying of the Sabbath, was then universally approved: Page 45.
Likewise how and by whom hereafter the censures of the Church might be every
way and in all Ecclesiastical courts, most fruitfully and sincerly
administered, then and there was so resolved of, as that if accordingly there be
proceeding therein, we shall all therefore have great cause to rejoice: Page
19. 78. 89. 94. And for the better maintenance of the purity of religion
amongsts us, then and there by his Highness order was taken (which since most
carefully and religiously his Majesty has caused to be gone about) that as
pure and perfect a translation should be made of all the scriptures as may be,
and that then that only (both to the ending of all quarrels touching
translations, as much as possible might be, both amongst our selves, and also
with our adversaries) should after be publicly used in our Churches. Page.
46. Then also it was to the same end agreed that our Catechism should be
perfected: Page. 43. which since thereupon as we see has been enlarged and
amended. Thirdly to that end likewise it was yielded unto, that there should
be a straiter restraint, for the selling of Papists books then before had
been Page. 49. And lastly then also it was granted, that the words in the
sixteenth Article of the book of articles touching falling from grace of
regeneration, should be explayned, by addition of some such words, as whereby
plainly it might appear, that it taught not, that the regenerate and justified
either totally or finally fall at any time from the same. Page. 30. 41. Further
concerning the communion book, to make the use and subscription thereunto the
easier to be yielded unto, it was by his Majesty, with the assent of the
Bishops concluded, that to the title of absolutio^ should be added (for the
better explanation of the meaning thereof) these words or remission of sins.
Page. 13. And that to the title of confirmation should be annexed these, laying
on of hands upon children baptized, and able to render an account of their
faith according to the Catechism following. Page. 36. And that the Rubricks
touching private babtisme should be so altered, as that thereby it might be
evident that the book in no case of necessity, allows any but a lawful
minister to baptize any child. Page. 19. 86. And that those words his
disciples should twice be left out in the Gospells Page. 63. al which we see in
our new communion books don. And then also certainly (as it is plainly set
down. Page. 61, of the said book of the co^fere^ce) his Majesty's order was,
that none of the Apocrypha should be read at all, wherein there was any error,
and therefore his highness willed D Reynolds to note those chapters in the
Apocrypha books, wherein such errors were, and to bring the note thereof to
the Bishops, as it is further testified. Page. 62. besides the^ and there it
was alleged by the author of the said book, D Barlow the^ dean of Chester
now Lord B. of Rochester when the objection taken from the reading of the
Apocrypha was in hand, as a sufficient answer thereunto, and not gainsaid of
any that the preface prefixed to the second book of Homiles might have made us
to see the needlesnesse thereof, for that thereby the minister is permitted, at
his discretion for any chapter appointed (by the Communion book) of the old
testament to be red, to read a chapter of the new, which he thought more fit,
for the edification of his people. And yet his Majesty most wisely foreseeing
that all these notwithstanding thus amended, it was likely enough that some
things in the book, or within the compass of the urged subscription, would
still seem unto some so harshly to remain set down, as that they would
stick and stay thereat, his Highness most graciously signified unto us, that
as it was our duties, so he wished every one of us, to construe and take
euerything in the best sense that we could, and not in the hardest and worst:
for so only his intent and pleasure was, that they should be urged. And so much
in the foresaid book of Conference also to this end is remembered, as that Page
47. it is set down, that his majesty would have things indifferent, rather
interpreted and helped by a gloss, then altered. All which things considered, if
we could and would once learn to bend our wits as well to make the best
construction of every thing hereafter, as some have heretofore, to make the
worst, both the practice of the book, and the subscription thereunto, and to the
rest, would now be doubtless far easier then heretofore it has, or yet is,
unto many. Indeed the rites and ceremonies prescribed by that book, by no
means would either his Majesty or the Bishops be drawn to alter, howsoever
it was agreed and then consented unto, that where they had in certain places
been long disused, and the men there, otherwise were found peaceable,
painful, and fruitful Ministers, a convenient time should be granted them
(which since accordingly has been) both to satisfy themselves and their
people in that time, for the using of them again. And certainly his Majesty's
answers to the reasons that were then used to have persuaded him to remove
them (which in effect were all that either before or since by any have been
urged to that purpose) were such, as also his own reasons for the continuance
thereof (being no otherwise urged then they are) as that I am fully persuaded
what his Majesty resolves therein, he does it with an upright and good
conscience in the Lord. For his Highness answers to the said objections, I
must needs confess, then seemed unto me not only very apt, acute and
sufficient, but also even now in this treatise, most of the ground of all my
answers to the same objections, or the like, grows thence. The reasons (as I
remember) urged by his Majesty, for his resolution of their continuance, were
these: that he found them here established by such a state which the Lord had
long and wonderfully blessed, that being urged but as they were, they were of
that nature of things, wherein both he lawfully might command, and we also
were bound willingly to obey, and that change unless very necessary, did (as
Augustine says Epist: 118) more hurt by the nouelty, then otherwise profit:
and that they were used by the primative and purest churches, and in the ages
next the Apostles, and that by holy fathers and renowned christians, before
popery began, and so ever since have been continued, and that therefore he
would not give the Church of Rome that advantage, as by his now rejecting of
them, to say that we were so given to nouelty, as that no ancient thing could
please us, but rather said he, by our retaining still of them, they should well
understand, that neither in doctrine, rite nor ceremony, we despise true
antiquity and that indeed, they are they that in both these do so, and not
we. And doubtless it was evident that all that pains then his Majesty took
to knit us altogether in unity, that so being joined together in one, in
uniformity of Judgment and practice in these things, as we were otherwise in
doctrine, we might all more strongly bend our forces together against our
common adversaries, and he be also thereby the stronger to draw them after to
conformity of religion with us. Give me therefore leave (good brethren) even of
unfeigned love also to you, and of an hearty desire of the peace and good of this
our Church, in the best manner that I can, by this my brotherly persuasion, to
further his Highness royal and holy desire herein. Many have written I confess
to this end, both before I writ this and since, and that in good sort, and to
very good purpose, and yet I trust there may be also good use of this of mine,
but indeed even therefore in most things I have been so brief as I may
referring you for the rest that might have been said, to those others in print
before this.

CHAP. 2. Containing the sum and division of the whole Treatise.
To enter therefore hereinto, though I must needs confess, that so far to
justify by subscription as it is urged, as we are content by our practice to
allow, or at the least to tolerate, seems unto me in effect all one: yet I
cannot deny, but that there is great difference betwixt a ministers yealding
only so far forth as concerns him and his ministry to conformity, and his
yealding universally and simplye to the subscription now urged. For by the
former, he yields only a tolleration, or an allowance at the most, for the
peace sake and good of the Church, to so much of the book of Common Prayer, as
by the rules thereof, he himself is bound to use and practice and by the other
he not only so far also iustifies the same, but all the rest thereof, as
namely the tract of confirmation, the use and practice whereof only belongs to
Bishops, as also the book of ordination the execution whereof appertains
likewise only to them, and the reading of Homilies then published and
authorized, or to be then after published and authorized, which long since (as
I take it) so have been in the second volume of homilies 1563 which being a
preacher and preaching always when they should be read, by the order of the
book it self, he needs never do. As for the rest within the compass of the
said subscription, namely touching his Majesty's supremacy, and the Articles
concerning faith and the sacraments, I mention not, because without gainsaying
all of our religion are willing so far to yeald it, howbeit for as much as he
that has once learned with a good conscience for the Churches good and his
own, to yeald to the former will also the easilier be brought in the same
respects to yield to the other, and he that cannot be brought to the former,
will never be drawn to the latter: first let us consider what may be said to
induce men to the former, and then after likewise how best the objections that
stay men from the latter, may be answered and removed in both which because I
have to deal with men of wisdom and learning I will study to be as brief as
I may.

CHAP. 3. Consisting of the maine proposition of the whole and of seven
grounds of the discourse following.
That we are bound to yield the former, the statute made Eliza i: first to
authorize the book and the uniform practice and use thereof, and since his
Majesty's proclamation published therewith as it is now, to ratefie the same,
and the Canons aucthorised by his highness as they are in my opinion, make it so
clear and evident, that we can justly make no doubt thereof. All the question
therefore I would think now is, whether being thus by lawful acthority
commanded, the nature of the things within the compass of the commandment
and the manner of the urging thereof considered, we be bound or no, to yield
quietly our obedience thereunto, wherein my opinion is were not the law that
requires this at our hands so penal as it is, yet but commanding it (the
things commanded, being neither in their own nature, either against faith or
good manners, and therefore but things indifferent, nor yet in the use as they
are urged otherwise, by the common rules of the word in that case set down,
touching the obedience of the inferior, to the superior. Romans 3.1. etc. 1 Pet.
2.13, etc. we were quietly and willingly (even to discharge our duty and
conscience toward such, in respect of those rules, for our own good and the
Churches, and to maintain good order and peace in the same) to yield our
obedience and conformity thereunto: yea further seemed there to be some
inconvenience, and vnexpediency in some of the things commanded, yet being by
such lawful authority, and under such penalty urged as they are, so long as by
any right and charitable construction of our Churches, and her governors
intent and meaning therein, they may be so taken, as that there is nothing in
the word of God set down in the canonical scriptures contrary thereunto, in
my poor judgment, it is the duty of every modest and christian Minister, to
yield rather his conformity thereunto, then (he cannot tell how much to the
wrong and prejudice of the Church, himself, and his, unto all which he stands
so strictly bound as he does) for his perseuering still and refusing so to do,
to suffer himself by his ordinary, either to be kept from entering into the
ministry, or to be deprived of place or ministry. Now yet before I can come to
answer the objections against this required obedience and conformity, by your
gentle patience, let us a little consider of a few necessary grounds (I hope
confessed of us all) which notwithstanding duly weyed, may well serve, not
only to confirm these points, but also to open a way to answer all that is or
can be objected against the same.

1 First therefore (good brethren) I trust we all are resolved, that things
neither for their nature, nor use commanded nor forbid by the word of God in
the canonical scriptures of the old or new testament, expressly or by any sound
deduction from thence, are and may lawfully be held for things indifferent. Of
this mind I am sure Augustine shows him self to have been Epist. 118. and
Epist 86 ad Casulanum, and so it is noted in the Heluetian confession Sect. 17.
of the harmony of the confessions of the reformed Churches: that Hierom writing
to Augustine was also of the same judgment: the same also appears most flatly
to have been Ambrose opinion in the foresaid Epistle of Augustine. And indeed
in all ages, all learned writers amongst christians, for any thing that ever I
could read to the contrary (and yet for this cause I may truly say I have taken
some pains to read and search as many of them as I could come by) are fully
with us in this point.

2 Now next we know that though christian liberty especially consists in our
freedom from the curse of the Law, from sin, and from the wrath of god for the
same, and in our freedom from the service of sin, and from the rites and
iudicialls of Moses, and from being tied in all common wealths and churches, to
the precise followng either of one outward civil policy, or of one and self
same form of rites and ceremonies ecclesiastical, yet one part thereof lies
undoubtedly also, in our freedom and liberty in and concerning things
indifferent. For of these things the Apostle spoke, saying I know and am
persuaded, thorough the Lord Jesus, that there is nothing unclean of it self,
but to him that judges any thing to be unclean, to him it is unclean. Romans
14.14, and again unto the pure all things are pure. Tit. 1.15. And all things
are lawful for me, though all things are not expedient. 1. Cor. 10.23. And
therefore in respect of such things, it was no small part of his glory as he
shows. 1. Cor. 9.19. etc. to become all unto all, so to win the more.

3 Thirdly therefore we may not deny the christian supreme magistrate, who by
Gods ordinance is to be Esai. 49.23 as a nurse father unto his churches under
him, nor to the Bishops and others of the Clergy by his authority lawfully
assembled in a national Synod, authority in such matters as these, for the
more orderly government of the Church in their judgments, to prescribe
ordinances: always provided that the rites and ceremonies that thereby they
impose upon the Churches, be not contrary, but rather consonant to the general
rules left them in the word, to direct the^ therein. For else to what purpose
has the Apostle left that general rule in this case to al churches to the
worlds end? 1. Cor. 14.40. Let all things be done honestly and by order, this
therefore as their very due and right, is with one consent yielded the^ in the
foresaid 17 section of the harmony of the confessions, and Calvin upon the 11
of the first to the Corinth. and Beza in his 8 epistle (as indeed generally
always the learned of all ages and the continual practice of Christ's church
also have done) grant the^ the same: Indeed whiles as yet consultation is but
by them held, what shall in this kind be ordained or continued, or what shall
not. I find that lawfully (so it be done orderly and in quiet sort) they that
have lawful calling thereunto, may show the best reasons they can, to direct
them therein, to determine and conclude for the best: but when once upon mature
deliberation, the conclusion is made and published howsoever then we may not
deny the rest of the church that fredome and liberty, because of those general
rules given all christians, try all things, and keep that which is good. 1 Thessalonians. 5.21. and try the spirits whether they are of god or no, 1. John. 4.1.
to examine co^clusions by the word, yet doubtless in things of this nature and
kind, all must also remember, that Paul has given rule, that neither the
Apostles nor the churches of God, have any custom to warrant any to be
contentious. 1. Cor. 11.16. In case therefore any constitutions at any time by
christian Princes, and there national Synods in such matters, shall chance to
be made, which some private man or men examining by the word of God, are
thereby able to prove the same to be contrary thereunto (which I cannot deny
but may be possible, for the truth is, as our Church very soundly holds.
Artic. 21. general counsels may err, and sometimes have erred, even in things
appertaining unto God) yet such are then, but in all peaceable and in dutiful
manner, to make known those their reasons, for which they so think thereof to
those that are in authority, and no way otherwise by press or in pulpit, to
seek to trouble or to deface, either the^ or the church, in other respects
commendable, for matters of no greater moment then an aberration or twoe can
be, touching the outward orders only thereof; so leaving in patience the
success thereof to God, and to more mature consideration in the next Synod,
for so much I think the foresaid rule of the Apostle binds us unto, and
certain it is, as Augustine teaches in his second book against Parmenian,
Toleranda quaedam sunt, quae non sunt tamen probanda: and therefore as he there
says Cap. 1. as a man of right may quaedam improbare, so and firmitate debet
quaedam supportare.

4 Our fourth ground and principle therefore is, that the Sovereign magistrate
and the church, having in things indifferent lawfully once enacted their
ecclesiastical orders, and constitutions, howsoever before therein men might
use their freedom and liberty to use or not to use them, as charity in not
offending their weak brother thereby would best permit them, all men then are
only so to use their liberty therein, as that they give no scandale and
offense to public authority, nor show any contempt thereof in wilfully not
conforming them selves, according to the order thereby prescribed therein. For
when the council. Acts. 15. had once decreed that the gentiles should abstain
from things offered to Idols, strangled, and blood Verse. 29, we read that
Paul and Silas: Acts. 16. gave the Churches of the gentiles the same to
observe and keep after, as they traveled. And he him self having
prescribed, and further prescribing certain ordinances touching such matters
to the Corinthians. Chap. 11. commends them for observing them verse. 2. and
condemns those that contentiously refused so to do verse. 16. The frequent and
usual practice of the Church, as it appear both in all ecclesiastical
stories, and in the decrees of ancient famous councels, both in making of
canons touching such matters, and in obaying the same pregnantly prove, that
this is an ancient received truth. Yea even thereby, for the further proof
hereof, it appears, that it has been an usual thing in the Churches of
Christ, as well to censure them for Schismatics, who for a rite or ceremony,
not unlawful in it self, neither for nature nor use, would make a rent
therein, to the breach and disturbance of the communion and fellowship thereof,
as those for heritikes, that would set abroach and wilfully defend errors in
doctrine of faith or manners, to the disquieting and infecting of the same. And
truly not without just cause has it thus done, for as Calvin writes Lib. 4.
Inst. Cap. 10. Sect. 31. what a seed of braules and confusion of things would
that be, if every one might be suffered, as he list to alter things appointed
by public order. The consideration whereof, as Beza to his commendation notes
in his discourse of his life, caused him to submit himself to the order of
Geneua touching their communion bread, when he was admitted thither again,
though he then dissembled not, that he liked other bread better.

5 But then fifthly we are to take this with us, that then rites and ceremonies
by public authority commanded are such, as thus we are bound (though not in
respect of the things themselves in particular, yet in regard of gods ordinance
set down in his word in general, to bind us in all things not contrary to
his revealed will in the scriptures, to obey our superiors) to yield unto, when
not only in their own nature they are things neither commanded nor forbid by
the word, as is aforesaid, but also are neither for multitude nor cost too
burdensome to the Church nor are such in respect of the use wherein they are
urged, wherein any part or piece of Gods proper and immediate worship, outward
or inward, or any opinion of holiness, merit or greater perfection, or
necessity to inthrall or ensnare the conscience is lodged: And when they are
imposed as such things ought to be, only for order, decency, and comeliness, as
mutable and changable upon just occasion by like authority, and therefore as
edifying only as such things may, and not justly tending to the offense of
any, for that they are urged but to the lawful ends last named, and extra casum
scandali and contemptus, lay not an Inevitable necessity upon the conscience of
the obseruer. For so long neither any thing set down or meant in the second
commandment, nor any elsewhere in the Scriptures against adding thereto, or
against the worshipping of God in vain by the precepts and traditions of men
(howsoever some seem to think otherwise) can justly and rightly be drawn
against such ordinances: for the second commandment only condemns any
worshipping of God, otherwise then he has appointed himself. And so likewise
all the other places against additions, and vain traditions, are only against
such wherein any opinion of faith, Gods worship, or service is laid. And the
opinion touching the sufficiency of the Scriptures, by the godly learned in all
ages held and maintained, has been and is this, that either expressly or by
right inference, they are sufficient to determine all truth, concerning faith
and gods worship necessary to salvation: whereas still it has been also held
and yet is, for outward accidental and changeable rites and ceremonies, that
the Churches of Christ have liberty to ordain touching them, as the
governors thereof shall think fittest, and so neither all, nor always, that
they are tied to one precise form therein. Always provided that in their
ordayning the same they cross not but rather agree as near as they can as is
aforesaid, to the general rules left them in the same Scriptures, touching the
same: else how ca^ we justify Salomons seven days festiuity at the
dedication of the temple 1. Kings 8. Hesters and Mardocheus yearly holy days
Chap. 9 or of Judas Machabaeus his brethren? Math. 4.59 All which yet we allow
and all this is set down as one of the points agreed on amongst our selves in
this Church. Act. 6.20 and 34, whereunto none refuse to subscribe: and Calvin
upon the eleventh of the first to the Corinthians, and Beza in his foresaid
eight Epistle, most plainly teach the same: yea even Cartwright himself, as
you may see in the 84 Page of the late Archbishops book against him,
confesses, that it is not necessary that every rite and ceremony be expressed
therein, but that it is sufficient to make the orders of the Church therein
lawful, if they be according to the general rules set down in the
Scriptures, concerning such things. They therefore being so, if any yet will be
offended, either at the commanders or obeyers therein, it is an offense taken,
and not given, and therefore at their own peril only, for both reason and
religion teach, and therefore as an undoubted truth it is held and always has
been, and namely of Calvin, 1. Cor. 11. Instit lib. 4. Chap. 10. Sect. 31.32.
Chap. 16. of the harmony of the confessions: by August. Epist. 118.119. and
86. by Bucer to Alasco, by Peter Marter to Hooper, and by Bucer to Cranmer,
that the Churches of Christ have freedom and liberty according to these
general rules to prescribe orders, rites and ceremonies, and then they having
so done, it is not for private men to refuse, for the maintenance of good order
and peace therein, to conform themselves thereunto, for that the public
judgment of the Church in such matters, is always to be preferred before the
private opinion of this man or that, and the Church is not to stay from making
any constitutions in such things, until she can be assured that all will be
pleased therewith, for then hardly ever should she make any, and so also there
would never be any end of brawles, iarres, discords, and dissentions
thereabout. He therefore that herein would neither give offense nor take any,
is according to the council of Ambrose in this case, as Augustine has
reported in two of the former places, modestly and quietly always to conform
himself according to the order of the Church wherein he lives.

6. And yet though he do so, let not any man think, but for all that he may
be fully in possession of his Christian liberty in such matters, and so
according to the rule of the Apostle, stand fast in that liberty wherewith
Christ has made him free, not suffering himself any whit to be entangled
again with the yoke of bondage, Galathians 5.1. For we may sufficiently to
that end be possessed thereof, within our consciences, though for not offending
of a weak brother, much more for not offending the public estate of a famous
Church, we never outwardly possess our selves thereof: For the same Apostle
that gives us that rule, and as we have heard of such things confidently said,
that all things were lawful for him: 1. Corinthians 10.23. yet says also, if
meat did offend his brother, he would eat no flesh whiles the world stood,
that he might not offend his brother, 1. Corinthians 8.13. For Christian
liberty in respect of such outward things, lies in our right judgment
thereof, in that we are always persuaded that extra casum scandali and
contemptus, both of private persons, and the public state wherein we live,
we may without sin, and hurt to our consciences use our liberty therein.
The ignorance or forgetfulness but of which point, is the ground and cause of
many unbrotherly quarrels and contentions in the Church, about things of this
kind; let us therefore take this for the sixth general point needful to be
resolved of, for the better directing our selves and others, how to behave our
selves in matters of this nature. If any doubt whether extra casum scandali and
contemptus, one may lawfully without sin or hurt of conscience in such
commanded rites and ceremonies, sometimes upon due and just consideration and
circumstances, omit, or intermit the using of them, let him consider that the
decree of abstaining from things offered to idols, strangled, and blood,
mentioned Act. 15. notwithstanding after, the Apostle Paul in his first Epistle
to the Corinths (though he utterly disalow the breach of that ordinance by any
of the church in the idols temple to the offense of any weak brother, Chap.
8.10. etc.) yet when in respect of the circumstances, there is no such danger
of offense, Chap 10.27. permits them freely to eat thereof, without any scruple
of conscience. Neither ought this to seem strange unto any: for as there is a
precise keeping of such laws, and as flat a breaking thereof, so is there also
a middle or mean betwixt both, which is to do prater legem, and yet not
contralegem, because though then the letter of the law be not strictly
observed, yet neither the true meaning, nor end of the law is crossed, by doing
otherwise then it appoints. Upon which ground, though the foresaid decree of
the Apostles and brethren in the council of Jerusalem, was set down, as it
appears there, without limitation of time or place, how long and where it
should bind the christian gentiles to the observation thereof, yet in due place
and time, without sin or hurt of conscience, they grew to the disuse thereof,
and now it is universally held not to bind at all any, when there is no danger
of offense to any weak brother by doing otherwise. Wherefore it is to be
wished that the Church, and they that are in authority therein, would always
in the urging, the observation and execution of such their ordinances, not
only have a care (as questionless this of ours has had) first that by all
good means they whom the observation thereof concerns, might be taught how
with a good conscience they may, and ought to yield thereunto (for doubtless
the rule of the Apostle, whatsoever is not of faith is sin, Romans 14.23. holds
not only of things indifferent left at liberty, but also limited by
authority, for their use one only way) then also that they be but urged
according to the nature of the things themselves, that is, neither as
perpetual and unchangeable upon any occasion, nor as simply and absolutely
always to bind the conscience, as the things commanded by God himself do.
Much less would they be urged more earnestly then the ordinances and
commandments of the Lord himself in his word, least so the reprehension of
the Scribes and Pharisees should justly be incurred, ye tithe mint and annisse,
and leave the greater things of the law undone, or ye make the commandments of
God of none effect, for the observing of your own traditions, Math. 23.22. and
15.3. for it is all that the very laws of God himself do, or can do, simply
and absolutely to bind the conscience, and therefore human laws and ordinances
doubtless bind not simply of themselves, but so far forth only, as they are
made by lawful authority, whereunto the word of God requires subjection and
obedience, as long as the things commanded thereby are not contrary, but
rather consonant to the same word of God. Marvelous well therefore says the
late Archbishop in his answer to the admonition (as it is to be seen Page 279.
of his foresaid answer to M. Cartwright) that a christian magistrate may
ordain or retain, any civil, politic, or Ecclesiesticall orders and rites,
so that first they be not against the word of God, secondly, that justification
or remission of sins be not attributed unto them, thirdly, that the Church be
not troubled with the multitude of them, fourthly, that they be not decreed as
necessary and not to be changed, and last of all that men be not so tied unto
them, but that by occasion, they may be omitted, so that it be without offense
and contempt.

7. Hereunto I will add only one general rule more, and that is this, the
nature of charity being as it is described, 1 Cor. 13.4. etc. Certainly where
it is indeed, it will make the owner always strive to hope and to judge the
best that he can of his private neighbors actions and deeds; how much more
then ought it to bind all men to conceive and to construe the best of the laws
and orders of the Church of Christ wherein they live? contrary therefore
doubtless it is to Christian charity (let men therein pretend never so much
zeal) to stretch and bend their wits, to make the worst and hardest
construction they can of the laws and ordinances, set forth by lawful
authority in the Church whereof they are. Thus questionless whiles men do,
they give not unto Caesar that which is Caesar's, as Christ has commanded,
Math. 22.22. neither do they yield unto their superiors that honor and
reverence, that both Peter and Paul enjoin all Christians to give them, 1 Pet.
2.17. Romans 13.7. but rather by thus doing, they make themselves like such as
Pet. 2. Epist. 2.10. and Jude verse. 8. describe to be despisers of government,
presumptuous, standing in their own conceits, and fearing not to speak evil
of them that are in dignity. For they cannot but see that so far as they by
their hard conceit, and construction disgrace their laws and ordinances, so
far also they deface and discredit them that made and urge them. Remember we
therefore that as it is an ancient saying, so it is also in this case a very
sound rule, the words of the law may not captiously be taken, nor the law it
self slandered. For he that in wresting of the laws would seem to be (...),
therein uses to prove himself commonly to be no better then a Sycophant.
These things thus premised, and as I hope by us all yielded unto, as certain
truths, I trust I shall be able to justify as much as I have said, namely that
with a safe and good conscience we may and ought to yield conformity, so far
as by public authority is now required at our hands. Howbeit whiles I go
about this, understand, my purpose is not to take upon me particularly and
expressly to seek to satisfy every objection, that I know has been or is
made, but only those that I judge to be most material, and that also as
briefly as I can, for that I hope I have to deal with men of learning and
judgment, who therefore being satisfied in the greatest, will never stick (I
should think) at the rest.

CHAP. 4. Of Conformity, and first in kneeling at the receipt of the Communion.
TO proceed therefore therein, the things of greatest moment for which I
observe this urged conformity is stuck at, are either certain rites or
ceremonies, prescribed the Clergy to use, by the service book or Canons, or
certain exceptions made against the things thereby appointed in the Churches
service to be read. In the first rank three rites or ceremonies are misliked,
especially kneeling in the receipt of the Communion, the prescribed apparel,
and the making the sign of the cross after Baptism: Their reasons of the
dislike of the first of these. I find especially to be three; that it was not
used by Christ, nor his Apostles at the first institution of this Sacrament,
that it came in and first was taken up after the doctrine of real presence by
transubstantiation, and so thereupon adoration of the host crept into the
Church of Rome; and now by the Canons it is urged so strictly, as that neither
the minister may administer it to any that refuse to take it kneeling, nor they
otherwise receive it without incurring the censures of the Church. Touching the
first reason, long ago it has been sufficiently answered, as you may see Page
596. etc. of the late Archbishops answer to M. Cartwright, where he shows the
Authors of the admonition, that were the first vrgers of it, that as the Church
of Christ without any wrong offered to Christ, or his institution, have since
altered the time and the place, and diverse other circumstances in the
administering of this Sacrament, so may it also the gesture of sitting, (then
used for that it was instituted after the receipt of the passover, in eating
whereof they used that gesture) into this of kneeling. And as for the second,
it is grounded rather upon an imagination, then upon any sound ground, for
though there I find the admonition says it came in by the decree of Honorius,
yet they quote no author to prove it, which they would not have failed to do,
if they had had any worth the citing: And therefore though they were answered by
the foresaid author, that he could find no such decree of Honorius for it, yet
neither they nor M. Cartwright their defender, once since go about to prove
that ever Pope Honorius made any such decree. And there being four of that
name Bishops of Rome, and some of them before either transubstantiation or
adoration, was heard of in the Church, in fathering such a decree upon Honorius
without any adition or proof, argues the weakness and uncertainty of their
evidence. But howsoever the Papists since these gross and idolatrous conceits
of theirs touching this sacrament came in, have used it superstitiously in
adoring their host in the elevation thereof, I cannot find neither in their
mass book, or any where else, that either Priest or people with them, were
bound to receive it kneeling: and we by our public doctrine having abandoned
that elevation and adoration of theirs as we have, we use it only as in the
foresaid place the said Archbishop shows to no such end, but for that we
think it a fit and seemly gesture, the Sacrament being as it is a Sacrament
of thanksgiving, and it being also by the order of our Church always delivered
and received with prayer, wherein that gesture is very comely, and for that we
know that now amongst us, there is as great danger, if not more, of too base a
conceit, and of too much contempt of so excellent a Sacrament, then of any too
high an estimation there of. And therefore even, to prevent that the better is
it only that the Canon so earnestly vrges the use of this gesture of kneeling,
as also by urging it so severely, to put an end to the offensive diversity
(if it were possible) in the receiving of this sacrament of unity, some
sitting, some standing, some walking, and but some keeeling: for that of all
these kinds of gestures (these times considered) this of kneeling is judged the
fittest. For it was wisely foreseen that such multiplicitie and variety of
gestures, tending so much as they do, not only to set the people forward in
that whereunto they are too forward already, namely in thinking too too
irreuerently of so high a mystery, but also to the no small occasioning of the
Papists more and more to stumble both at our doctrine and doings, would not,
nor could not, be reduced to a needful uniformity in this case, without
some moderate severity used to that end. Wherefore otherwise to gather
thereupon, as though thereby our Church now meant to make it absolutely and
simply necessary to the complement of this sacrament, is but directly
contrary to our last premised rule, to make the worst construction of the
Churches order therein that may be; and therefore thus is their third argument
founded upon so bad a ground answered also. Further yet to breed and continue
in us (for the reasons aforesaid) the better liking of the Churches order in
this behalf, none can say of this gesture of kneeling, as they say of the
other, that it is a mere humane invention, for we find it often practiced with
allowance and liking of the Scriptures of the godly in praying, and
thanksgiving to God, and therefore howsoever idolaters have, or do, and will
still abuse it, in and about their idolatry, I hope for all that we purging it
of all such abuse, none will deny the use thereof to be lawful, and very fit
also, for true Christians in humbling themselves before God in their prayers
and thanksgiving. Sure I am that the consideration of these things has always
so prevailed with me, that without scruple of conscience, I have ever used it
my self in the receipt of the Sacrament: and rather am I encouraged to use it
still, for that I find that not our Church alone, but the reformed Church of
Boeme, as it appears in the harmony of confessions, Sect. the 14. also
allows and uses it. Let this therefore suffice touching this rite, and now
let us go on to consider what is said against, and what may be said for the
prescribed apparel.

CHAP. 5. Of conformity in the prescribed apparel.
ALl the rest of the prescribed apparel save only the Surplisse, for us
ordinary Ministers, as namely the Gown, Cloak, Hood, Cap. and Tippet, are in
all men's eyes rather civil, scholasticall, and academicall, then mere
Ecclesiastical, appointed rather only for a decent distinction and degree then
otherwise; neither are they imposed by law upon any such penalty as the
Surplisse, and therefore they must needs be without the reach of most, if not
of all the objections made against the Surplisse: Yea the very surplisse also,
in that it is, by the order now appointed, not to be worn of any minister that
is a graduat, without his hood answerable to his degree, so far forth must
needs cease to be mere Ecclesiastical. Somewhat also to the same end it is
that we see in Collegiate and Cathedral Churches, the wearing of it, is not
appropriate to ministers or deacons only, for that many there wear it, as well
as these, which neither are such, nor never mean to be. And as for the Coape
appointed by the 24 Canon, by the principal minister to be worn, when he
ministers the Communion in Collegiat and Cathedral churches, we need not here
trouble our selves at all, for there is none that I know, or hear of in such
places, that refuse therein to conform themselves. The only question
therefore touching apparel prescribed us ministers, is in effect about the
surplisse, so that it being once proved, that we may and ought (it being urged
as it is) conform our selves therein, I doubt not but with all it will be
sufficiently cleared, that we may without scruple yield to the use of the
other, appointed us for our ordinary civil use; out of the time of our
administration. Many have bin, and yet are the objections against it, but they
are also answered by the late reverend Archbishop in his foresaid book, Page
256. etc. that he that will take the pains but to read and mark what is there
said thereunto by him (partiality of affection laid aside) cannot but be
satisfied I would think. And there further shall you find proved, that
distinction of apparel was appointed ministers and used by them, before the
Popes tyranny; and namely that this of wering a white linen garment was in
use in Chrysostom and Hieromes time. Page 291, 259. and that he defends it not
(howsoever some other have done) for any signification it has, but for
decency, order, and comeliness sake only, nor as most fit and necessary,
but as tolerable and quietly to be yielded unto, and used for obedience sake
to lawful authority, commanding it for the peace, and good of the Church; so
proouing against all their said against it, either by the admonition, or by
Master Cartwright, as it is urged, and used by our Church, not to be contrary
unto any thing set down in the word, but rather to be consonant every way, to
the rules thereof touching such matters. And doubtless it is but either the
ignorance, or wilful error of men, to refuse and shun it as they do, for that
either it was first devised, and brought in by the tyranny of the Bishop of
Rome, or for that it has been used, or yet is, idolatrously by the Romish
Church. For first it is recorded by Polidor d^^inuent rerum. Lib. 6. Cap. 12,
and by Isidor writing de Stephano, that the said Stephanus (who was Bishop of
Rome anno Chri. 256, which was long before ever popery was) first decreed the
white lynnen garment, to be used of ministers in their ministration: and for
further proof of this point, let any man read Hieroms first book against the
Pelagians. Cap. 9. and upon the 44 of Ezechiell, and Chrisost. hom. 6. ad
populum Antiochaum, as also council. 4. carthaginense. Cap. 41. and he shall
find a white linen garment in those times also in use amongst the ministers of
the Church, as a distinct apparel to administer in, yea that more is, who so
reads Theodorets 2 book Cap. 27. shall find that Constantine gave unto
Macarius Bishop of Jerusalem a precious garment wrought with gold to administer
baptism in: all which was before popery that we so much condemn. And as for
the other reason drawn from the abuse of it in popery, not only by the
testimony of Augustine ad Publicolam Epist. 154 but also by the most clear
testimony of sundry other writers, both ancient and modern, and by sundry
presidents and examples out of the scripture, in the foresaid tract, in the
defense of the appointed apparel. Page. 272. etc. the said Archbishop
plentifully proves, that the good creatures of God never so much abused by
Idolaters, purged of that abuse, may be used and that very lawfully about Gods
worship and service, and so quite overthrows the ground of this argument, for
whereas to revive it again, they would shift off all these proofs, by saying,
they hold only when the things so abused, after purged and used, are things
needful and profitable; that cannot serve there turn: for many of the things,
if not all mentioned in those there alleged testimonies, were not so
needful, but that Gods service might have been fully done without them, and
it is not for private men to judge, so well as the public state, what is
profitable and to be used to good end. And in very deed the very Latin word
Superpelliceum used to signify a surplisse (as some not improbably have noted)
does show that it was taken up and used by the ministers in their
administration, in the primative and purest times of the Church, when the
ministers, and almost all that professed Christ, through the cruel
persecutions raised in those times against all such, were feign to hide
themselves in Caves, woods, and mountains, and for very poverty and want of
better, to go clothed in pellibus, in beasts skynns, even therefore for
seemlinesse and comeliness when they were to execute their ministry, to hide
and cover those there base garments of skyns. And many of the ministry now in
these days, either thorough poverty, or by some other means, ordinarily going
so raggedly and indecently apparrelled as they do, if it were but in that
respect, there is and may be a profitable and necessary use in some sense of
the same garment, to cover the deformity of the other, and to preserve them,
and their ministry, from contempt and derision, that too easily otherwise
therefore with too many, they might run into. But to take away quite all
force of this their argument, which yet seems to be the chief and principal
that any now stand upon in this case: first I say, suppose a surplisse for
matter and form altogether like ours, were abused and yet is as they say in in
the popish Church, yet ours that we now use being not eadem numero, but only
eademspecie, they can no more make idolathites of ours then the Corinthians
could of every sheep, because such some amongst them had been. As therefore
they without any scruple of conscience of their own and others, might eat of
any other sheep that certainly was known never had been offered to an Idol,
though it were never so like that which had, so what reason is there, but that
we for all this reason, of the abusing of a surplisse to Idolatry by the
Papists, may use an other surplisse made us since the banishment of popery out
of our churches, which we are sure they never abused nor yet used? secondly I
further ad that in very deed, it can never soundly be proved that a surplisse,
as it is prescribed to us with long and large sleeves, has been at all any of
their idolatrous mass garments. An Albe I find was one of them, but that was
with strait sleeves and diversely otherwise in their wearing of it differed from
ours, as many may see. Lib 3. Durandifol. 25. de rationali diuinoru^ officioru^
In deed I cannot deny but that at the first by the statute. 1, Eliza. ministers
were to use in their ministratio^ the same ornaments that were in use in the
reign of Ed. the sixth, and in the second year of his reign, amongst which
this Albe was. But her Majesty by virtue of the said statute, with the consent
of the Archbishop, and the high comissioners, in the seventh year of her
reign (as it appears by the book of Aduertiseme^ts then by authority
published) belike of purpose to remove the scandal taken by the popish Albe
appointed the surplisse in this form and manner that we wear it, to be-vsed
in stead thereof, hoping that seeing forma dat esse rei, and so thereby this
differed from that popish linen mass garment as it does, that by this change
of the form, people would also change their mislike thereof for the former
reason, into a liking of this, for that now it was not the same, neither numero
nor specie, particulerly nor generally, that ever had been used to or about
the Idolatry of the mass; for though Gedeons Ephod particularly abused, was
therefore worthy to be defaced, yet that neither caused Samuel nor David to
shun the wearing of linen ephods especially differing from his otherwise in
form, as they did also, yea (to conclude this point) seeing the Lord in the
old testament prescribed such distinct apparel for Aaron and his sons, and
all their sons to minister in, as we read he did, Ex. 28. and that not only to
be typical (wherein it stands not with the nature of the times of the new
testament to imitate the^) but also as it is, there expressly set down) ve. 40.
for glory and comeliness: things lawful to be respected even now in the time
of the new, what sound reason can be showed utterly to debar the Churches now
since Christ, from imitating them at all, in appointing any comely apparel to
discern, and distinguish their ministers by? To say it is an humane tradition,
and therefore to be rejected, as long as it is urged but as it is without any
superstitious opinion thereunto annexed, only for comeliness, order and
decency, as we have heard by the fifth principle before set down, it may
lawfully be retained and used. But if it be alleged, that it is offensive to
some eye, to many weak brethren, first answer is to be made thereunto, that
indeed that were sufficient to stay men from the use thereof, if lawful
authority, had set down no order therein, but now that it has, the case is
altered, as that according to the fourth premised ground, the ordinance of he
Church must be the rule that we are to follow therein, for fear of offending
the public estate thereof whose offense we are rather to shun then the
other; yea the case so standing with us, that in respect of our ministry and
place, we have all to say with the Apostle. 1. Cor. 9.16. woe be to us if we
preach not the Gospel, as Cartwright himself has written in the second part
of his reply page. 264 we are rather by continuance in our ministry, by
yielding to the use hereof, to shun this rock of incurring otherwise this woe,
then the other. For in this case all we can do for such, is says he, to seek
better to instruct them, and to pray for them, but we may not to prevent not
offending of them, leave undone that which God has not left free unto us, and
to the same effect, writes. Beza Epist. 8. and 12. But indeed to many are the
readiest to be offended at our yielding hereunto (though intruth it be of
conscience before God, even for their good) not for that they are weak
brethren, but for that they take us to be weak in yielding, and themselves to
be strong in misliking: and generally whosoever they be, if they be at that
point, that whatsoever is said to satisfy them, they yet are so far from
being willing so to be, that they seek and search all the corners of their
wits to the contrary, and refuse no pains by all means to nourish themselves
still in their weakness or error, it surely so appearing, that they would yet
rather have us leave all to humor them, what mischief soever grow unto the
Church, them and there neighbors, us and ours thereby, then for the good of all
these by using hereof, to continue in our places and ministry: verily in my
opinion, we make a fond choice, if we so respect them, that we neglect all
these. Whatsoever further is or can be said against this (because the
objections against it, and the sign of the cross, therein are common) I shall
have occasion to answer, in seeking to satisfy that which is objected against
that, and therefore for the surplisse in the mean time, I will say no more. And
yet even hereby it may sufficiently appear, that neither the christian
Magistrate, nor the Church are so without all word of faith, as some think, for
their appointing it, but as they do with us, for we have heard and seen that
both, by Gods word have lawful authority to make laws and ordinances, and
that the same follows then for decency and good order, and so in general
though not in particular expreslie to those ends to prescribe this.

CHAP. 6. Of conformity in using the sign of the cross in Baptism.
BEing now come to the sign of the Cross (howsoever some ignorant persons
think to the contrary) the use of it even in baptism, is far ancienter then
antichristian popery; for Origin that lived and dyed before the first three
hundred years after Christ were ended hom. 8 in diuersos locos Euang: makes
express mention of it, as the^ used in Baptism, and so does Augustine in his
time, in his one hundred and eighteenth tract upon John, and evident it is to
all of any reading in the ancient Fathers, that almost infinite are the places,
as others plentifully have showed, that have writ hereof, that might be cited
out of them that flourished before 400 years after Christ were expired, to
prove the frequent use thereof, not only in that sacrament but also otherwise.
In deed I must needs confess that very many of their speeches seem to sound
as though they too quickly grew to attribute to much unto it. But Master
Perkins in his problem lately published, writing of those their sayings, is of
opinion, that in so speaking and thinking thereof as they did, they had always
an eye and reverence therein, to Christ and his death upon the cross, and that
they put no such affiance in the sign, but only used it with reverence to
testify thereby, boldly their faith in him that dyed upon a cross, and to be
an admonitory sign unto them, to stir the^ up so, still to believe. But
howsoever either some of the^ to quickly, or the Church of Rome since, by
mistaking their metaphorical, and hyperbolicall speeches thereof, have used it
superstitiously, and Idolatrously, making it a sign of it self not only
significatiue, but also operative and effectiue of wonderful things, we
therein and therefore condemn them and retain the use thereof only that was
most ancient and free, either from superstition or Idolatry, namely to be as a
sign or token, neither naturally of it self, nor supernaturally otherwise,
either signifying any thing, or working or effecting any thing, in those upon
whom we confer it, but it is used indeed by us, and that by the minister in
his own name, and the congregations or Churches whereof he is minister, after
he has baptized the child, that it together with his admittance thereof, into
the outward visible church, upon the baptism precedent and finished, may
always after be an admonitory token unto it, never to be ashamed to profess
the faith of Christ that dyed upon a cross, and manfully to fight under his
banner against the world the flesh and the Devil; for after it is fully
baptized, and to manifest the same, Amen is said, then by the order of our
book, the minister says, we receive this child into the congregation of
Christ's flock, and sign it with the sign of the cross, in token that
hereafter it shall never be ashamed to confess the faith of Christ crucified
etc. So that not it alone, but it together with the public admittance thereof
into the Church, is made the token unto it, of that which follows and further
any man may se, that neither it alone, nor it together with that admittance or
receiving thereof, are made any otherwise to be a sign or token thereof unto
the child, then in our intention, and that only it is conferred by the minister
and the Church, and so withal they receive it into their fellowship and
company, of hope they have, that if it live (as they trust it will) coming to
age and discretion, and then seeing others baptized, it will remember, that
likewise when it was baptized, it was so received into the Church thereupon and
so signed, and that therefore thereby it would take occasion (accordingly as
they that baptized it, and so signed it, thereby seemed to hope and expect) not
to be ashamed to confess the faith, wherein it was baptized, and to show the
fruits and effects thereof in continuing Christ's faithful soldier, and servant
to the lives end. No sign therefore at all it is made betwixt God and the
child, nor betwixt the child and him, but only as a token together with the
outward receipt thereof, upon his baptism premised, betwixt the minister and
the people and it, of the christian hope and expectation they have, that it
will answer after in time both in belief, and life, that which they then hopd
and promised in the name thereof, as much as lay in them, it should. And it
rather appears, that this indeed is the only and true use of it with us, for
that in private baptism, which is only allowed, when the child is in more
danger to die then otherwise, the book does not prescribe the use of it, for
that belike they in that case, fearing rather the present death thereof, the^
hoping for the life, until it may thus confess the faith of Christ crucified,
it was not thought fit they should thus sign it in token of their hope and
expectation, that it should and would thus, not be ashamed to confess etc. for
the reason aforesaid, well and justly therefore it is protested in the thirtith
canon, that as it is used with us, it is no part of the substance of the
sacrament, and that being after used, it does neither ad any thing to the
virtue and perfection of baptism, nor being omitted, does detract any thing
from the effect and substance of it, for doubtless the child privately
baptized, by the order of the book without it: though it immediately after
die, is thereby and by our church taken and held to be fully and effectually
baptized the very name of the cross, as it is said in the beginning of that
canon, we find indeed so honored by the pen of the Apostle S. Paul, as that
under that very word, often in his epistles, he comprehends the death of Christ
with all the fruits and effects thereof, and therefore the sign after a sort
bringing the name of the cross to remembrance, and expressing it, by all
likelihood even thereupon grew, as there it is further noted, very early,
reverently also to be used in the primitive Church, to make thereby outward and
open show, to the astonishment both of Jew and Gentile, that Christians were
not ashamed to believe in Christ, that dyed upon a cross. For the use thereof
to that end is so ancient indeed, as that the most diligent studier and
searcher of ancient writers cannot show the first original and beginning there
of, he may show when first he reads it was used, but that will not prove that
it was not used before, but rather shows the contrary. Whereupon some think
that it is so frequent with the ancient Fathers, as namely with Basil Cap. 27.
de spiritu sancto to term it an Apostolic tradition, for that they think it
came from them and their times, for that other original sense, they cannot
show thereof. For that indeed as Saint Augustines rule de baptismo contra
donatistas. Lib. 4. Cap. 24, namely that which is universally observed in the
Church, and whose original we cannot show by counsels, and which has
always therein been used, that we are to think certainly to be an
Apostolic tradition. I wonder therefore the author of the late book published
against the cross, allowing the use and practice hereof in the primitive
Church to the same end and use that is in use amongst us, should dissallow it
in us, he says it was civil in them, but it is ecclesiastical amongst us,
but what reason has he to say so, seeing it was used by them in baptism, at
the first to the same end that it is amongst us? neither will that serve that
some say it was then taken up, and used because christians then lived
intermingled with unbelieving Jews and Gentiles, for let the testimonies of
the Fathers be examined where they mention the use of it, and it will appear,
that they used it as well when none such were by or near, as when they were:
and if their living amongst such was a warrant to them for the use thereof; why
is not ours likewise, living amongst so many profane Atheists as we do? We
use it but (as it is said in the foresaid canon) as a lawful outward ceremony,
and as an honorable badge of our Christian profession: Whereunto Peter Martyr
writeing upon the second commandment, having an eye says, if it be lawful
for us to wear the Cognizance of our own house and family, licet etiam signo
crucis Christianam nostram religionem profiteri: And this also was so clear
and manifest, that even Beza though elsewhere no great friend or patron hereof,
in this answer to Baldwin, speaking of such Churches, that still thus to this
end do use it, writes plainly, let such as it is meet, use their liberty
therein, Bucer also in his censure upon the first communion book, does most
plainly allow it, and we know Cranmer and Ridley, and sundry other learned and
famous Martyrs, lived and dyed in the liking and allowance of it, It is not
urged, nor used, nor defended by us, as simply necessary, or as immutable, For
the late Archbishop, even when and whiles he sought most and best to maintain
and defend the use of it, as it is with us, writes plainly of it. Page. 617 of
his foresaid book: it was used of the primitive Church, and still may be
used, and it may be left; but we choose rather to retain it, and to use it as
Paul did imposition of hands, and thereby as by an admonitory token to put the
child in mind of the duty, as hereby the other moved Timothy to be mindful
of his, 1. Tim. 4.14. All which laid together may make it evident, that not
only it is a thing of the own nature indifferent, because it is so, neither
commanded nor forbid in the word of God, but also as it is used and urged, for
that neither so, any way is it contrary to faith or good manners, but may well
stand with the general rules of the word left the Church for her direction in
such matters. Howbeit I know for all this, many both godly and learned, will
hardly be persuaded so of it: let us therefore consider the reasons they seem
to have yet further against it.

CHAP. 7. Containing answers to certain objections against the same, some
new, and some old, generally stood upon by the refusers to use it.
FIrst some seem now to mislike worse of it, since by the said third canon the
use of it has been explained as it is there, then they did before, and that
for two reasons: for that it is there said to be retained for the remembrance
of the cross of Christ, whereof the sacrament of the body, and blood of
Christ is a sufficient remembrance, until his coming again. 1. Cor. 11.26.
and for that therein also it is first said that the christians in the primitive
Church signed their children therewith, when they were christened, to dedicate
them by that badge to his service, whose benefits bestowed upon them in
baptism, the name of the cross did represent and then afer that, we now
following therein the primitive and apostolical churches, and accounting it a
lawful outward ceremony, thereby also as by an honorable badge dedicate our
baptized infants to his service: For this now say they must needs be taken for
the sense and meaning of our Church in the use thereof, howsoever before we
might have taken it, as I before have set down. But if such would herein put
in practice the last of the seven rules laid down for a preamble to this
treatise, neither these reasons would prove so strong as otherwise they seem,
nor yet hereby would it follow, that they are one whit enforced to take it in a
worse, or harder sense then they might before: for first in reason and
charity, we are all bound to think, that whereas by that Canon, as it
evidently appears thereby, the reverend Bishops and Prelates assembled
seriously and carefully, went about by their explaining the meaning of our
Church in the use thereof, to draw men to like and allow thereof better then
before, that they were not so inconsiderate, as so directly to cross their
own intent, in making it harder and worse to be like of then it was before.
Then secondly it is certain, if these their words might be so hardly taken, as
thereupon now to build such an erroneous and superstitious use of this sign,
as they (that thereupon now take occasion more to dislike it then before)
persuade themselves they justly may; then these reverend and learned fathers
and brethren of ours, should most absurdly contrary themselves, even in the
Canon it self; for growing toward the end thereof, as before they had
confessed, that always our Church since the abolishing of popery, has used
it with such sufficient cautions and exceptions against all popish superstition
and error, as in like cases are fit and convenient, so they conclude that by
this their declaration and explanation of the use thereof, they have not only
purged it from all superstition and error: but reduced it also in the Church
of England to the primarie institution of it, upon those true rules of
doctrine, concerning things indifferent: and according to the judgment of all
the ancient fathers. With what probability therefore can any man think, that
so many and such men, could in their foresaid words have any such hard meaning,
as thereby not only to make the sign of the cross of it self to serve to the
very same end that the Supper of the Lord does, as to keep in our remembrance
his death and passion, but also so plainly to encroach upon a principal use of
the other Sacrament, as to be the means whereby the child is substantially and
effectually dedicated to Christ and his service? Surely whatsoever other men
say or think in this respect, christian charity neither will nor shall ever
(I hope) suffer me to admit of so absurd a conceit of all, or of any of their
meanings, that either were the penners, makers, or allowers of that Canon: yea
the same charity and the dutiful and reverend estimation I have of them all,
leads, yea enforces me, even by the consideration of their own words used
within the same Canon, to be fully resolved, that that was never their meaning:
but that indeed their meaning plainly and simply was only, by the former to
signify, as the name of the cross in the phrase of the Apostle did comprehend
or represent, the death of Christ with all the fruits and effects thereof, so
the sign thereof with the help of our intention and meditation in the using
thereof, might be as a token or sign admonitorie to put us in remembrance
thereof: for by the name of the cross they say expressly the Apostle in his
speech comprehended as much, and that by that name or word was represented all
the benefits of Christ's death, and so that thereupon the making of the sign
thereof was shortly after taken up and used, thereby to make show and
profession of their faith in him that died on a cross, which they could not
do; without taking occasion thereby in some sort (which is not unlawful) to
remember his deaths and by the latter doubtless they meant only, (as these
words, immediately in the latter place added, show, as by the words used in the
book of common prayer it may appear) such a dedication of the child by that
badge to the service of Christ, as formerly the book only meant and intended;
which was no otherwise, then I have showed before: that is, a public
admittance thereof, with the conferring of that sign, into the congregation of
Christ's flock, and so into his service by confession of faith in him, and
manfully fighting under his banner against all the spiritual enemies: for
immediately before the act of the baptizing of it, the minister prays that
whosoever there shall be dedicated unto God by his office and ministry
(meaning in baptizing them) may be endued with heavenly virtues, and
everlastingly rewarded through his mercy: and then having baptized it or them,
in faith and hope that this prayer is heard, and so that they are by, and in
baptism, substantially and effectually dedicated unto God, Amen is said: after
follows the ministers and peoples admittance of them, and signing of them as
aforesaid: which is nothing but an approouing of the former dedication as much
as lies in them, and a declaring of their hope and expectation by that which
they do, that in time they will show and manifest themselves to be dedicated to
his service indeed, in faithfully serving of him both in belief and life: so
that even the words and order of the book, whereunto they have express
conference, in that Canon plainly show, that by them is meant no other
dedication of the baptized by that badge, then an approbation by them of the
former dedication of them in and by baptism, and so their declaration thereof
by that, and the admittance of the baptized, as the book appoints.
Appobatiue therefore, and declaratiue, and non effectiue, are they and the
Canon to be understood: wherein there is no such danger or alteration of the
former good meaning, that might be of this sign.

2. Now therefore these new objections thus answered, let us go on to weigh
what further either of old or else of late is objected against this sign of
the Cross, in answering whereof I shall, I hope; yet more lay forth the
weakness of these: ^t is still, and long has been alleged against it, that
it is made by us as it is used significatiue (and that when we have made the
best construction thereof we can) of that which is sufficiently signified by
baptism before, and that therefore in the urged use it is not indifferent, and
so not to be yielded unto. To this argument it is answered first, that it is
grounded of that which will not, nor need not be granted, namely that it is
not within the power and liberty of the Church of Christ, to ordain rites and
ceremonies with signification of spiritual things, especially of any thing
signified already by either of the Sacraments, for that were, say they, to
obscure them, and as it were to bring in new kind of Sacraments without
express warrant from Christ, which is unlawful. For where find they in the
word any warrant to debar the Church of this freedom and liberty, to
ordain rites with any such spiritual signification? Sure I am Peter Martyr a
very godly learned man in an Epistle of his to Hooper, plainly shows, that
he had never found any such, for there he says, how shall we debar the Church
of God of this liberty, that it cannot signify some good thing in setting
forth her rites and ceremonies? especially being so done that no manner of Gods
honor is attributed unto them, and that they be in sight comely, and in number
few, and that christian people be not with them ouerburthened, and matters of
greater importance be not omitted? But indeed though this and the rest of ours
be otherwise, thus qualified, as Martyr would have all such to be, and are not
dark and dumb ceremonies, as the Popish ceremonies abolished were, but are so
set forth (as is said in the tract of ceremonies prefixed before our Communion
book) that every man may understand what they mean and to what use they
serve, and so consequently (as there also is noted) are the freer from danger
of abuse; yet indeed, that book no where, nor any public ordinance of our
Church annexeth any signification unto any of them, as I said before, either
for that naturally of themselves, they signify any such thing, or that
supernaturally any such is tied thereunto: what use soever therefore we make of
any of them, by way of signification or resemblance, it is either from our own
declared meaning and intention in the use thereof, as in this, or from our
voluntary meditation thereof, as in the rest, and therefore they neither
darken the nature of the Sacraments, nor no way justly can be said or thought
to be as new Sacraments. For all Sacraments by Christ's own ordinance, not
only signify the spiritual things whereof they are Sacraments, but also are
Gods ordinary means, whereby he does offer, deliver, and seal the delivery
thereof, to all the worthy receivers of the same, in all which these come
short of them. And who knows not but the Sacraments have significations, some
principal and proper, and some less principal and common to them with other
things, and that therefore, though the Church may not either in her intention
or voluntary meditation, in the use of her own rites and ceremonies, thereby
encroach upon the principal and proper use of Christ's Sacraments, yet she may
without wronging either of Christ or his Sacraments, reach in her intention and
meditation by occasion of her own rites and ceremonies, to those that are
less principal and common. As for example, the Supper of the Lord has two
ends and uses, the one principal and proper, to be unto the right receivers
the Communion of the body and blood of Christ, as Paul shows 1. Cor. 10.16.
and another less principal, set down in the next verse, namely to knit us in
communion amongst our selves. Now though the Church, never that we read of,
ventured by any of her rites and ceremonies to signify the former, yet
doubtless both by her love feasts taken up in the Apostles times, as it
appears even in that Chapter, and by the use of the holy kiss, mentioned Romans
16.16. and 1. Cor. 16.20. yea even immediately before the receipt of the
Sacrament, by Iustine Martirs time, as it appears in his Apology unto
Antoninus Pius, it was the Churches use to resemble unto themselves the latter,
and thereby as by admonitorie signs and tokens the better to put and keep
themselves in remembance thereof: what should let therefore, but that the
sacrament of baptism principally and properly signifying our remission of
sins in the blood of Christ, and our regeneration through his spirit, in
being thereby so ingrafted into his death and resurrection, as that we are dead
to sin, and raised up to righteousness, but that the Church of Christ may
use the sign of the Cross as she does with us, as an admonitorie token of our
christian hope and expectation that the children of Christians baptized amongst
us, shall and will answer the less principal and common end thereof, which is
to bring forth the fruits and effects of the former, thereby before bestowed
upon them and sealed unto them?

3. Hereby also we are led to answer another maine objection which they make
against it, for that whiles it is used as it is, it is charged to be an
addition to Christ's Sacrament and ordinance of baptism, which is utterly
unlawful, or at least an arguing him in some sort of some imperfection in the
ordaining the manner how it should be ministered, in that we never read, he or
any of his Apostles made any mention of the use hereof in the administration of
this Sacrament. For even hereby we see already by the lawful use of the love
feasts, and the holy kiss, together with the receipt of the other Sacrament in
the primitive and apostolic Churches, neither of which were any more mentioned
by Christ in the institution of that Sacrament, then this was in this other,
that every such rite and ceremony taken up by the Church and used, when and
where the Sacraments are ministered, though they be also such as serve to
betoken and signify unto the people some thing also signified by the
Sacraments themselves, as these did, are not straight to be accounted either
unlawful additions thereunto, or things arguing Christ of imperfection, in not
remembering them in the first institution: They themselves that urge this
objection most, do allow diverse things in the administration hereof, and in
the other Sacrament also, as here either of godfathers, or godmothers, or of
the parents, or of some in their room, and that to answer certain questions,
as also in the other of ministering it in the morning, in the public assemblies
and to women, none of which are expressed in the first institution of either,
and yet they will not grant either of these things to folllow thereupon. But
the full answer to this objection is this, that the truth is indeed, that
Christ has left the institution of the Sacraments full and perfect for all the
substantial and unchangeable things thereunto appertaining, expressly set
down by the direction of his spirit in the Scriptures, wherein he is to be
followed without addition or detraction, yea or any alteraon thereof at all;
and that he left unto his Church the further ordering of the circumstances, and
further what was fit according to variety of times, persons and places, for
the most orderly, decent, and comely administration thereof, provided always,
that therein she keep her self in a course not contrary, but consonant to
rules set down in the same Scriptures for her direction herein: for thus the
practice of his true Church ever since has taught us to understand him
therein. Unlawful addition to any of Christ's Sacraments therefore, is only
that, that either participates therewith in all, or at the least in the chief
and proper ends and uses thereof, or is added for complement thereof, as
necessary and so unchangeable, whereas our Church in the last named tract of
her ceremonies protests of this and of all the rest, that they are retained
only for discipline and order, and may upon just causes be altered and changed,
and therefore are not to be esteemed equal with Gods law, and we have heard
that the 30. Canon particularly of this protests, that the using of it is
neither to add any virtue or perfection to the Sacrament, nor the omitting of
it detracts any thing from the effect and substance of it: And therefore not
only private baptism, as we have heard, is by our service book judged perfect
and effectual without it, but we see that our Church accounts many thousands
that have bin, and yet are baptized without it sufficiently baptized: so that
even thereby it is evident, that it is used not as a necessary supply to
perfect baptism, though it be called the sign of the Cross in baptism, but
that it is urged, only upon the minister, to use it as is appointed, as a comely
and decent rite in the administration thereof, and therefore he is only censured
for his contempt or neglect of the churches authority in omitting it, but the
sufficiency of the sacrament therefore, is never by authority for want thereof
once called in question. To argue therefore that it is unlawfully added to
baptism, because it is called the sign of the cross in baptism, in the
title of the 30. Canon, is a gross Paralogisme, for the words of the Canon
expressly sever it from baptism, in showing how the child by the book is
perfectly baptized before it be used; and though the whole tract wherein the
form of baptism is prescribed, is called the form of administration of
Baptism, yet who knows not that it is so, not for that every thing therein, is
to be reckoned as part of the essential form of the administering thereof, but
for that the chief part thereof sets down that, and the rest appertains but to
the circumstances, and to the comely and decent outward accidental and
changeable manner of administering of it.

4 But say some, yet it cannot be but unlawful in the use, for that being but
an humane needless tradition, it is placed so near baptism, and is urged as
it is. But as long as it is so severed from it, as it is, and is urged and used
with the cautions before mentioned, and so no way made either simply necessary,
or any way, any part or point of Gods immediate and proper worship, and
service, it is not, nor cannot be any forbid addition thereuto: Deuteronomie.
12. or elsewhere, or any vain condemned tradition, in or by the scriptures any
where, as is premised in the fifth principle agreed on at the first. But they
reply confidently as it is urged, that it is made a part of Gods service and
worship, and therefore that it is no better then a very Idol, and a forbidden
likeness of some thing in the second commandment condemned, and therefore by
no means to be yielded unto; yet as confident as they are herein this
antecedent of theirs, we utterly and wholly deny, for neither make we it, as
the similitude of any thing to be worshipped with any divine worship, inward
or outward, either in it self, or in that whereof it is made a likeness: the
Papists do both, and therefore as they use it, it is with them in their concept
a part of Gods divine worship, and a gross Idol they make of it, but in all
these respects, we condemn them: and doubtless they themselves, howsoever
they so esteem of it, as it is used in their manner, and with their intent and
mind, yet as it is made and used by us, there is none of any judgment and
learning amongst them, that anything regard it, and so much the stranger it is,
that any of our own religion quite contrary to our public protestation should
bear us, themselves or any other in hand, that we lodge any piece of Gods
worship in it, or make any Idol of it. Sure I am our hearts, our words, and
deeds, clear us both before God and man hereof: and that so being our best
armor to bear of the blow, that by this weapon they would give us, is to
think and say with S. Paul. 1. Cor. 4. As touching our selue we pass very
little to be judged of you or of man's judgment. But seeing they are so confident
of the truth of this their antecedent, let us see what they bring to prove it
withal: the effect and su^me of all their proof is first, that we use it in
the worship or service of God, therein that the Jews worshipped and served
God, with divine worship in the observing of their ceremonies prescribed by
God, by the ministry of Moses, also for that thereby in the public worship
of God religious duties are taught, and lastly for that it is an outward form
devised by man to some use of religion: in that it teaches him upon whom it is
conferred, some religious duty, by the signification thereof. To all this,
first I briefly answer, that neither any of these, nor all these together,
prove the antecedent before denied, then my reason thereof is this, things may
be used in the worship or service of God, either as necessary, essential, and
substantial parts thereof only, which are part of Gods worship indeed, or but
as circumstances, or only as humane or ecclesiastical orders appointed but for
seemelynesse and comeliness about the same, of which sort this of ours is: and
the Jews observing their rites and ceremonies so prescribed with right
understanding, and with sound hearts to God, therein might and did immediately
serve and worship God, because they therefore had the express warrant and
commandment of God in particular, and yet not we in ours, because we want
that, having only the general rule that he left us for matters of this kind;
and every thing that any way teaches religious duties in the public worship
of God, is not therefore part of his service and worship, but that only is so
indeed, that is of his own immediate ordinance, to that end, and when
accordingly it is rightly used; of which nature we hold not this rite to be
and as for the last which is to prove it to be against the second commandment
and so an idol, it proves it not so to be in this, for though it be an
outward form of some thing devised by man, yet that is not sufficient to prove
it to be an idol condemned in that commandment, for that it serves to some
use of religion, or for that also by our intention, and meditation thereof, it
is given by the minister and people as a token betwixt them and the child, of
the christian hope and expectation that they have it will answer that which
therewith all is added. For as we have heard the love feasts and kiss used, as
they were with the supper, and to that end they were also, were all this, and
yet were neither condemned by the second commandment, not yet Idols. And who
can deny but that the altar, built by the a tribes and a half mentioned Joshua.
22. was an outward form devised by them, and to a religious use, namely to show
an other day to their children, that they belonged to the same God that the
other Tribes did, and that therefore in respect of that end, use and
signification, it was allowed by their brethren, when they understood thereof,
how angry soever they were against them for it, before they understood it, and
so for all that, not condemned to be against the second commandment or an
idol? That altar in their intention and meditation, when they made it, was to
be an admonitory sign unto their posterity of that religious lesson in their
hope and expectation, and therein there case and ours in this are like, but
herein yet there is some difference that their inention and meaning therein was
secret to themselves, and therefore their building thereof, so subject as it
was, to offend the rest, and ours is plainly with all expressed and set down
in our book of every body to be seen, and therefore the better to prevent all
offense, or other construction of our meaning thereby: but indeed neither
they, nor we hold; that the altar, or our sign of the Cross of themselves; or
any otherwise; then in our intention, signify any such thing at all. And yet
this puts me in remembrance of another difference betwixt that of thicks and
this of ours, that that was visible and permanent, as the substantial crosses
used in popery also are, whereas ours is but as an action transient, and by
and by ceased and gone, and therefore neither so subject to further abuse, nor
yet to give offense, as either that of theirs, or these of the Papists, which
are used without any express notification with all, of the end and use
thereof, much more of any lawful and warrantable meaning they have therein,
and therefore the more doubtless offensive. Yet if we should thereunto annexe
the signification imagined, why should that be unlawful in our public
estate, when as the writers of the admonition think, that they lawfully may
prefer sitting in the receipt of the Lords Supper, before any other gesture,
for that it best signifies rest thorough Christ from sin, and the rites of
Moses; yea that more is, read we not Joshua 24. that he having pitched a
stone under an Oak, told the people that that should be a witness against
them, if they at any time after forsook that God, whom they then had chosen to
serve? But yet for further and more full answer to these prooffes of theirs,
we are to understand that Gods worship or service, is taken either properly, as
it is immediately tendered and done to himself, for that he has so commanded
it: Or it is taken in a large and general sense, for whatsoever is done so
with warrant from any rules of his word, as that the doer may do it in faith,
without which in nothing he does he can please God. Romans 14.23. as it seems
to be taken. Coloss. 3.17. where the Apostle says, whatsoever ye shall do in
word or in deed, do all in the name of the Lord Jesus. In which sense,
servants doing at the commandment of their masters according to the flesh,
any servile work not forbidden by God, doing it willingly and cheerfully as
they ought, for that God has commanded servants to obey their Masters in
such things, the Apostle says, they therein serve the Lord and not man. Ephesians.
6.7. And therefore so also when subjects obey the lawful ordinances and laws
of their Princes and Superiors, be they civil or ecclesiastical, because God
has commanded obedience and subjection to such, Romans 13. and 1. Pet 2. as we
have heard, and Hebr. 13.17. and their commandments have warrant from
general rules left them in the word, though there they be not particularly
specified, they may even therein in this sense be said to serve God himself.
But yet then any man may see, that there is great difference betwixt this kind
of serving of him and the other, for the other, is so his proper and immediate
service, as that men sin, if they yeald him it not, because of his own only
commanding it and requiring it at their hands. Whereas this grows to be but
an inferior kind of service of his, though rightly done very accetable also,
by the means of the lawful command of the superior, whom he has
commanded to be obeyed.

And therefore the late Reverend Archbishop in his foresaid book. Page 269.
writing and speaking there of the commanded rites and ceremonies amongst us,
and namely of the distinct apparel appointed ministers, says, that men know
we could be without them, and that but for obedience sake, we do not much
esteem them: which he neither could nor would have said, of any thing expressly
and immediately commanded by God, as a point of his perpetual or necessary
service or worship. Now then who is so simple but he may easily conceive, that
things of this latter kind, may be used about religion and the service of God
in the former sense, and yet for all that, made no part nor piece either of
religion or of the worship and service of God in that kind; which as long as
they are not, but only keep their own inferior rank and place, that which
they say of their so being used, makes nothing to prove their antecedent, or
any unlawfulness in them. For the rules against all addition by man to Gods
service and worship, prescribed by himself in his written word, and against
worshipping and serving of him by the precepts or traditions of men, are only
to be understood (as it is evident even by that which we heard Paul say of
servants serving the Lord Christ in doing their masters lawful commands, in
any thing that he has not forbid) of his service and worship in the first
sense: and therefore they are no better then wrested, when they are drawn
against such rites and ceremonies, and conformity therein, as we spoke of.

5 Neither is that any reason of force against them, that they are said to be
needless and unprofitable traditions of men, nor that they are made mere
ecclesiastical, though they had some signification of some religious duty
annexed unto themselves: for the judgment of the public state of a Church,
touching the needfulnesse and profitablenesse of such things; is to be
preferred before the judgment of private men. For they that be in place of
authority, and have been long exercised therein, being also Godly and
learned, through their better acquaintance, with the mysteries of government,
must needs see and judge better what is fit, and meet for order and
comeliness, then private men can. And as for their being made mere
ecclesiastical, by that which I said before of the surplisse, partly appears
to be false, and reason I can see none (as I have said also) why the author of
the book against the cross should account the use of it in the primitive
Church, being the same for which we use it, (namely to show that we are not
ashamed to profess faith in Christ crucified, etc.) to have been then civil,
and therefore lawful, and ours to be mere Ecclesiastical, and therefore
utterly unlawful. If their reason be, because we use it only in the church
and that by the minister, and they used it also elsewhere by any of them,
surely that is a very weak one. For though marriage be, or were only to be
solemnized in the church, and in the time of divine service, and that only by
a minister, yet that would not prove it to be mere Ecclesiastical, and the
like may be said of the burial of the dead: For notwitstanding burials are in
some sort civil, humane, and politic things, and therefore neither the
using it only in the Church; nor only by the Minister, will prove it so. And
I wonder that any should ever imagine, that an Ecclesiastical rite or
ceremony, should therefore be thought to be unlawful, because by the end
and use thereof it teaches some good religious duty. For none can be
ignorant, that Paul ordered, that in the Church assemblies women should be
covered, and men uncovered. 1. Cor. 11. and that, (as well Calvin notes) even
from ground sufficient in the words of the text there, thereby to signify the
subjection of the one to the other, and the superiority of the other over the
other, which are good religious duties and lessons. And a man would think they
were so much the more commendable, and the more tending to edification, by how
much the more they occasioned men to learn thereby, and to remember good
religious duties. But as I have often said we neither maintain nor defend
ours, for any signification they have, neither do we hold they signify of
themselves any such religious duty only by the help of our meditation, by
occasion of them, and by our intention in the use of this in particular, we
retain and use it, adding withal as we do, in hope of the child learning
and practicing that after, so the better also (for that we live amongst such
who have abused it otherwise, and would feign so do again) to keep and
preserve it from all such abuse, and in this ancient and lawful use; yet all
other arguments failing, many think, that because it has so superstitiously,
yea idolatrously been abused of the Church of Rome, even therefore as Ezechias
for like abuse of the brazen Serpent commendably defaced and destroyed that,
though once commanded to be set up by God himself. Number. 21. So much more
should this, being but a mere humane ordinance have been abandoned, and that
therefore it ought not thus to be urged as it is, or so being, is yet not in
any case for the using thereof by us to be yealded unto. Whereunto I answer,
first that there is more in the conclusion then the antecedent or premises
will bear, for though the idolatrous abuse thereof amongst the Papists, by
that example of Ezechias carry never such show of a sufficient reason, to have
moved our Ezechias accordingly rather to have quite removed it (as
questionless none will or can deny but upon that consideration and others, if
it so had seemed good unto his majesty, he might) (for doubtless Princes may
as well use their authority to remove such, as to continue them) yet the same
reason and considerations whatsoever else, are not therefore straight of
sufficient force, to bind us rather to leave ministry and all, then (he
choosing rather for other reasons that seemed stronger unto his highness, to
retain, and thus to urge it, which otherwise I am fully persuaded he would not
have done) to yield our obedience in the using it accordingly. For it is
generally held, that Ioab did lawfully at the last in obeying David's
commandment in numbering the people. 2. Sam. 24. having before in dutiful
manner sufficiently showed the king his reasons to diswade him therfrom,
howsoever David notwithstanding persisting in his purpose offended. And
therefore even Beza writing of these very matters of ours that we have in
hand, says that many things may be well observed, that are not so well
commaunmaunded, how much more therefore herein may we lawfully obey, seeing as
yet there is not found any unanswerable reason, but that lawfully we may also
be commanded as we are? And Master Cartwright after he had said all that he
could against the imposing of these rites and ceremonies upon us, yet concludes
in his second part of his reply, Page 265. in these very words, if the Prince
upon declaration of the inconvenience of such ceremonies, and humble suit for
the release of them, will loose nothing of the cord of this servitude, for my
part, I see no better way for the minister of God, then with a vn^^onition of
the weak that they be not offended, and prayer to God to strengthen them
thereunto, to keep on the course of feeding the flock committed unto him. But
indeed (well-beloved) now the question is not that we have in hand, what the
state should have done herein (though even in that respect yet, we in duty, as
I have said all are bound to think and judge, that for that they which are in
authority have done, and do in this case, they have sufficient warrant and
reasons to ground, and justify their consciences upon, both before God and
man, though sundry private men, not so acquainted as they with the necessary
rules of government conceive them not straight) but the question that we are
now to seek to be resolved upon only is this, whether any of the things
whereunto our conformity under pain of deprivation is thus required as it is,
be so intolerable for unlawfulness or inconueniency, as that rather then, we
will be drawn to yield obedience thereunto, we are by our persisting in
refusal thereof, to suffer that sentence of deprivation or but of suspention
from our ministry to pass upon us. Touching therefore the rest of this
objection, (and so that notwithstanding to resolve us, that we may and ought
rather by yielding to the use of this, to hold on our ministry, and to keep
our places, then for absolute refusal so to do, to leese both,) Again, I would
wish every man to take the pains to read what the foresaid Archbishop has set
down touching the lawful retaining in the public service of God, things
formerly used to idolatry, in his forenamed tract touching apparel, beginning
at Page 272, unto 279. for there out of Aug. 154. Epistle ad publicolam, and
out of Calvin upon the 23. of Exodus v. 24. Peter Martirs Epist. to Hooper.
Bucers to John Alasco, and out of another of his to Cranmer, as also out of
Bullinger and Gualters Epist. he shall find in all these men's judgments that
things both wickedly invented, and also grossly abused, may yet be so purged of
that abuse, as that they may be used to good Ecclesiastical uses. Yea who
knows not that Gedeon was commanded to take his fathers bullock which he had
dedicated to Baal, and the wood which he had likewise appointed to his service,
(...) therewith to offer and burnt a sacrifice to the Lord? Iud. 6.25. that the
vessels of the temple abuse, by Belthasar, Dan. 5.3. were restored by Cyrus
Ezra. 1.7. and after again without scruple used in the Temple about Gods
service, by the people of Israel after their captivity, and that sundry things
profaine before abused by the idolatrous inhabitants of Hiericho, were yet
reserved, and consecrated with Gods own liking and allowance to the use of the
tabernacle and sanctuary. Joshua. 6.23. Whereby, what exceptions soever
otherwise they make against these examples as unlike to the things with us in
question, thus much yet is got, that the gross abusing of a thing to to
idolatry, makes it not always after so polluted, as that eue^ therefore simply,
it can never be purged of that abuse, and so used again about Gods service to
a lawful and good end and use. But to urge them with examples nearer and liker
to our rites in question: Bells in popery have been and yet be (witness Durand
writing of the use of them, de rat. divine. offic. Fol 7.) as much abused as any
of these, and yet we removing the abuse, lawfully I hope retain them to a good
use, to call our people together to prayers and sermmons. Again the
commemoration of the Saints departed, used to good and holy ends only at the
first in the primitive Church (as to the praising of God for them, and to the
better encouraging of others to imitate them) grew in time grossly to be abused,
in adoring and praying unto them: and yet in the universities in their
Colleges, and at Saint Mary's in Oxenford as also at Paul's Cross, and else
where, the abuse being removed, the is a kind of commemoration of some
departed used, and I think none will say unlawfully. They cannot deny both
these were first taken up by humane ordinance, that the use of them is
Ecclesiastical, and that neither of them, are simply necessary, and yet I
trust they will not say, that the Church with us does amiss in retayning them
as she does to a good use, notwithstanding their foresaid abuse by and in the
Church of Rome. And kneeling who knows not has been a gesture and yet is,
most grossly abused in and of that synagogue; in saying their prayers, and doing
their idolatrous devotions to their stocks and stones, and yet who is there
that will or may disalow it as an unfit and uncomely gesture to be used in our
religious and dutiful service of God I grant for kneeling we have warrant by
the commended examples of the godly in the scripture, yet thence it follows
not that it is simply always a necessary gesture in praying, which is
sufficient in this, for that point. But to press them yet more nearly in this
case, howsoever they may say, that some signing with the sign of the cross
and some making thereof has been, and yet is superstitiously and idolatrously
abused of Papists, how can they say in particular that ever this of ours has
so been, or is. They know and we know, that we in the use thereof have and
do banish all their superstitiousnesse and idolatry in the use of it. As
therefore we use it there never was nor is abuse in it: neither have or do
they abuse the same that we use Numero and indiuiduo eodem: but the like only
in Genere aut specie: which makes no more to the condemnation of ours, then the
abuse of some particular cattle, to the sacrificing of them to idols or
devils, could or did make unlawful the sacrifycing of any other in the time of
the old Testament like thereunto to the Lord, or as I said before, to debar
the Corinthians from eating without scruple of all like mutton or meat, to that
which had been f^red to Idols. And as for the urged example of Ezechias in
demolishing, for the gross abuse thereof, of the brazen serpent, who sees not
that it reaches no further but to the encouraging by that example of others of
like authority, upon like occasion, to do the like, to and with the very
particular things so abused, and yet not to deal in like manner with all
things that after shall be like the other made and used only to a lawful and
good end? And after the use of that particular brazen serpent was ended, for
the which GOD commanded it to be set up, as we read. Number. 21.8. the
retaining of it so long after, even without any warrant from God, and therefore
there being no use thereof, neither by divine ordinance, nor by the churches,
when it was so abused, it was the best so to deface it. And yet these things
considered, that binds not our King straight of necessity to abolish this,
which he found here before imposed by the lawful authority of a famous Church,
to a lawful end, (...) howsoever other abused the like. But why may we not,
to some such good ends as we may imagine, then say some, as well retain the
use of some material crosses, and other images in our churches, as this? I
answer that besides that there are many other reasons, why that should not be
allowed, though this thus be, there are two evident reasons taken even from
the nature of this, and the manner of the use thereof, that put such a
difference between this as it is used and them, that no way the tolleration of
them follows upon the allowance of this. For first as I said before, this is
past and gone as soon as it is made, when as those stand and abide still, and
this has the use and end express, and that lawful with the making of it, and
so have not the other theirs, neither is their use lawful. And therefore this
is, so freed from the danger of superstition and idolatry infinitely better then
those.

CHAP. 8. Containing answers to objections that concern some men specially,
touching these ceremonies or rites.
THus now their maine and chief objections answered, touching the unlawfulness
of the urged use of our ceremonies, because as I understand there are some, who
though they be brought to confess, that being in nature end use, no otherwise
then they are with us, they may of some be yielded lawfully unto, yet for their
parts in respect of some particular circumstances arising from their own
persons and places, hold it still so inconvenient for them so to do, that they
think they were better to suffer deprivation for refusing to yield conformity,
herein something further I must add, for the answering of the objections of
such: wherefore indeed I must needs confess, that it is most true, that the
same Apostle that said speaking of outward indifferent things, that all things
were lawful for him, ads straight that all things were not yet expedient for
him, all things edify not, 1. Cor. 10.23. And therefore questionles well may it
be, that some that are persuaded of the lawfulnes of others yelding, yet may
doubt of the expediency thereof, both in them and in themselves. But we must
withal remember (good brethren) that when Paul so spoke, he spoke of things
indifferent left at liberty, and not as then for their use one only way
limited by the lawful order of the Church, as now our case in this is, for
then as we heard in the fourth general rule set down in the beginning, the
same Apostle vrges. Act. 16. and 1. Cor. 11. the observation of the Churches
orders in such things. For the^ in respect of their outward use, such things
have much altered their nature: for before whereas charity was our rule to direct
us, how, where, and when to use our liberty therein, now the public order of
the Church, is to be our director in that respect, and both we and others in
charity and love to maintain peace, and good order in the Church, are to
conform our selves quietly to her ordinances therein.

1 But thou will say perhaps thou have so long disused them, and by speaking
against them, made them so odious unto thy people, as that it cannot be but
much to thy discredit, in that place especially, and to the no small offense of
thy people, for thee to yield now unto the^, though to keep thy place and
ministry, which otherwise thou have small hope to do. I grant this may be,
and is the case of some, and where it is so, I cannot deny, but it is the
harder with such, by much, but yet I cannot think but in time, by using good
means, if not by thy self, yet by others, these inconveniences, as great as
they seem to be, may be removed. For first touching the disusing of them, or
at least of most of them, it was and has been very common and ordynarie a
long time. But in most places, not for that the parties that so disused them,
ever thought it unlawful to use them, especially when they should be urged as
they are now, under such a penalty, for I am sure some that have disused some
of them as long well nigh as any, yet have always both privately and
publicly, when by their text they had just occasion so to do, and otherwise
also showed plainly that that was their judgment of them: and happily also would
long ago have used the surplisse, if they could have had any fit, or any at
all to use; And therefore in deed only forbore the use of them, because they saw
without danger, and without any public offense they might so do. In these
therefore their former disusage of them, being but in his sort, it can be no
just cause of discredit, now to use them: for notwithstanding, then and now,
their judgment seems to be one and selfsame of them, namely that they thought
and think them such things, both for nature and use, as that they could and
can be content to forbear them, when and as long, as the state will quietly
permit them so to do, and they can be content again to use them rather then
any way they would scandalize that, or show any contempt of lawful authority.
If any yet will condemn such of inconstancy or leuity, or that they do so of
worldliness to save their livings, they do them the more wrong, and themselves
directly in their so rash judging, offend against the nature of true christian
charity, 1. Cor. 13.5. and against the rules that flatly condemn all such
judging one another in and for things of this kind, as we heard in the
beginning of this treatise. Such therefore are by good instruction, privately and
publikly to preserve their people from these faults, but if that will not serve
against all such rash censures, they are with the Apostle, 1. Cor. 4. comfort
themselves with the testimony of a good conscience, that witnesses with them
before God, that that which they do, they do first in faith, that so lawfully
they may do; and then that even for the good of their flocks, and for the best
discharge of their conscience before God (as they think in that respect) they
do as they do herein. And therefore to draw them from rash judging, it were to
be wished, that they knew and would imitate the modesty of Justinius Martyr in
his conference with Tripho, and of Cyprian in his epistles to Quirinum and to
Iubaiam^: where they may find, that the one wished that Christians might not be
condemned in his time, for the bare using then some of the ceremonies of Moses;
and that the other persuades that none should judge another, or shun
communion one with another, for there diversity of judgments about the thing
then in controversy, touching the baptizing again or no of them that before
had bin baptized of heretics, which counsel as he gave, he himself took;
insomuch that Augustine, though therein, dissenting from him in his third book
against the Donatists, greatly co^mends his moderation, and christian courage
in that point, etc. Truly for my own part, I must and may with a safe
conscience before the Lord say and protest, that I find my self in conscience
so bound to atte^d my flock, and to fulfill my ministry therein, in feeding of
it still with knowledge and understanding, that I cannot but say with the
Apostle, 1. Cor. 9. Woe is to me if I preach not still the gospel, such a
necessity I find laid upon me so to do and therefore I could never persuade my
self (as I said before) that if for any or all these things, I should willingly
suffer my self to be put therfro^, it would ever serve me at the last day, when
I shall appear before the judge of quick and dead, to yield a reason and an
account why I so did, then to make answer that I could not be suffered so to do
any longer, unless I would co^form my self herunto. And doubtless (my good
brethren) considering you have the same outward calling of the church that I
have: and most of you as good, if not better gifts, and the Lord has sealed
unto you his approbatio^ of your ministry, b^ many excellent fruits and effects
thereof amongst his people, why should you not al be of the same mind with me if
(...) with me, yet with Master Cartwright, who as you have heard would not
have you to forgo your ministry, for refusing to be comfortable in these,
notwithstanding the offense of weak brethren, for where offenses cannot be
redeemed (says he in that foresaid place) otherwise then by leaving that undone
which the Lord himself has not left free unto us, but cast a yoke of
necessary service upon us (meaning thereby our continuance in our ministry to
preach the Gospel) there the case is otherwise, then that we should for the
not offending of weak brethren, suffer our selves to be put from that. In
deed, when (as he says a little before) the not offending of private men is
laid but in the scales with any thing that God has left free unto us, as is
the choice of meats, and drinks then it will wey that down, but in no case as
he there adds, it will in the scales so counterway the preaching of the Gospel
(which is so necessary for him that is called thereunto, as that woe is his if he
do it not) as that for the shunning of that, he should let go so necessary a
duty. But if neither of our words nor opinions be of sufficient weight, to draw
all others to our minds, yet I would think our reasons should.

2 As for that which is urged in the second place, namely that thou have
preached against them etc, though as I said that make thy case in yielding
harder, yet (good brother) both you and your people know I hope, that it is no
news to hear famous men, to have their second cogitatio^s (witness but S.
Aug. books of retractations in matters of a higher nature then these, and for
which yet there is better and more clear light in the word) wiser and better
then their first. And always it has been counted a glorious thing to yield
unto the truth, though men have oppugned it never so long before. And what
should any man so stand upon his own private credit, as in comparison thereof
to forget the maintenance of the credit of so gracious and christian a King,
and the public credit of so famous an estate of a Church as this of ours is,
that vrg us hereunto? we deceive our selves, if we think we offend men straight
in the sense that it is forbid, when they are angry at that we do, and
therefore prate and talk their pleasures of us: but the^ only we so offend Gods
children and others indeed, when we do or say any thing whereby justly in truth
we occasion the^ either to fall into an error, or into any sin, neither of
which we do in this case, in obeying for the good of the^, and Gods church the
lawful ordinances of the same

3 O that every one would as forcibly bend his wits to take a survey as well of
the inconveniences of their refusal hereof, as it seems they have done of the
contrary. For then quickly they would and should find (in my opinion) that the
inconveniences this way are far the greater: For doubtless whiles they
pretend conscience, as they do, for their so doing, and stand upon so many
reasons for that their refusal, as though the things whereunto they are urged
were in so many respects contrary to Gods word, do they not thereby as far
as the credit of their persons, and those their reasons stretch, discredit both
his Highness, and all the state of this Church, that join with him in the
urging hereof, as vrgers of so many things against the word of God, to the
weakening of them, (...) consequently so much, in their reducing to conformity
of religion, and the open practice thereof with us, both Papist and Brownist?
for so many reasons they have by this means put into their heads and hands,
why they should hold out as Recusants still. And though I must needs confess
their cause be infinitely worse then this of these men, yet by this their
example doubtless, they take the more encouragement to plead their blind and
fond conscience, for the justifying of their said stubbornnes and peevishness,
and also to think that they may be yet as well borne withal in their
disobedience in greater matters (which as they think more deeply concern
their salvation or damnation) as th^s, in these things of lesser moment. And
say they in words never so much, that they yield his Majesty his just and full
title of supremacy in all causes, and uer all persons as well Ecclesiastical
as Civil, yet as long as they refuse, as they do in things of this kind, to
yield him obedience, hardly can they persuade his Highness (says the libeller
T. W. in his late augmented and printed libell against us, that in earnest they
do mean so indeed. For in matters that God has expressly, or by good
consequent from his word commanded, first himself (say they) they would and
should obey though he said nothing, and if he should command contrary to
that his word, then answer would and might be made, that they were rather to
obey God then him, and therefore in such matters as this, which are neither
commanded nor forbid by him, are they to show they yield it, or wherein else
can they? And by perseuering in this refusal, and so occasioning thereby the
sentence of their ordinary to pass against them to their deprivation, alas,
to what inconveniences (besides the weakening of our selves and our whole cause)
do they expose themselves, their wives and children, and their flocks,
whereunto they are so strictly bound as they are, by so many bonds, natural,
civil, and Ecclesiastical? Surely, surely (dear brethren in this iron and
hard world, men had need be sure that they suffer for an apparent righteous
cause indeed, to bear them out cheerfully to endure the manifold
unkindness thereof. O what a grief can it not choose but be, for many to see
as it is much to be feared, it will come to pass by one means or other upon
this occasion, they leaving their places, that such shall creep into their
rooms, as not only shall want the skill and will that they had to do good in
their flocks, but also that shall even in their sightes, if not pull down
themselves, yet suffer by the common adversary that to be ruinated that they
with great labor before had built. But put case Law should not be executed so
severely, yet who sees not, whiles men openly by their refusal of this
conformity lay themselves open to the danger thereof, that thereby they so
weaken themselves in their places, that they shall no sooner go about to bridle
by other laws, any lewd persons in their charge, but that thereby they shall
provoke them to urge the execution of this law against them. It may be the
mouths of some Papists and foolish protestants also will be opened against them
that yield, and surely we se, they will not be stopped against them that refuse.
Many will be offended at thy yielding thou say, but more and they that are
more worthy to be respected, will be offended at thy refusal; by thy yielding
thou strengthens thy self, thy Prince, and the whole state so much, by thy
unity with thy brethren that do against their common enemy, and thine, to all
your rejoicing, by thy continuance in thy refusal, thou weakens all these, to
the joy of our common adversaries.

4 To conclude therefore this point, the best advise and council further that
I can give is, that as heretofore thou have sought to gather all the reasons
together thou could, to induce thy self still refuse so much thy own
harm, and peril, and the Churches, so thou would henceforth study as
seriously to satisfy the same, and seek out as carefully, reasons to persuade
thy self that with a good conscience thou both may and oughst to yield. For
this I must needs tell thee, that thou but deceiuest thy self, and seek
also to beguile others, as long as thou pretendest that thou refusest only of
weakness or tenderness of conscience, and yet wittingly and willingly thou
hold on the former course, and do not follow this advice. Forecast
therefore in time, as well what is or may be said to strengthen thy conscience
in the lawful use of these things, as ever thou have, what tends to hold it
in weakness still and therefore not to dare to use them, and earnestly with thy
self as well forethink of the scruples and troubles, that thou may have in
thy conscience, after that by thy standing to long in this refusal,
deprivation be pronounced upon thee, for the inconveniences that many ways
may grow thereby, as ever thou have thought of those that may come by thy
yielding; least when it is too late, thou then cry, had I wist; Christ yielded
of his right to pay tribute to the officers of heathen Caesar, least he should
offend them. Math. 17.27. And so likewise Paul, though he could truly say he
was free from all men. 1. Cor. 9.19, yet withal, even there, he glories in
it, not as in an infirmity of his, but as a commendable course of his, wherein
he was to be imitated of others, that he made him self servant unto all, in
such outward things that he might so win the more, in conforming him self
both to Jew and Gentile, weak and strong (as there he sets down at large) that
so by all means, of all sorts he might save some, yea thus he did, when there
was no positive law of the Church, to bind him so to do, how much rather
would he have so done, if there had been any such to have bound him
thereunto, under pain of ceasing else from preaching of the Gospel, which to
do he confesses then such a necessity was laid upon him, that woe was unto him
if he preached it not? None of all the Apostles more fervently and frequently
taught and urged the doctrine of christian liberty in such things then he, and
namely from the rites and ceremonies of Moses law, Christ being come, and
having put an end thereto; and yet we see even he, many years after Christ's
ascension coming to Jerusalem, there at the persawsion of James and the
brethren, to maintain the peace of the Church, and so to win an opportunity
to do the more good amongst them, yielded according to the ceremonial law of
Moises, to be purified the next day with four men that had made a vow, and
entered into the temple with them, declaring the days of the purification,
until that an offering should be offered for every one of them. Act. 21.23.
And to the same end he yielded to the circumcision of Timothy before that
Act. 16.3. And yet he could not, nor was not ignorant what a supersticious
opinion many of the Jews then had of those things, and what a show of a
dangerous consequent the retaining of the^ in use, so long after the coming of
Christ might seem to have. Howbeit as long as he knew in his conscience how
rightly to use them, and he knew that James and the brethren urged him to yield
to the use of them, but to a good and lawful end, he thought it his duty to
that end to yield, as you have heard. Wherein though the success answered not
their good meaning therein, yet that is no sufficient argument to condemn his
so doing, as unlawful, for we know that most lawful and commendable actions
through the frowardness of the ungodly have often as hard events as that had;
and we have heard, 1. Cor. 9. how he glories in his so doing, and lays his
example therein forth at large to be imitated of others. Indeed when these
things, and namely circumcision was urged by the false Apostles, as necessary
to salvation, and as a thing to merit by, and to tender unto God any part of
his proper and immediate worship, then the same Apostle is most stout in the
refusal thereof, and therefore in that case by no means, as he writes
Galathians 2.3.4. would he yield that Titus should be circumcised, and he most
confidently assures the Galathians, that whosoever (meaning with that opinion
thereof) should be circumcised, Chap. 5.2. Christ should profit them nothing at
all. Otherwise yet when it was used but as an indifferent thing, without any
such superstitious opinions tied thereunto, even in the same Epistle twice, he
said thereof, that neither circumcision, nor uncircumcision was any thing, but
a new creature, or faith that wrought by love, Chapter 5.6. and 6.15. for as he
said in another place, the kingdom of God is not meat nor drink, but
righteousness, peace, and joy in the holy Ghost, Romans 14.17. And (God be
thanked for it) unless we would wilfully offer the Church of England manifest
wrong, we cannot say that any such superstitious opinions are tied by the
ordinance or meaning thereof, to any of the rites and ceremonies that it
prescribes us: but that they are imposed no otherwise then such things lawfully
may be, and therefore I would think that this example of Saint Paul gives us
a plain light how to carry our selves therein, and accordingly to say, the
wearing or not wearing of a Surplisse, the making or not making the sign of
the Cross, is not any thing. For the best and most honorable defender thereof
that has been, and whose sayings thereof for his learning and place, may
worthily be taken for the true meaning of our Church therein: has of the
Surplisse said in plain words, Pa. 258. of his foresaid book, that he thought
none that would communicate with us in the use of the Sacraments, though either
the better or the worse thereof for the external habit of the minister, and of
the other as much (as we have heard before.) These things therefore duly and
without partial or preiudicate opinion weyed and pondered, I hope will be
sufficient to persuade that lawfully, and with a good conscience we are rather
to conform our selves to the order of our Church in these ceremonies, then for
refusing so to do, to incur the sentence of deprivation of ministry and all.
Having therefore thus said what I thought fit, and I hoped might serve the turn
for this, let us now proceed to the consideration of the other exceptions, that
are made against conformity required, taken from the things that by order
ministers are enjoined, by the book to read or use.

CHAP. 9. Touching the practice of the orders in the book of reading of the
Scriptures Canonical.
THough by a rubricke in the tract of the Communion, we be directed to read
Homilies, yet seeing that concerns only such as cannot or will not then
preach: and none such (for any thing that I hear) refuse to yield the urged
conformity, we may (whiles we are in hand only with this point) omit saying
any thing of them, reserving that which we have to say thereof, until we come
to the other point, touching subscription, within the compass whereof the
allowance of the reading of them indeed comes, not only by means of that
rubricke, but also by virtue of the 35 article in the book of articles. The
things therefore that now only we have to consider, are the exceptions that the
refusers of conformity make against the order that the book appoints, first
for the reading of the Scriptures Canonical or Apocrypha, and then against
other things set down in the same to be read, in the formal use and practice
thereof, in all which I will strive by how much I have been longer then I had
thought I should, in the former, by so much to be the briefer. In the order
appointed by the book touching the reading of the Canonical Scripture, three
things are misliked, namely that thereby a great part thereof is not appointed
to be read at all, that some portions thereof are appointed to be read at such
times as they are, as namely the Epistles and Gospels the first day and Sunday
of Lent, the Epistle on Innocents day, and the Epistles on Easter eve and
Michaels day, and lastly that the portions of scripture inserted into the
book, and the Psalter annexed thereunto, are so prescribed thereby to be read
as they are, wherein yet there are many known faults that by no means can
stand with the same Scriptures in the original tongues wherein they were first
written. The first, whereof is proved to be a great fault, for that it is a
kind or taking from the word, and forbid, Revel. 22. and a depriving the
people of one good means the better to enable them to search them: and so is
the second said to be, for that by the precise appointing them at those times,
the people are occasioned to mistake and to misunderstand them, and likewise is
the third, for that so there is false witness borne both against the
scriptures, and the spirit of God the author thereof, as to have said and
meant that there, which they never did. But to the first of these, for any
thing that I can gather out of the 14 Canon (for by the statute made at the
first, Eliz. 1. to establish the book, as well all addition, detraction, or
alteration thereof, in the use and practice of it was forbid as it is now by
that Canon) it may as well now as before, and indeed both before and now truly
and justly be said that no such inconvenience need arise by that order, for
that no minister either by the book, or by any other ordinance of our Church,
is (...) forbid, over and above those that are appointed (being allowed to be a
Preacher) to read any or all of those that are not, at such times as he shall
think good, with exposition thereof, and sure I am, I myself have so done,
and in full persuasion that therein I have done nothing against order therein
taken either before or now. For doubt less any man may justly think that by
our Churches order they were onley so left out as they are, in that they were
not thought so lightsome and easy to be understood as the other, that are
appointed to be read, being but barely read without exposition and
interpretation: and in the mean time none that can, are forbid to read, and
study them privately: But if they were by the Calendar as well appointed as the
other orderly to be read, yet in that in parish Churches the people com not
together, but upon few days in the week, they might miss the hearing of most
of them as well then as now. And as for the second, the inconvenience imagined
to arise thereby, every minister that makes scruple at conformity, being a
Preacher as commonly and generally he is, that likewise he in reading of those
Scriptures at those set times by soundly interpreting them, and preaching
thereupon, which the book no where nor any other Canon forbids him, may
prevent. And touching the last I hope shortly all occasion of that objection
will be removed when the new translation by his Majesty's most Christian and
Princely order in hand, shall be finished, and authorized as the only
authentical translation to be used in our Churches: and in the mean time I am
persuaded that no Bishop in this land, will deny any minister (that can and
will in peace and quietness use that his liberty) to read all the foresaid
Scriptures, in the book according to the great Bible by order already from
themselves appointed to be in Churches, that we may read the Chapters out of
it: for though we may find that the Book appointes Epistles and Gospels,
Chapters and Psalms to be read, yet no where shall we find there either that
they are said to be any part of the Book, (and therefore they were left out in
the latin translation thereof) or that it ties or binds us to any one
certain translation for the same. But if it expressly did, may we justly
think that it is contrary to the word, to read the Scriptures to the common
people, in a translation that has such faults, as the originalls thereof
rightly understood sometimes will not bear? Doubtless then I fear (in faith
and assurance in our consciences that we do always well therein) we shall
never allow them to read, or to have read unto them the Scriptures in any
translation at all: for when can we be certain that any translation is free
from all such faults? unless therefore with the Papists we would debar them
from having and hearing the Scriptures at all in the vulgar tongues, we must be
contented that they read and have them read unto them in translations that
(happily when we have all done) may have some such faults. And this is it, that
both they and we must content our selves withal in this case, first that the
faults be such, which though they stand not full with the original, yet they
import not any error against any necessary truth elsewhere taught in the
scriptures, of which kind (for any thing that I can remember) amongst all the
faults noted in the foresaid inserted Scriptures, in the book there is not
one: and then that those faults are not so defended by our Church to be no
faults, but that always it has been permitted the godly learned ministers in
preaching of any of the said Scriptures, in a wise and discreet manner,
notwithstanding, to acquaint the people with the sense most agreeable with the
original: yea we see most of the same faults corrected and amended already in
the foresaid great Bible, commonly called the Bishops Bible: and now again,
that that whole translation and others are to be examined and so all faults
that have past in any hertofore (as far as the learning and diligence of man
can reach unto) are to be reformed, all which duly considered I hope may serve
to answer these objections.

CHAP. 10. Touching the reading of the Apocrypha.
NOw the next is touching the books appointing the Apocrypha to be read as it
does, wherein many faults are found also, as that they are appointed publicly
to be read at all, that they are appointed to be read as Chapters of the holy
Scripture of the old Testament, and as more edifying then the Canonical
omitted to give room for the^, and that often there is a special choice of
them, for certain solemn feast days or holy days. All which objections (as
I said before) the Deane the^ of Chester, now L. Bishop of Rochester, (no man
then or there finding any fault with that his answer, in the conference before
his Majesty) showed was needless, because by the preface set before the
second volume of homilies (which is by order of our Church allowed and
authorized as well as the book, and indeed published since the books first
authorizing in the year 1563. and therefore even by that circumstance more
likely and fit to serve in this point to explane the meaning of the book,) the
minister is exhorted to wey and to read his Chapters privately before he come to
read them publicly, and thereupon, if in his discretion he think it fitter
and more to edification, to read a chapter of the new for any that is appointed
of the old, then so to do. And indeed this being even so (as any man may see it
is in that place) in that thereby he is so left to his discretion to change any
chapter appointed to be read of the old, and therefore thereby some times may
so do with a canonical chapter, what reason has any man to think, but that
he may so do also with the Apocrypha? or who can truly say that ever yet any
minister was troubled for his quietly and peaceably taking and using his
liberty herein? you heard also before, what the same reverend man truly
reported to have been said by his Majesty in the foresaid conference,
touching the omitting the reading of any apocrypha chapter, that justly might
be charged with any fault, crossing the canonical, Page. 63. of his report
thereof, since in print. Further, certain it is that Doctor Abbots Deane of
Winchester, one called also to the foresaid conference and then vice
chauncellor of Oxenford, in his answer of late published against Doctor Hill.
Page. 317: urges again the direction of the said preface, to the second book
of Homilies, published by authority 1563, whereas the book was authorized
some four years before, to prove that the minister by warrant from thence,
may lawfully in stead of any of the Apocryphal Chapters appointed to be read
on sundaies and holy days, and therefore much more as he says upon the
working days, as he in his wisdom and judgment, shall think fit, using
prudence and discretion in that behalf, read other canonical lessons, and so
likewise others in print, have answered this objection since (as it should
seem with the good liking and allowance of them that be in authority, which
being so all the branches of this objection, are even thereby quite cut of, as
also all the hard consequents and imputations by reason thereof imposed upon the
book, or the order thereof, so far as conformity is use and practice thereunto
reach, are utterly removed, especially seeing also in the preface of the book,
it is said that nothing is thereby appointed to be read, out either the pure
word of god, or that which is evidently grounded thereupon, and the late
Archbishop, as plainly refuses to defend any thing allowed thereby, to be read,
not grounded upon the word of God: Page. 720. of his foresaid book. But
suppose the worst, namly that it be not, or were not so, or if it had been so,
that now yet by better view of the Callender, for the order in this respect in
August, and by the canons, it were taken away, as some allege (though looking
thereinto, and as seriously considering thereof as I can, I find nothing to lead
any man justly to think, that in that regard the case is any thing altered, or
otherwise then it was before) yet though by the book we be tied never so
strictly to read them, yet we are not thereby bound to justify them to be
faultlesse, neither do we, for likewise by the said book, by a certain
rubric in the treatise of the communion, we allow sermons to be made, and if
we read not a homily, we should preach, and yet we thereby do not justify all
sermons made according to that order, always to be without all faults, but
surely most, if not all the supposed faults against them, that by the book are
appointed to be read, by favorable construction, would be much lessened, if
not quite removed. And in that by the very express order of our book, we are
both before, and after we read them, to note out of what book every chapter
thereby appointed to be read, is taken, and in the sixth article of the book of
articles published first and concluded on, in convocation. 1562, which was
three years after the book was first authorized, all the Apocrypha books are
apparently severed from the canonical, and there further it is said, that as
Hierom faith, the Church does read them for example, of life and instruction of
manners, yet it does not apply them to establish thereby any doctrine, it is
most evident, howsoever they are appointed to be read and some canonical
omitted, and on some solemn feast days, and holy days, and as chapters of
the holy scriptures, or of the old Testament, that yet by none of these, or all
these together may we, or can we gather, without doing the Church of England
manifest wrong, that ever it was or is her meaning to equal them, much less
to make them in dignity or in edifiing superior to any of the canonical, but
rather indeed all these notwithstanding, her meaning and desire is, that every
one should know that they are but Apocrypha chapters, and therefore far
inferior to any of the caconicall, especially we having acquainted our people
as we should which be canonical books, and which be apocrypha, teaching
them even by their names to know and discern them. In common charity therefore
we are bound whenever either in the book or in the Homilies, they are said
either to be Chapters of the old Testament or holy Scripture, to conceive
(whereas holy scriptures, or old Testament, are taken either according to the
vulgar and common speech, for all that commonly is wont to be bound together
in Bibles with the holy scriptures of the old testament, or more properly and
strictly, for those only books thereof, that we are sure were written by such
direction of the holy spirit, that preserved the writers thereof, from all
erring therein, which therefore only we count and call canonical) in so
speaking of them, that the said books speak, and therefore are to be
understood so to do, only in the former sense. And when therein there is
comparison made betwixt chapters of the old testament of less, and more
edifying, we can not, for the foresaid manifest difference acknowledged to be
by our Church betwixt all the canonical books of the old Testament, and all
the Apocrypha even in that respect, understand it to be betwixt any canonical
appointed to be read or not read, and the Apocrypha set down to be read, but
only betwixt the canonical appointed thereby to be read, and those that are
not. And looking into the Kallender for proper lessons for sundaies and holy
days, in that thereby I find none but canonical appointed for the sundaies,
and Apocrypha often for Saints days, I always have taken it, that even
thereby our churches meaning was, plainly to give us all to understand, that as
she in her regard and estimation preferres the Lords day, before all other
holy days, so she would have us even by this order to see, that so she
preferred the canonical, before the Apocrypha, in worth, credit and dignity:
but suppose the comparison should by the book be meant of certain chapters of
the Apocrypha; it is so, for that the same are wholly consonant with the
canonical, and are more now to our edification, then the canonical, either
for their hardness, or for that now they do not so much concern us. these
things therefore wayed indifferently, and with minds rather seeking to be
satisfied, where justly they may, then needlessly still to keep stones, and
blocks in their way to stumble at, I trust the force of this objection is so
removed also, that henceforth it will stay none that duly considers hereof,
from peacably yielding, this notwithstanding, to conform themselves to the use
and practice of the book.

CHAP. 11. Concerning the interrogatories in Baptism.
THe next thing of any moment, that I find troubles and hinders men from
yielding to conformity, is the order of the book for the interrogations and
answers in the tract of baptism, whereat I the less must needs maruail, for
that I find by the 23. Epistle of S. Au: that one Boniface a learned Bishop in
his time, was also troubled therewith: but then I must needs say again, that I
find in the said Epistle, that it first appears, that they were even then in
use in baptising of Infants, in effect as they are now, and that there the said
S. Aug sets himself earnestly in the best manner that he could, to defend the
use of them, against all the objections of the said Boniface; yea further
certain it is, let any man read Dionisius ecclesiastical Hierarchy. Cap. 7.
and he shall there find, that in that Authors time (whosoever and whatsoever he
was) they were also in use, and likewise of some misliked, and that therefore he
to defend them, expounded then the promises there, that the godfathers make, as
also our late Archbishop does, defending the same Page. 611. as made only to
signify that they will undertake to do as much as shall lie in them, that
after, the child living to years of discretion, it shall perform that which
they promise and vow in the name thereof, which therefore in the first entrance
into our Catechism; every one is taught to profess, that thereby he takes
himself bound to do, and therefore accordingly that he will. And surely
hereupon it is also that in the new addition to the Catechism also it is said,
that the child performs faith and repentance, in that they promised them both
in the name thereof, so speaking for that so they are both vowed and professed in
the name thereof, and not as some hardly take it, as though now therein, it
were the meaning of our book, to teach either that both these are actually in
every child that is baptized, or that one may believe and repent by another,
but only so to show that their good hope was, in so promising in the name
thereof, that in time it should and would. To this effect S. Austin in the
latter end of his 105. Epistle, having an eye to the like use in his time in
answering for the child, most plainly writes, that truly the child so answers
by their mouths, and believes by their hearts and mouths that so confess for
it; as it is there newborn, by the ministry of the baptizer. See him also,
to this purpose: de verbis Apost. ser. 10. And indeed who so only considers the
words of the book, not only in the questions and answers themselves,
especially as they are set down in private baptism, but also in the
exhortation, precedent, and consequent, in the tract of public baptism, as
also what is set down concerning the same in the entrance into the old part of
the Catechism, shall be enforced to see, that the said questions are proposed
to the infants, and that the answers are made only by the godfathers and
godmothers thereunto in their names, for and of the hope, which they in
christian charity have of them (which teaches them to hope always the best,
1. Cor. 13.7. of such as are so borne in the Church, and descended, and come of
Christian parents, 1. Cor. 7.14) because they are not able then so to answer
for themselves. The reason and ground of which custom is, that in the
administration of this Sacrament the Church always has thought, there is to
pass a mutual stipulation and covenant betwixt God and every party to be
baptized; and therefore seeing children born or descended of parents, whereof but
one is a christian, so far herby are sanctified, as that they are admittable
to, and capable of baptism, 1. Cor. 7.14. and yet not able either to offer
themselves thereunto, or expressly themselves to make the same, they that in the
name of the parents and congregation present the^ thereunto, should in this sort
and manner, as our book appoints it, do it in their names; thereby not only
showing what they hope they after will do, but so binding themselves also to be
what means to them they can, that when they come to age and to discretion, they
shall perform al which they promised for them, or in their names. Which as his
Majesty said in the foresaid conference, when question was about these, ought
the less to seem strange unto us, for that it is an usual thing for gardians
to orphans and children, to answer and to promise sundry things in the names
of their said pupils and wards, and that yet the foresaid pupils and wards, are
after to think themselves bound as well to perform the same, as if they had
their own selves being of years of discretion so answered and promised.
Whereof also another experience his Highness gave us in his own self, and
that when he was crowned king of Scotland, being then but an infant, yet then
his nobles answered in his name, as he himself would and should have done, if
he had then been a man, and therefore whereof he had ever since been and would
be hereafter as careful to perform the same, as if he had himself made the
said answers. It may be at the beginning this form was prescribed to be used,
only as some think, to such as when they were baptized were of discretion and
understanding, thus to answer for themselves, and yet very likely is it also
(that so the rather it might appear that the Church would have all men to
understand that the baptism of such and of infants also was one and self same
baptism, and that they therein as well as the other entered into covenant with
the Lord) that it was thought fit and necessary, that the same answer, should
be made by some of the congregation always in their names, that the other made
themselves. Wherefore to conclude this point, in my opinion, well and justly
has again our late Archbishop, Page 602. of his answer to Master Cartwright
concerning this objection said, why should it not be as lawful for the Church
of England by public authority to appoint godfathers and godmothers, thus to
answer in the name of the child, as for the writers of the admonition, to allow
upon their private fancies, that parents or some in their rooms in case of
their necessary absence, should in the child's name, make confession of the
Christian faith and desire to be baptized therein? Thus therefore in the name
of the child they professing and desiring, what is it but in the true meaning
of the book in Christian charity, and hope so to do, for that they are
persuaded, that if the child were of age, it would even so do, profess and
desire, and therefore that they in the mean time do so in the name thereof, in
full expectation, that when it shall, it will account that by them it self so
did, that so the Covenant betwixt God, and it may in this Sacrament stand
ratified therein. And yet in some sense according to Christ's saying, Math. 18.
it might well be defended, that such little ones believe in him, as habitually
they are reasonable, not actually.

CHAP. 12. Answering diverse objections against the book touching baptism and
other things there ordained
ANd seeing by Christ's baptism, and his ordaining of this sacrament, water was
alloted to be the outward part therein, why may we not according to the book,
both say and think that thereby the water of the flood Jordan, wherein he and
others were baptized, and all other water, was indeed sanctified (meaning as
the outward element in a sacrament by the institution thereof, was, and is
thereby sanctified for that use) to the mystical washing away of sin! As for
that which is further objected against that which is set down, in the foresaid
part of the Catechism, touching two sacraments, only generally necessary to
salvation, the meaning only is, that there are only 2 such, taking a sacrament
properly, as thereafter it is defyned, and that they two are necessary so to
salvation, as by no means without danger thereof, they may be contemned or
neglected, and that for all christians, first or last, young or old, and then
what just exception can there be made at all against that? So also by the order
that is now taken in the book, that the lawful minister only shall privately
baptize the child, the old objection against the conditional baptising of it
after in the case mentioned in the book, is sufficiently taken away, for now
that will never need to be put in use. And as for the ring used in marriage,
the words with my body I the worship, or the rese^blance that it is said there
to have of the spiritual marriage betwixt Christ, and his church; I find not
that any seem greatly to stand at any or at all of these. And if they should,
surely they could not therein find any just cause; for the ring is but given
and taken as a civil token betwixt the parties that are married, of the promise
and covenant that therein they make one to the other: and the word worship
there used, does but import that worship or honor that grows unto the woman by
marriage, in that thereby man is so made her head that she has in the phrase
and sense of the Apostle, thereby also such a right of, over and in his body,
that thenceforth it is not his own, as it was before, which whiles by marying
of her, he intitles her unto, very truly he may say in that sense, that with
his body he does her worship, and finding the holy ghost, so often has taken
delight under the shadow of marriage betwixt man and woman, to set forth unto
us the spiritual marriage betwixt Christ and his Church, the speech in the
book being to be understood no otherwise, but as having reference only
thereunto) as indeed justly it cannot) no just fault can be found thereat. Now
as for all the rest of the objections alleged against precise conformity in
the practice of the book, from certain words and phrases in sundry prayers
and parts thereof, which seem hardly and harshly to be set down, yea so as
without some alteration they cannot well be so used, to help us in that, we
are to call to mind again his Majesty's pleasure (as I noted in the beginning
of this treatise) most graciously delivered us in the conclusion of the
conference, that he would have us to take every thing in the best sense we
could, for in that sense only he would have us to understand that he urged them
to be used and yielded unto: for in this case, we but so doing, there is
nothing so hardly set down, but that taking it and explaining it as the very
book means it, and as the publikly professed and authorized doctrine of our
Church does lead us, the offense thereat will be removed.

2 Then secondly, howsoever some now (so the better to countenance their
refusal to yield this conformity (though in some sort they have seemed better
to like thereof heretofore) persuade themselves, and would also persuade
others, that now they are more strictly bound to follow in every thing the
precise letter of the Book then before, by the new Canons, and the declared
meaning therein of the Church in that respect, we are to understand that both
contrary to his Majesty's foresaid declared pleasure in that point, and
contrary indeed both to the meaning of the book and those Canons, it is so
conceived: for if that were so, that now upon no circumstance or due
consideration the precise letter thereof might be altered at any time, then we
should neither bury, baptize, nor visit any but males, and though there be
but one to be baptized, we should yet always use the plural number in
speaking thereof, for so only runs the letter of our book: yea (that more is)
if conformity now urged bound us to such a precise and strict following the
very letter of our book in every thing, then thereby we should be bound to
breed the Bishops and the whole state, more trouble by our exact so doing then
they breed any by the urging of it. For by the last rubricke in marriage, every
married couple should receive the Communion that day, and by an other, even the
last also in the tract of confirmation, it is flatly set down, that none are
to be admitted unto the holy communion, until such time as they can say that
Cathechisme, and be confirmed, for all wise men will and may easily conceive,
that if our conformity bound us so strictly to the letter of the book, that by
force of these two Canons, no Papists or Brownists that refuse utterly to
communicate with us, nor any else that cannot both say the whole Catechism,
and were not confirmed also, might by any minister of this Church lawfully be
married, what inconveniences soever otherwise grew thereof, and likewise that
all vnconfirmed, old and young, man and woman, noble and ignoble, should be held
from the communion, until they could all say the Catechism, and were also
confirmed; there being therefore so few in comparison of the rest that are thus
qualified, what a stir would this breed? Ministers in most places should
have far less to do, then they have in marrying and in ministering of the
Communion, and the Bishops would be driven to spend all their time and living
in confirming of the vnconfirmed, or the whole land would mightily be
disquieted in running and seeking unto them for no small space. The makers
therefore of the Statute Eliz. 1. First to authorize the service Book, though
thereby as strict order is taken for the uniform practice thereof, as ever was
by any Canons since, without any alteration thereof, yet most wisely
foreseeing, as well the mischief and inconvenience that might grow in time
upon some circumstances in following too to precisely the letter thereof, has
only made penal the wilful transgressing the order thereof, and obstinate
standing therein And therefore also in the second Article, whereunto
subscription is made touching the use and practice of the Book, he that
thereunto subscribeth, promises only to use the form in the said Book
prescribed in public prayer and administration of the Sacraments and none
other. Whereby it should seem to me, that the edge and force both of the
statute law and Canon, is against Papists and Sectaries, that will use new
forms or rites quite differing from this Book, or but little or none of this,
and not against such as are careful to use the whole form and substance of
this without any alteration thereof at all, but upon due circumstances, and
just consideration, reason and occasion, and that in peace and silence also
answering yet always by that their alteration or explanation, the true end and
sense thereof, as much as any way conveniently may be, and therefore we may be
sure that such alteration only of some occurrents therein, is lawful and
allowable. As for example, when reading the Collectes appointed to be read on
Christmasse day, or Whitsonday, certain days follwing, the minister quietly
and in good discretion, chooses rather to say, as about this time, then as the
very letter is, this day, because he knows that Christ was borne but of one
day, and the holy Ghost likewise in that extraordinary manner came down but
upon one: or when in the receipt of the communion by himself, or in his own
person, he chaunges the words appointed to to be used in the delivery or
receipt thereof; namely the words, given for thee, into these words given for
me: what Bishop or Ordinary in the land can or will dislike him for so doing?
Likewise, in the foresaid cases, doubtless the meaning of those rubrickes
only is, that they shall communicate that day if there be a Communion then,
and they be fit, and that none are to be held to be fit to be admitted
thereunto, but they that are confirmed or which for knowledge, age and
discretion might well have been. And so though the book prescribing a common
rule and order for the burying of all such as in such a Christian Church as
this is, shall die (in Christian charity and hope that all would die like
Christians) appoints the minister to say in committing his body to the earth,
that he does so, in sure and certain hope of resurrection to eternal life:
and therefore after also to pray, that they together with that their brother
may have their perfect consummation and bliss in Gods eternal and everlasting
kingdom: yet now without any breach of that order, by the other Canon, Persons
dying excommunicated, Maiore excommunicatione, for some grievous and notorious
crime, when no man is able to testify of their repentance, the minister is not
to bury at all, much less in the precise form, and with those words. And
otherwise it is well known, that murderers of themselves, and sundry other
notorious offenders, dying in and for those their such crimes, ministers are
not by that order, or by law, at all bound to bury: and therefore not in that
very manner. Wherefore then, as the very reason given in the Canon in the
foresaid case shows, when both the minister and most of the parish knows (as
the case in my knowledge both has been, and therefore may be again) that one
comes to be buried, that lived and dyed most profanely, more like a very
Atheist, and a gross infidel, then like any Christian at all: who does not
see, that the discreet minister (yet therein nothing crossing either the
meaning of the book, or the intent of the authorisers thereof) may in wisdom
and discretion, in such sort use, and alter those words: as that neither he
bury his body in sure and certain hope of the resurrection thereof to
eternal life, as the body of one that died like a Christian indeed, nor that
he be enforced to say, that he and the rest there present, may have their
consummation with him in Gods everlasting bliss and kingdom? For we may be
sure that it was neither the meaning either of the book or of the authorisers
thereof, first or last, in those set and precise words and terms, to bind the
ministers to bury any but such whom with a good conscience they so might. And
yet who knows not that fit it is, that for the maintenance of good order, the
rule should be so generally see down, because it is not fit (many amongst such
a multitude of ministers as be in this kingdom, lacking due discretion) to
leave all or any in such a case simply at their own liberty? And yet again,
who is so simple but he understands, that hardly can any rule in such matters,
be so generally set down, but that ever the equity thereof, and the true
meaning of the prescribers thereof, will and may admit of some instances to the
contrary. Howbei Gods mercy being so infinite as it is, and we in Christian
chariritie being bound but as we are, to hope and to judge the best of all that
die amongst us, doubtless in this respect, the instances will be but few, and
very rare: and yet even then to prevent all inconveniences that might grow by
the rashness and indiscretion of some ministers, I would wish none to take
liberty of themselves to alter this form, but by allowance of authority, upon
due information of the particular occasion first obtaind: which when there is
or shall be just cause, I am fully persuaded, would easily be obtaind; and I
wish it should. For it cannot stand with the rule, whereby the Church is bound
in all her orders to have especial care that they tend to edification always;
to tie her ministers in the burial of the dead, to equal such, in and by such
words, with her best and liueliest members. As for that which is misliked in
the book, touching private absolution, in the tract of visiting the sick, in
my opinion there is no just cause thereof: for doubtless in the case there
mentioned, such private absolution is very necessary and comfortable: and the
meaning thereof is no more, but that they so repenting and believing as is
there specified in the book, we, as the ministers of God assure them, that he
does absolve them of their sins so repented of. And indeed there is no
difference in the true sense and meaning, between this and the general
absolution, or pronouncing of the sins of the penitent to be forgigiuen, with
good allowance used after the general confession of sins in the beginning of
morning and evening prayer: but that there it is pronounced generally to all
there present that are truly penitent, and believe in Christ according to the
Gospel: and here particularly but to the sick party, likewise so professing
both faith and repentance. And why may we not in the Collect of Trinity sunday
pray as there the book appoints to be delivered from all adversity; as well
as in the Lords prayer to be delivered from all evil? For the Church and her
members (at the least some particular Churches) sometime may have rest
therefrom; but if not, and she were sure thereof also, why may she not yet so
pray, to show her desire that she might; as Christ did, that the cup might
pass from him, which he knew should not? These things duly considered, I
remember nothing of any moment in the book, to stay any man from yielding to
conformity in the use and practice thereof. For, as for the few supposed
incommodious phrases in some other prayers, they will and may be easily
removed, but by taking them in the best and fairest sense, most standing with
the substance of sound doctrine otherwise publikly professed, and authorized in
this Church, which until evident cause be given me^ to the contrary, every one
in duty is bound to do. For, what reason has any man to think, but that our
professed and authorized doctrine, and our prayers and practice agree? Our
Church therefore disalowing prayer for the dead as it does, and requiring
always steadfast faith in our prayers, we may be sure thereby, we are only in
the Letany so taught to pray that God would not remember the sins of our
forefathers, as therefore to take vengeance of us: and in the two collects, the
fifth after the offertory, and the second after Trinity, to fear, and to
distrust, only in respect of our selves, but not in respect of Gods mercy in
Christ at all. Wherefore, having now thus said, what I hope may be sufficient to
move my good brethren for the Churches peace and good, and also for their own,
and to prevent greater inconveniences, to stand forth no longer in their
refusal to conform themselves in their practice to the orders of our Church,
required at their hands: let us pass on to that which yet seems to be
wanting, to persuade the^ also, if and when need shall be; in the same respects,
rather to yield to the urged form of subscription, then either therefore to shun
to enter into the ministry, when otherwise they are fit and might, or for the
refusal thereof, to be debarred of the use of their gifts therein.

CHAP. 13. Touching the yielding to the now urged subscription: and answering
certain objections against the same.
BEing therefore now come to the question about this subscription howsoever
heretofore it was doubted whether it had any express law or canon to warrant it
or no, now we are put out of doubt thereof by these last cannons, and namely
by the 36, in that we see and know them all to be so authorized by his
Majesty as they are, who has full and sufficient authority by his highness
title and prerogative confirmed unto him by express law otherwise, so to do.
And therefore we cannot be now ignorant, but that our reverend fathers the
Bishops, have thereby authority, to urge such ministers thereunto, as be under
their jurisdictions, at such times, and in such cases, and upon such occasions,
and in such manner, as are expressed in the said canons, and also under the
penalties to the refusers, then specified in the same. Wherefore as I said of
the former so I must needs say of this, so far as there is nothing within the
compass thereof, either in the own nature, or as it is meant by the order of
our Church, and the governors thereof, contrary either to sound faith or good
manners, taught in Gods word, conscience (in respect of them and this their
authority which they have now by law or canon, though not in regard of the bare
nature of every thing within the reach of the same) without all question does
bind us, for the Churches good, and our own, to yield thereunto. And this is
certain, the first Article touching his Majesty's just Title and supremacy
therein set down, and the last touching the book of Articles (so far forth as
they concern faith and the sacraments) all me^ of our religion and profession
that hold communion with us, have always since subscription has been first
required, been willing and ready to yield the same, acknowledging, as by the
laws of the realm, so also by the laws of God, for the plain and manifest
truth therein contained, that they were bound in conscience also, even for the
matter thereof, so to do. The question therefore concerning this point lies in
this, whether the rest contained in these three articles mentioned in that 36
canon, and in the form there set down, may be yielded unto with a safe and good
conscience, wheru^to first I say, that co^paring the Articles where unto now
subscriptio^ is required, with the 3 that formerly were wont to be urged,
touching either the whole, or the rest, now only in question, I find no great
difference; some words are added in the first somewhat more fully to express
his Majesty's title and supremacy, whereof therefore I think every one likes so
much the better, and as for the second, it is word for word, the same it was,
and that requires that by our subscription thereunto, we only aduouch, that
those twoe books therein named (the book of common prayer, and the book of
ordering Bishops, Priests and Deacons) contain nothing contrary to the word of
God, and in the last, as I find these words added; (now to make it plain how
many articles the said book of Articles contains) being in number 39 besides
the ratification, so I observe for the word believes, used before touching all
the Articles therein contained, as it there is expressly set down, a softer
word put, namely acknowledges, so that herein even in the construction of
those that most mislike and write against the former, it is most clear, that
this now urged is in respect of the matter thereof, the very same, if not better
and easier, then it was before, especially considering also the things amended
and explaned in the book of common prayer of late, as was noted in the
beginning.

2 If any say yet, now it is worse then it was, in respect of the form,
because now is added ex animo, where it was before but volens, that is such a
difference, whereupon it will not follow that it is one jot worse then it was
before: for who can indeed say or write that he does a thing volens, and yet
not ex animo? it also appearing by that which I have said already of the former
point, that our Church by these last canons, has in nothing made the sense of
any thing harder then it was before, it must neees follow that now to refuse
thus to subscribe, for any that have subscribed before, is rather an argument
of inconstancy in them then otherwise. And this is well known, and doubtless
the Bishop (I am persuaded, by public record under our hands (can prove, that
very few or none of us, that have entered into the ministry, or have been
instituted or admitted by them to any living since the thirteenth year of her
Majesty's reign that last was, but we have both for the one, and the other,
how often so ever that has been in the latter respect so often subscribed unto;
the consideration whereof, one would think might be some motive unto us, the
less to stick at it now again, if need so require.

3 This also in my opinion may be an other of some force the rather to draw us
thereunto, that we plainly see in the second article, the reverend fathers and
our brethren that first with them agreed in Convocation, that this form (to
breed unity and uniformity, as they hoped) of subscription should be urged,
thereby only concluded that we should aduouch nothing to be contained in those
two books mentioned in the second article, and about which indeed all the
question is, as I have said, in this case, contrary to the word of God. Which
(as I, and many others have heard some of the chief that then were) protest,
they did of purpose thereby to ease the consciences of the subscribers, as much
as might be: for that as they knew sundry things within the compass of the
said books to be prater verbum and diuersa a verbo (which was lawful enough
in things of that nature that they were) so they knew also, that it was far les
to say accordingly that they contained nothing contrary to the word, then that
all things contained therein were agreeable to the word, as they require we
should say touching the book of Articles, containing the most substantial
grounds and points of the doctrine of faith and the Sacrament, whereof the third
article is: unless therefore in their sense, we can show some things that those
books contain contrary to the word, we say nothing against the form of
subscription thereby required.

4 To say or think that the book of Common prayer contains some thing
contrary to the word of God, either because it appoints the Canonical
Scriptures but to be read as it does, or the Apocrypha chapters mentioned in
the Kalenders, I hope by that which I have said before, at large of both those
points, it will or may appear, that therefore it is not so. For thereby I have
showed that in good construction, (and but yet in such as may well stand with
any thing set down in those kookes) in both those respects, it contains
nothing but that which a man may lawfully accordingly practice and conform
himself unto, and therefore nothing contrary to the word: and the like also I
hope I may assume of all the rest contained therein, in the foresaid discourse
cleared of the obiectio^s made against the^ touching co^formity: and that
therefore now again, I shall not need to trouble the reader with any further
rehersall thereof. For as I said in the beginning, so far as one may lawfully
and with a good conscience go in his practice and use, he may also go in this
form of subscribing thereunto: and this is certain also, that that which the
authorized book contains not, nor binds us to practice (lying within the
compass of these things we should practice, if the books meaning were indeed to
bind us thereuno) that, we need not think, that it contains at all, thus
far to be justified by subscription: Let us hear therefore what further
particularly can be objected against this subscription, either out of the book
of common prayer, or out of the other. Some thing further I find to this end
objected, out of the tracts of the communion and, baptism, and something out of
that of confirmation.

5 Out of the tract of the communion for the sick that there in a certain
case, the communion is allowed to be administered to one alone, as namely when
he is sick of a contagious disease, and none can be got to communicate with
him, and that it is there in the treatise of the public communion also
permitted unto some of the communicants to make the general confession of
sins in his own name, and of all the rest, as it is there set down; both
which are held to be contrary to the word, For that the minister by the
institution is to say, eat ye and drink ye all of this, which he cannot say
to one alone, and that so to make confession of sins is held to be, by the
word properly and only belonging to the minister. Neither of these I alleged
in the former discourse, because though they be both in the communion book,
yet they are neither of them there so set down, as that necessarily either of
them need ever come into practice, and very seldom or never have they, or are
like to do: for in the former it is expressly set down, that in that case only
upon special request of the diseased, the minister may alone communicate with
him, it says not that either he must or ought; and therefore we may be sure,
for fear of his own peril, he will choose rather not so to do, then so to
administer it, especially seeing the preface to the communion for the sick,
and a rubricke after therein, seem rather to wish that to be never ministered
without a convenient company, and that the people by often communicating, and by
good instruction, shall be brought to that understanding, that they should
never need to desire it so inconueniently to be administered, and the 67 Canon
now binds not the minister to go so much as to visit the sick, in case his
disease be known, or but probably suspected to be infectious: and the other is
also so permitted to one of the receivers (in the rubricke before the said
confession) as that the said confession is to be made either by one of them, or
by one of the ministers, or by the priest himself; and therefore (being so set
down) that always it shall lie in the ministers or priests choice, whether
any of the other lay communicants shall say it or no, they have, will, and may,
by the book so prevent that inconvenience, that it shall need never (more then
it has done) come to be so used, And thus also indeed we see even by the same
reasons that neither of these are so contained in the book, as that they need
to trouble any in the subscribing thereunto. And therefore as the latter is not
once remembered, either by the writers of the admonition, or by M. Cartwright,
as worthy once to be objected against the book, so the other though it be
objected by both, is neither acknowledged nor once defended, by the late
Archbishop in his answer unto them (as you may see Page 528. and 229. of his
book) as at all contained or mentioned in the service book; yea Page 525.
(belike for the reasons aforesaid) he says flatly that there is no receiving
of one alone allowed in the book. But suppose the worst; if it should be held
to be contrary to the word, either to minister it in a private house, or that
the minister in any case should minister it to one alone, we must then condemn
all antiquity, even in Justin Martyrs, Tertullians, and Cyprians times, in
whose times Master Cartwright is enforced to confess it was ministered in
private houses, in the foresaid page 525. and in Serapians time, who had it
sent him lying sick on his death bed, to be received alone, as we read in
Eusebius Lib. 6. Cap. 43. And though there be but two, the minister and the
sick, yet in reference to them two, it may be said take ye, eat ye, and we
know that Christ has promised that when two or three are gathered together in
his name, he will be in the midst of them. Math. 18. And we know that
Bucer and Peter Martyr allowed our communion book, even in respect of the
communion therein prescribed for the sick, in their judgments that they gave
thereof, and likewise that Musculus: de coena Domini confesses that it is
retained in diverse reformed Churches, yea neither Beza nor Calvin, but in some
case they allowed it, and Oecolampadius as it is written in his life, denied it
not the sick, but in this case we need none of these helps, because this thing
in question is so mentioned in the communion book as rather yet it is
disalowed thereby then allowed, and cannot justly be said to be contained
therein, and is so shut out again (as we have heard) both by the drift of the
same, and by the foresaid Canons explayning the meaning of the book touching
the ministers duty in visiting of the sick. And further of the other need not
be said, for it is so there permitted, as with all, straight (as we (...) have
heard) the use of that permission is prevented. And yet if it should be urged as
plainly yet permitted there, I think well may it be Prater verbu^, but hardly
will it be proved any more to be contrary to the word, the^ the former, for where
has the word so appropriated this to the minister, and denied it unto others,
that it should be contrary to the word, but (...) to permit it to another.

6 Further yet, in that (in a rubricke next the creed in that tract) it is
said, if there be no sermon, shall follow one of me homilies already set forth
or to be set forth by common authority, especially the 35 article in the book
of Articles, adiudging both the former book of Homilies set forth in King
Edward the sixts time, and the second book, the several tytles whereof are
there set down, to be read in the Churches, by the ministers diligently and
distinctly, as containing what doctrine is meet and necessary for these times,
arise other objections, which they have against this subscription: for say they
in these already extant, some faults there are in certain of them, which
cannot stand with the word, and further what may be in the rest, that shall be
see forth, we cannot tell, and therefore hard it is to subscribe; howsoever
when that book and rubric was authorized first Eliza. I there were some to be
set out, yet since they that were intended then, have long ago been
published, and so therefore in that respect as I said in the beginnig, this
objection is void. Touching those that then were extant, notwithstanding the
objected faults against some of them, very true it is, that there is much
wholesome and needful doctrine contained in them, and most of them they can not
nor do touch with any faults at all, and those which they object against any of
them, are not of any such moment, but either with a favorable constructio^,
they may be made none at all, or else (as they know) they are such as about
which amongst the godly learned both of ancient time, and now also, there is
and has been great question whether they be to be counted any faults at all or
no: and the same may as justly be said of all that since have been
authorized. But touching those that by authority then should after be set out,
why ought not men then in charity, as well have hoped that they in authority
would have a care, that they should contain nothing contrary to the word, as
it seems they did of Sermons to be made? In that therefore they made no
exception ever yet against the Book in that respect, though then their Sermons
be allowed to be made, by preachers every where, which yet then they could not
tell whether they would be faultlesse or no (...) But in very deed, though
subscribing to the Book of Common Prayer, and Articles, we thus subscribe to
the allowing of them to be read, yet in that by the preface before the second
Book of Homilies (which interprets the meaning of both these books, herein)
it appears the minister is not tied to read them all, but directed there only
out of them all, prudently to choose out such as be most fit for the time and
for the instruction of the people, our late Archbishop in his foresaid book,
Page 715. and the next, had just cause and ground to write (as he has) fully
to remove this objection: if any homily (says he) shall be appointed
hereafter, wherein you mislike any thing, you need not to read it, for the book
appoints you not to read this or that homily, but some one which you shall like
best, and if you be disposed to preach, you need read none at all; and touching
those which are to be set out, if you fear any such thing as you pretend, I
think, says he, in that case a modest protestation would not be refused. Yea
as we have heard before, Page 720. he refuses in plain and express words to
defend any thing as appointed by the book to be read, which is not grounded
upon the word of God. But in very deed I cannot see how justly and truly the
books can be said, to contain all which they appoint or allow in any sort to
be read: such direction for the reading of them, they may well be said to
contain, but yet not therefore the things themselves. Howsoever in this case,
in my conscience, there is great difference betwixt being bound only by the
book to read the Scriptures in a translation that has faults, the Apocrapha
that has faults, or homilies that has faults, and the justifying of them to
be faultlesse: and plain it is (suppose in this that we were strictly thereby
tied to read all these) that yet no where, by the books, or otherwise, are we
charged, either by practice or subscription, to aduouch that all or any of
these contain no faults, or that so doing, to aver that they are no faults:
and therefore this objection need trouble us as little as any.

CHAP. 14. Answering more objections against subscription to the book of common
prayer.
NOw touching baptism and the tract thereof, in that private baptism is so
urged as it is thereby, and by the 69. Canon, especially seeing both it and the
other sacrament are said in the Catechism to be necessary to salvation, some
thereupon gather that now it seems to be the meaning of the book, and of our
church also, to hold baptism so necessary to salvation, as that none can now be
saved without it. But surely herein they wrong in my judgment both the books
and the meaning of our church. For hereby doubtless they do not mean to tie
God so to this ordinary means, as that he neither can nor will exraordinarily
save any without it, though never so much prevented by death, before according
to Gods ordinance they may have it. For then the book never should have been
so explained in that point as now it is, that none but a lawful minister
should baptize the chld in what danger soever it be. But only hereby would the
state take order as much as might be, (which was very necessary) to prevent all
contempt or neglect thereof, if it could in time be had, for as the one
extreme is to be avoided, so doubtless was and is the other: and so for any
thing our Church has done in this point, the ancient doctrine that always
has in this case been held and received of and in the Churches of Christ,
since the first institution of the sacraments, namely not the want thereof
simply, but the contempt or neglect thereof to be damnable, is held here still,
and therefore this of baptism is to be counted so necessary to salvation, as
that by all means when and where (as is aforesaid) it may be had it is most
carefully and diligently to be sought for.

2 Now whereas I hear that some stumble at that, that the child dying after
baptism before yet it can be confirmed, it is said in the book (immediately
before the Catechism, in a rubricke there) that such a child has all things
necessary by the word of God to salvation, and is undoubtedly saved, gathering
thereupon that the meaning of our Church therein is absolutely and simply so to
tie salvation to baptism that whosoever once is outwardly baptized, cannot be
saved: surely this is as hard a collection and construction of this as may be
For first it is evident that there the speech is of baptized children only
dying before they be confirmed and that of purpose it is there so set down, to
the comfort of christian parents in that case, and plainly to teach us all,
howsoever our Church thinks it fit to retain the use of confirmation in sundry
good respects, yet (it holds it not to be of the same nature with the
sacraments of baptism and the Lords Supper, nor so necessary to salvation. And
what reason is there to the contrary, but that we may and ought in Christian
charity, so hope and persuade our selves of al christian children so baptized,
dying in their childhood, as that book speaks?

3 For all this some yet draw an argument to stay them from thus subscribing as
is required, for that by the book as they allege, so much is attributed to
confirmation, that it is thereby made as a third sacrament contrary to the 25
article of the book of articles, also subscribed unto, for that say they, the
Bishops imposition of his hands, is in the tract of confirmation expressly
termed a sign, whereby they certify them whom they confirm of Gods gracious
favor and goodness towads them, whereas the article says that neither
confirmation nor any of the other four by the Papists held to be sacraments,
can be sacraments iindeed, because they have not any visible sign or ceremony
ordained of God. But the contrariety that seems herein to be, betwixt these
books, is easily to be removed. For though the communion book make imposition
of hands a sign drawn from the example of the Apostles, yet it deriues it not
from Gods ordinance and institution, as the outward signs in Sacraments are,
and so that notwithanding, the words of the article may well enough stand
therewith, which only denies it to have any visible sign ordained by God.
Again, there is great ods betwixt material and substantial signs, such as
water, bread, and wine are in the sacraments and this bare action of imposition
of hands: and sacraments properly taken are not only signs of some spiritual
grace but of saving grace in Christ Jesus: and they are means also to offer, to
deliver, and to seal the delivery of the same, to the right receivers thereof:
all which this is not hereby made. But I marvel what reason men have, to allow
of imposition of hands, as a laudable rite and ceremony, even drawn also from
the Apostles example, in the ordination of ministers, thereby as it were by
that solemn ceremony and prayer withal, to set them apart from all others,
for the work of the ministry, and yet so much to mislike of this here: they
think not that it makes ordination a sacrament, why should they think then
that it makes so confirmation? it is used here with prayer, whereunto especially
the book attributes their confirmation, appointing the other but withal to
be used as there by externally to certify them, that to them particularly that
strength is wished. Hierom, I am sure, against the Luciferians, acknowledges
that it was in use in churches in his time and before, and that only to be
ministered by Bishops as it is with us, propter honorem sacerdotii, non legis
necessitatem. And Bucer upon the fourth to the Ephesians. so allows it, and so many
other learned writers both ancient, and of these times, as you may see at
large, Inst. Call. l. 4. c. 19. sect. 4. and no reason it is why they should not,
because now with this imposiion of hands, extraordinary gifts of the spirit are
not given; for those were but to follow thereupon for a time, and sufficient it
is now that further strength does follow. And it is used and has bin thus, by
the bishops and not by the ministers, not as some hardly thereupon gather thereby
to intimate, as though it were a higher thing then either baptism or the
supper, which they use to minister, but only for order and in good policy,
thereby the better to draw both ministers and godfathers and godmothers the
more carefully to see children so catechized, as that being called by the Bishops
to this, they may therewith their own mouths profess and promise that which
others before did for them. And verily being used to this end, in the good
Policy of the Church, it would be a notable good means hereof, and therefore
I have long wished a more careful and an universal use thereof, and lament the
neglect thereof, for even from thence the great negligence that has been both
in ministers to Catechize, and in the people in seking to have their youth duly
instructed, has very much proceeded, and I hope the contrary good fruits in
that behalf, will grow by the wise and orderly reviving thereof.

What more of any moment, not formerly answered is now alleged out of the
communion book to stay men from subscription, I remember not, save that some
say the urging of all prescribed thereby now to be read without leaving out any
part thereof in respect of a sermon, or in any other regard (as it appears
Canon 14) shuts out preaching much. But my experience teaches me the contrary,
for though I read fully all that is appointed, and have long used so to do, yet
I praise God, being upon the point now of 60 years of age, yet I find both
strength and time convenient, every Sabbath, both forenoone and afternoon to
do both. And they that find not themselves of strength so to do, they are not
by any law forbid to get the^ Curats and helpers, which may ease them, commonly
if not of all, yet of a great part of the burden of the tone; and if their
living be so small, and they are not able to have that help, otherwise being
conformeable, and doing what they can, their weakness or sickly estate, will
easily with their ordinaries excuse them. Sure any man may be, that reads the
book and the canons, there to find that the book often directs us to pray
that all ministers may be diligent preachers of the word, and that by the
canons better order is taken, for often and diligent preaching of the word,
then ever heretofore has been, and therefore this may go amongst other too
hard collections and constructions of our Churches meaning well enough, and
therefore need not in truth stay any man from subscribing. I am not ignorant
that yet many things more in this book are objected, but because I know only
a charitable construction will easily remove them, I pass the^ over wishing
every man thereby, as he may and is bound, to satisfy him self therein.

CHAP. 15. Answering certain objections, out of the book of Ordination
THus then we are come at the last to the other book of ordinatio^ of Bishops,
Priests, and Deacons, against which (as it is in use with us now and long has
been) I must confess I see or find nothing ever alleged of any moment to this
purpose, but I find the same so fully answered by our late most reverend
Archbishop in his foresaid book against Cartwright, so often before named, and
since by the right reverend and learned now Bishop of Winchester in his book
written long since of the perpetual government of Christ's Church, as that I
cannot but marvel (especially seeing I could never see the latter of these
books by any, once ever yet attempted to be answered) that any for all this
should set a foot again, any old objections (and new I find none of any
moment) against the said book, whereunto there they have been and are, and
that also long ago, so thoroughly answered. And therefore for this point
(Christian Reader) both to spare thy further labor and mine, thereunto I
refer thee. Only this in the mean time I say for my own part, that there I
find all that has been said of any weight against the said book (in my
judgment) so satisfied, that in respect thereof only, whosoever refuses to
subscribe, he does so without any just cause at all. For concerning the
distinction of degrees by that book (for the better ordering of the Church in
her ecclesiastical policy) allowed to be amongst us the ministers of the
Gospel, I must needs say and protest, though as seriously and diligently as I
could, I have read and considered all that has been written to or from, with
or against, of that question for these thirty years and more, and also of
purpose for the same, have searched all ancient writers, and all monuments of
antiquity, that I could come by, yet I could never find any thing of any sound
moment or force brought against the same: yea (that more is) besides hatred to
popery, and too great an admiration of some other Churches I never by all this
could find, that the impugners thereof, and the seekers in the steed thereof
to bring in a government of the Church by a parity of Ministers and their
Presbiteries, have indeed and truth any thing of sound moment, or of any weight
at all to justify or to countenance their so doing. In so much that before the
late reformation of Geneua, for all the fore said points, and search that I
have used for this point, I could thereby yet never find, any one Church of
Christ, so big as that of Geneua and the appurtenances thereof, any where, or
at any time for the space of one ten years possessed of that their kind of
government: whereas of the contrary, through the whole course of the
Scriptures ever since Moses, and through all Ecclesiastical stories and
monuments of antiquity. I observe it has bin the lords pleasure in his good
providence, always to have his church since it had but outward visibility in
one nation, perpetually governed by distinct degrees of ministers,
proportionable to this of ours, for through the old Testament from Moses to
Christ, it had by Gods ordinance an high priest, Priests and Levites to that
end: and Christ enlarging the bounds thereof, we find by the plain testimony of
the new testament, he left for the orderly government thereof, until his second
coming. Ephesians. 4. some Apostles, some Prophets, some Evangelists, and some
Pastors and Teachers In that therefore in that golden age of the Apostles, when
the gifts of the spirit, both upon the ordinary Pastors, and christian people,
were as they were often extraordinary, we yet find when particular Churches
were furnished and settled with all their ordinary necessary officers, they
stood need besides the help they then had of Synods, the oversight of
evangelists and the visitation again, and again, both by their letters and
personal presence, of the apostles, whiles they lived; what reason can any man
have to think, that in the times since, far worse then those, the churches of
Christ should not likewise need some in the room of those, to have a
superintendency over the particular ministers, to visit, and to keep them in
order from time to time? And therefore doubtless the Apostles Prophets and
Evangelists, in that which they had extraordinaly, ceasing ever since we find,
by the testimony of ecclesiastical stories, by light and warrant from these
former proportions, and experience for the better ordering thereof in peace and
unity, the church of Christ possessed of Bishops, ministers and Deacons. All
which neither could nor would have been so, if this other fancyed form of
Church government had been so essential thereunto, and this of ours so bad and
unfit for the same, as the admirers of that other would bear the world in
hand, both this and the other has been and is, for who can or will be persuaded
that God being of that power that he is, and loving his church as he does, that
ever he could or would suffer her for 15 or 16 hundred years to be destituted
and bereued of her proper and essential outward form of church government, or
that he would have continued and blessed the other, as he has both in the
ancient churches and since, if it had been or were so displeasing unto him,
and antichristian, as they now charge it to be?

2 As for the preaching by deacons and ministering baptism by such, who can
read the story of the Acts, touching the Deacon Phillip and what after is
storied there in both respects, as done lawfully by him, though we read there
only of his calling to the office of a deacon, or what to like purpose, as the
foresaid two learned fathers have showed out of the monuments of true
antiquity, such have don in the primitive Church, but he will see he has cause
to cease from obiecting that as a fault against that book, in that our Deacons
are said to be called to their office according to apostolic example.

3 And as for the name Priest, it answering with us as it does in respect of
our office, the word presbyter, and not the other Sacerdos, what just offense
can any take thereat?

4 And as long as we find Apostles directing and commanding Evangelists, as
Paul did Timo. and Tytus, witness the epistles he wrote to them, and they
thereby directed to ouersee, and direct pastors, as therein and by the story of
the Acts, it appears they did, and pastors charged to attend and feed their
flocks, though we find not the precise names of Archbishops, Metropolitans or
primats at the first, what should we therefore strive? Strife about words, as
long as we find the matter and substance that in truth implies as much,
becomes not the Church of God: but the ecclesiastical stories, and the records
of the ancient counsels make it most manifest to them that read them, that it
was not long after the age of the apostles, ere these very names were taken up
and for order sake given to the Bishops over other.

5 And as for that saying, receive the holy Ghost, it being understood either
of the holy Ghost it self, or of the gifts thereof, fit for the ministry, as
some take it, it doubtless is used and meant as a prayer, that so they may,
not as a speech of one having power and authority to give it, as when Christ
used it, but taking it as very well, also it may for the calling to the ministry
whereof the holy Ghost is the author, they as the ordinary means whereby he
calls them thereunto, may say so: wherefore to grow to an end, I verily think
no one thing more, either has bred, or yet does nourish more the
ecclesiastical controversies of ours about rites and ceremonies, and the
outward policy of our Church, as either not reading, or negligent studying of
sound antiquity: and therefore I would wish, and do with all my heart, that all
my good brethren of the in ministry, as far as their ability will serve the^
would get them the writings of the ancient fathers, and especially the
ecclesiastical stories of Eusebius and his fellows: and the tomes of the
ancient councels, and then next after the study of the sacred scripture, that
they would diligently read and consider of the^. For doubtless even thereby they
would learn much to direct them how to carry themselves in their places, and in
all occurre^ts that otherwise for lack of so good preside^ts, to much troble
many of the^, and are often cause also why they are more troublesome unto
others, for such matters the^ otherwise they would be, if they were thoroughly
acquainted with the ancient practice of Christ's Church in such cases. There
they should find it in August. Epist. 86. to Casulan. and 118. to Ianuari:
Eusebius. lib. 5. cap. 23. Socrat. lib. 5. cap. 22. Zozom. lib. 7. cap. 19. and in
Greg. ad Leandrum: and that one Church is not bound in her outward rites and
fashions to another and therefore that no one Church is prejudiced by another
different fashions in such things: yea, that nihil officit in eadem fide
conspirantium Ecclesiaru^ consuetudo diuersa: yea that rather that so being,
they holding notwithstanding unity of faith, they are the more commendable: for
the bonds of the Churches unity were always held to be one God, one faith,
one baptism, and not one rite, or one ceremony, and therefore there also shall
they find, how peacably and godly the learned in such times conformed
themselves to the orders and fashions always of the Church wherein they lived
in such things; and so neither gave offense to any nor took any, and how, the
different fashions or opinions in such things notwithstanding, they thought it
unfit to break unity with others. And to this end I would every one would but
read the said 86. and 118 epistles of S. Augustine and his next also, the 119,
for there they should find, both excellent council, and examples to this
purpose.

7 Alas how can any join with the brownists in holding rhis kind of
government by Archbishops, and Bishops to be antichristian and that of theirs
to be Christ's Church, perpetual and essential regiment, but he must needs
join with them in their practice, rent, and separation from us?

8 Or the premises considered, what sound reason has any man to think though
one of late an enemy thereunto has urged it in print that the holding of this
government of ours to have warrant from the scriptures, should impeach the
Kings supremacy as though that these degrees of ministers, in this sort allowed
by the book of ordination of them, could not both stand together; whereas
indeed thereby, it is confirmed and strengthened as Solomon's was, in that though
the high Priesthood, was expressly from God, he yet rightly deposed Abiather and
placed Sadok in his room. 1. Kings. 3.35. For though in respect of that which
they have from Princes, they may be said to be theirs, and of humane
constitution: yet in respect of their ministry and spiritual jurisdiction in
the church, they well may be said to be of Gods own ordinance.

9 Wherefore (to grow toward an end) remember we (my good brethren) this one
thing more, that it stands this our state and Church much upon, having made
so many severe laws as it has against Papists, Schismatics, Barowists or
Brownists (call the^ as you will) and having also so executed the^, as they have,
and minding as it seems so to do still (and we see it is most necessary for the
peace of the church they should) let none of us, that should join with the^
therein, and also every way strengthen the^, what we could (they so multiplying
as they do both on the right hand, and left) by any means weaken either our'
selves, or the^, against them: which once again I cannot but put you in mind
we do, so long as either for conformity, or this subscribing, (by our refusal
still hereof) we not only make distraction, rent and breach amongst our selves,
but also strengthen them with so many arguments as we stand upon, wilfully to
persist in their superstitious refusal or recusancy, on the one side, and in
their like peuish shu^ning of ioining in co^muio^ again with us of the other.
And thereby as much doubtless as either the weight of those reasons comes to, or
the credit of their persons is that stand thereupon, are they and will they, be
emboldened to think and say, in the opinion of so many of our own religion and
fellowship that they have had wrong, and shall have still, in being punished as
they have been, are, or shall be for refusing to join with us in use of that
service, and for submitting themselves to that form of Ecclesiastical
government, which is in so many respects, contrary to the word. O therefore, it
were to be wished (good brethren) in this case, that you would seriously
remember that the Lord requires of all his, Zac, 8.19 that they should love
truth and peace, joining them both together, and therefore that the Apostle,
Romans 12.11. had no sooner wild us to be fervent in spirit, but he adds
straight, serving the lord, and ver. 18. urging us al as much as is possible to
have pe^^^ with all me^. For doubtless they are very much deceived, that under
pretense of zeal, think they may without offense disturb the Churches peace.
For who knows not that it is as dangerous erring on the right hand, as on the
left, and that Christ justly checked the sons of thunder. Luke 9.55. though
their wish of fire against the Samaritans, came from a fiery zeal, and love
toward himself? Surely even the lamentable experience we have had already by
the original and growth of the open schism wherein to many of our brethren have
desperately run of late years, and wherein still woefully and obstinately they
continue (being as all men must needs see from no other ground and occasion,
but from the too much urging and amplifying under the show and likeness of zeal
of the same things that now still in this case of refusal of conformity and
subscription are revived) I would think should have sounded such a loud
retreat in all our eats from ever meddling any more therewith, for fear of the
like inconvenience to our selves, that ere this we should have been
sufficiently warned from running any more this course: for hardly can any be of
the judgment of the one, but he must like of the practice of the other. But
Nunquam sera est ad bones mores via. Wherefore let not studium partium, or any
preiudicate opinion touching love of our own private credit, or to much desire
too please a few private men make any of us so to forget our duty, either to
God, our church, or our selves, and those that depend upon us, as for a few
weak objections (a thousand times so answered, that as Augustine speaks,
Epist. 118 might satisfy, though not a contentious person, yet any modest and
peaceable minded man) to run our selves and ours any longer upon these so
dangerous rocks, so much to our own harm, and so much also to the rejoicing
and strengthening of our common adversaries. And yet this I have not writ, or
any thing therein, either to condemn any that of weakness and tenderness of
conscience indeed, (all this that I have said notwithstanding) cannot in faith
do otherwise (for I have learned of the Apostle, Romans 14. (as I said in the
beginning) that whatsoever is not done of faith is sin, or any way to stay or
to withold them that be in authority, either from showing what favor they will
or may to such (else also being peaceable and fruitful men) or when it shall
seem good unto the^ is regard of the^ to remove, or better to smoth the
controuerted changable things, they most take offense at, but only in the
mean time, whilst things stand as they do, hereby to perwade my good brethren
in the best manner I could, how with a good conscience these things may be
yielded unto, for the peace of the Church without any just offense, thereby
either given or taken, rather the^ that for their not so yielding they should
suffer themselves to be kept from entering the ministry, or to be deprived
thereof again, or but to be but suspended from the execution thereof, by the
sentence of the Bishops. But in the mean time, whiles we can grow all to be
thus minded, and to be at unity amongst our selves, in these things, let no man
think that therefore he has any just cause given him, to call into question
the truth of our religion otherwise, or the Papist at all therefore to insult
over us. For none of any reading of the monuments of antiquity can be
ignorant, that in the primitive Church, and in the best times thereof since the
Apostles, and that for a long time together, there has been amongst the
ancient Christians, otherwise very sound, and at unity in the truth, and
substance of religion amongst themselves, as great diversities of opinons, and
as hot contentions as in these respects these of ours be about Ecclesiastical
rites and ceremonies. And all the world may know but by the confessed
differences of opinions by Bellarmine amongst themselves, in his books of
controversies in matters of far higher nature: that the Papists of all men have
least unity even in the chief grounds of their religion: and it is as
famously known, that here in England whiles they bare the sway: for all their
great brag of unity otherwise, that in their church service there was great
diversity: some following the use of Sarum; some Herford use, some the use of
Bangor; some of York, and some of Lincoln.

CHAP. 16. Containing the conclusion and exhortation to unity.
YEt to conclude (good brethren) seeing in every particular national church,
uniformity in such things, is very requisite and commendable, for the better
maintenance of peace and love therein: even of love and compassion to our
common mother the Church of England, which as I have said, is troubled with so
dangerous enemies, both on her right hand and left, and so to bury and
extinguish for ever the odious name of Puritants, and to put an end to all show
of Schism, distraction, and division amongst our selves, to the no small
strengthening of our selves, to our rejoicing against our common adversaries,
and so to the great weakening and undoubted grief of our enemies, let us, all
of us for ever hereafter, give over contending any more thus amongst our
selves, about these our mothers outward fashions, trimmings, and deckings, and
let us both speedily and unfeignedly, every one of us, reunite our selves
together in unity of judgment, and uniformity of practice, as by these her
outward orders, is by her authority required at our hands, that so we may bend
all our forces as dutiful children together to the preservation of the life
and strength of our said mother, which we cannot but see otherwise to be in
great peril and danger, so the better that she may strongly encounter,
overcome, and subdue all, both her adversaries and ours. For Nestor persuading
Agamemnon and Achilles to concord, said, that otherwise Priamus would laugh
them both to scorn. And wisely said Metius Suffetius to Tullus Hostilius king
of the Romans, when the Albans and his people were ready to join battle the
one with the other, understand, O king, that the Hetrurians, a mighty people,
envy us both, and only whiles we spoil one another, they exspect that so we
both being once spent, may in the end both become a pray and spoil to them;
And advisedly also thereupon, to end that controversy, whereas the Romans chose
3 Horatians, and the Albans 3 Curiatians to fight a combat, though therein the
Curiatians had quickly slain two of the Horatians, and also sore wounded the
third, yet we read in that story, that he flying in policy, and so singling
the 3 Curiatians being then all alive, in the end, so, one after another,
killed them all, which he could never have done, if they had all held together:
and so the Romans by the condition agreed on in that co^bat, conquered the
Albans; whereby we may plainly as in a glass see, that though two parts of
three of our Romish enemies, seem to us already slain, and the third part
also much wounded, yet if by any means, that one can single and sever us, he
will hope in the end to conquer us all. For whiles Athens and Lacedemon iarred,
both became a pray to the enemy, while Hanniball and Hanno envied one another
Carthage came to confusion; and whiles the two brethren Etheocles and Polynices
contended for the kingdom of Thebes, they both lost themselves and their
kingdom. Likewise whiles Aristobulus and Hircanus two brethren strove for the
kingdom of Jerusalem, it became a booty to the Romans. And when Amon and
Moab, and they of Mount Seir fell out amongst themselves, and so slew one
another, we know how the holy story shows, their huge army thereby easily
became a rich spoil to Iehosophat, 2. Chr. 20. whereas of the contrary we read
there, that the amity of Abraham and Lot, was the very cause of Lots rescue,
and of all his friends and neighbors, out of the hands of five kings that had
taken them all prisoners and captives, Genesis 14. And who knows not that by
concord small things increase, and that by the contrary very great things come
to nothing? and that a threefold cord is not easily broken, but yet, that
untwisted it easily falls a sunder, and so though a sheafe of arrows bound fast
together will not quickly be burst, that yet loosed they are quickly knapt a
sunder? Justly therefore did Sparta count the concord that was in that city, the
strongest and best walls that it could have, and otherwise where that was
wanting, that the strongest walls that any city could have, were but as walls of
paper. Learn we therefore (dear brethren) in time to sing with the Psalmist,
O how good and pleasant a thing it is for brethren to dwell together in unity.
Ps. 133. and therefore according both to his advise, and the Apostles, let us as
much as is possible, and in us lies, seek peace with all men, and ensue it,
Psa. 34. and Romans 12. And therefore also consider we one another, as we are
wished, He. 10. to provoke one another only to love and to good works not
forsaking the fellowship that we have amongst our selves as some do, and learn
as we have been taught of Christ and his Apostles. Mat. 7.1. To. 14.13.
especially of things of this kind, neither to be offended at or with one
another, or to judge one another, but rather to say with Abraham every one to
another, let there be no strife betwixt us, for we are brethren, Genes. 13. so
yielding rather with him of our own right, as he then and there did to his
inferior Loath, if need be to redeem and purchase our own peace and the
churches, so long especially as we may so do without breach of holiness, as in
this case of ours, I hope, I have showed we may. For if there be envy, strife,
and division amongst us still, and that for things of no greater moment, Paul
does tell us plainly, 1. Cor. 3.3. that we are carnal and walk as men. God
therefore give us all once grace, so to make it appear, that we have mutual
consolation in Christ, Comfort of love, and fellowship of the spirit,
Compassion and mercy, that we may fulfill his joy in being of one accord and
judgment, Phil. 2.2. not doing any thing of vainglory or of contention, but in
meekness of mind, every one esteeming another better then himself, ver. 3.
and in following the things that concern peace, and wherewith one may edify
another, To. 14.19. and so striving in giving honor who can give most and
first, To. 12.10. Now then saying with the Psalmist 122. Unto all, pray for the
peace of Jerusalem, Let them prosper that love her, peace be with in her walls,
and prosperity within her palaces. I humbly beseech the Lord to direct us all
herein, and in all our other actions to his own glory and to our own
everlasting comfort, and so I heartily bid thee farewell in the same Lord. 1606.
February. 1.

Thine in the Lord unfeignedly, Thomas Spark.

Faults escaped, thus corrected.
PAge. 1. for commended, read commanded. Epist. dedic. line. 4. for bound. r.
bold. Epist. to the Rea p. 3. l. 1. r. stronger for strong. and 18. for
quieter. r. quiet. lier. and. l. 22. for Bishops, r. Bishop. p. 8. l. 4. for
show. r. showed, and. l. 10. for point. r. course. p 7. l. 4. for. 3. r. 13. p.
9. l. 31. for act. 1. art p 18. for also. r. all so. p. 20. l. 35. for it. r.
it, it and any for many. p. 21. l 31. for some ey: r. some, ey. p. 22. l. 30.
for follows r. allows. and for then. r. them. p. 23. l. 14. for reverence. r.
reference. p. 24. l. 35. after baptized put. p 25. l. 15. for as. r. is. p. 26.
l. 1. for this. r. his. and l. 27. for third r. thirty. p. 29. l. 5. for
conference. r. reference. p. 34 l. 3. for. therein. r. then. p. 35 l. 10. for
mention r. intention. p. 40. for. there. r. the. l. 34. p. 42. l. 3. put out.
and. 46. l. 1. r. put out as. p. 51. l. 19. r. put out, any man. p. 63. l. 20.
for howbei. r. howbeit. p. 69. l. 36. put out we p. 70. l. 2. put out. that. l.
34. for their. r. and there.


