A SERMON PREACHED AT Cheanies the 14. of September, 1585. at the burial of
the right Honorable the Earl of BEDFORDE, by THOMAS SPARK Doctor of Divinity.

Newly perused and corrected the Author.

AT OXFORD, Printed by Joseph Barnes Printer to the University.

1594.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, ARTHVR LORD GRAY OF WILTON, KNIGHT OF THE NOBLE order
of the Garter, his very good Lord and Patron: Thomas Spark wishes the
increase of all good spiritual graces, with health, wealth, and true honors to
Gods glory, and his own full contentation and comfort.
SInce the preaching of this funeral sermon following (right Honorable) I have
been earnestly urged, and entreated both by words and letters of good
brethren to commit the same to writing, and so to the print. And in deed their
dealing with me therein has been so effectual, that, though I had rather
preach ten sermons, than pen one, and have always hitherto been very hard,
considering the multitudes of books already published, to be entreated to
publish any of my poor labors, yet in this, lo, I am ouercommed. And truly
amongst diverse other reasons moving me to yield hereunto, this has not been
one of the wekest, that thereby not only they which heard me preach it might
for that present have so noble an example both of sincere religion, and holy
life sounded in their ears, but also both they and others at their pleasure
might have the same laid down before their eyes, to the stirring up and
provoking them, the rather by consideration of the doctrine set down in this
sermon, to imitate and follow the same. For seeing it has pleased our God (no
doubt of great mercy to him) thus, as he has, to take him in peace from us,
that we cannot any longer enjoy him living amongst us as he has done, yet by
this and such like means after a sort (I hope) to the good of many he shall
live still. Nay I am out of doubt of it, that as his death was precious in the
eyes of the Lord, so he shall be had in everlasting remembrance, and his name
shall never be put out. In the mean time it is greatly to be wished, that we,
whom he has left behind, would take occasion by this his taking from us, to
learn that, which even thereby we have just occasion given us by the Lord to
learn, which is; to fear that the Lord is in preparing some great scourge for
us for our great unthankfulness after so many benefits both heavenly and
earthly a long time bestowed upon us, in that he begins thus to gleane
from us (least they should see to their grief the evils to come) such dear
servants of his: and thereby also to take occasion to repent, and to turn unto
the Lord unfeignedly, that so he may turn the deserved evil day from us. For
in the 2, of Esaias. 3. for the like sins and transgressions of the people, as
are amongst us, the Lord threatens, that even therefore he would take away
the honorable and wise counselor. And yet notwithstanding this plain
warning afterward the Prophet complayneth thus. The righteous perish, and no
man considers it in his heart: and merciful men are taken avvate, and no man
understands that the righteous is taken away from the evil to come, Chap.
57.1. And I fear though the Lord has not barely threatened, but in deed has
taken away from us an Honorable and wise Counselor, in that this worthy
Earl of Bedforde is now dead and buried, that yet most justly the Prophets
complainte may be renewed amongst us. God of his mercy therefore give us
grace better to consider thereof every one of us, that we may find out the
Lords counsel therein: and so take occasion, by an effectual and universal
turning unto the Lord to prevent the evil thereby, and by such other like
examples threatened to come upon us. It may be that the envious and malicious
Papist (who always gathers poison thence, from whence he should and might,
if he had the grace, gather honey) will not stick to think and say also,
that God has taken him away, as he has, and his three sons with him in his
anger and displeasure toward him and his house. But whosoever considers the
doctrine set down in this sermon, they all living and dying in the Lord, and
in her majesty's loyal and faithful obedience, as they did, he shall be
enforced to confess, that (by what means, or by what kind of sickness so
ever they parted hence) they died in the favor of God: and who so weighs
further, that it is the Lords property to begin even at his own house,
thereby to work a greater terror in others, and withal foreseeth what
heavy plagues and miserable days our sins daily cry and call for, he cannot
choose but see, that the Lord herein has showed a marvelous great mercy to
him, and to those of his house. Truly by occasion hereof rather (to the
astonishme^t of al papists, who obey not the gospel of God) we may say with
Pet. 1. Epi. 4.17. The time is come that judgment must begin at the house of
God. If it first begin at us, what shall the end be of them, that obey not
the gospel of god? But (to leave this noble Earl and his sons in the hands
of the Lord in blessed test and peace, and these malicious papists to the^
selves as men in whom then sin of spiritual whooredome with the garish and
Babylonicall harlot is grown to such rottenness in their bones, that there is
small hope, or rather none at all of their recovery, such is the judgment of
God upon them, because light is come into the world, and yet they love darkness
more than light) concerning this sermon following (right Honorable) it may be
in perusing of it you will find some difference in it, from that which you
heard. In words it cannot be but there is, because I had taken but short
notes before, and it is impossible for me to call to remembrance the very
words, wherein I uttered it. But as for matter I am sure you will perceive it
is all one with the other, and in words too, as near as memory could well
serve to call them to mind. In deed because then when I preached it in diverse
points I was enforced (as I think you might well perceive) through the
shortness of time left and allotted me, but summarily to touch many things, that
more at large I had purposed to have prosecuted, and therefore perhaps then was
the obscurer; I have hear in this according to my full purpose and
premeditation then set the^ down, whereby it grows to be somewhat longer
now, than it was then. The hardness and vnpleasantnes of the style I must
desire your Honor, and all others to bear withal. For (as you know) my
manner is not at any time to study for words, but for matter. Which so I
deliver in such words as I may be understood of them that hear me, I care
for no more. For the thing only that I always seek, is to edify the^ that
hear me with as good and necessary doctrine as I can. As for gloriousness of
words and pleasant and delicate speech I think it becomes the philosophers
chair, but not the pulpit. For I find, that Paul has written, that he was
not sent to Preach the Gospel with wisdom of words, least the Cross
of Christ should be made of none effect, 1. Corinthians. 1.17. And therefore when
he came among them he says he came not with excellency of words, or of
wisdom, shevving unto them the testimony of God. For he esteemed not to
know any thing among them, save only Jesus Christ and him crucified, 1. Corinthians. 2.1.2. Sometimes there are some sentences of the Doctors and ancient
fathers interlaced, but they are not by me at any time alleged as though
their testimony or judgment were a sufficient argument to ground a truth
upon. For all truth must have and has his sufficient warrant from the
canonical Scriptures; and having so, it is a truth though all the Doctors and
Fathers should gaine-saie it. I only therefore bring them in as vvitnesses of
the truth in their times received, partly to show the Popish vain brag of
antiquity in these points, and partly to beat them from their errors with
their own weapons. Howbeit herein I have been very sparing, though indeed I
might have been in the citing of them very plentiful, they are so full of
excellent sentences to the same ends and purposes, for the which these few
out of them were alleged. Now my reasons that move me to be so bold, as
to make this Sermon appear again after this sort under your Lordshippes
protection, making my choice of you to dedicate it unto, are these: First I am
persuaded that you were a principal means, that I was occasioned first to
conceive and preach it. Secondly, you are the man, to whom among all other and
above all other I am most bound for your manifold kindenesses diversely showed
unto me: and therefore he that may most justly challenge all dutifulness,
and tokens of thankfulness, which lie in my poor power to show: amongst
which I beseech you accept this as one, though it be but a small one.
Thirdely I know such is your sincere affection to the truth of Doctrine
therein contained, and such was your unfeigned love and affection to-vvardes
him, whose memorial it still reuiueth: that as you took pleasure in hearing of
it once, so you will delight your self in reading and perusing of it often.
Which reasons considered I hope you will bear with my boldness herein, and
others I trust, whosoever they be, will approve of this my so doing. And
therefore beseeching the Lord of his mercy long to preserve you, and your
virtuous and good wife my very good Lady with all your children in health,
all true honor and prosperity, I cease from any farther troubling of your
Honor at this time. At Bletchley the 25. of December, 1585.

Your honors always to command, THOMAS SPARK.

Text. Apocal. 14.13. I heard a voice from heaven saying unto me, write:
Blessed are they that die in the Lord thencefoorth: even so says the spirit
that they rest from their labors, and their works accompany them.
The certainty of the truth in this scripture contained noted to breed
attention and obedie^^e thereto.
THis present occasion considered (right honorable and dearly beloved in our
Lord and Savior Jesus) this portion of Scripture offers most fit and
necessary matter, both to me to speak of, and to you to he are. For (as you may
well perceive) herein is set down, what the state and condition of al those is,
that die in the Lord, yea immediately upon that their death. Of which number (I
hope) all you here present are fully persuaded, this honorable person, whose
funeral day here this is, was one. And the more reverently both to move me
to speak thereof, and to provoke you all the more attentively to listen to
that which is therein avouched, we are to wey yt that which herein is set down
is a proposition or assertion not first devised, uttered, and recorded by the
will and wit of man, but which came down from heaven, left in writing thus
unto us by express and special commandment from thence, confirmed also to be
most true by the assent and approbation of the holy Ghost. For John the beloved
disciple of Jesus Christ, and a faithful witness testifies unto us, that he
heard a voice from heaven commanding him to write it, and also he tells us,
that this heavenly voice had no sooner told him, that the thing which he
should write was this, Blessed are they that dye in the Lord thenceforth, but
that the Spirit said yea unto it, adding further, that such rest from their
labors, and that the works of such accompany them. Wherefore in the fear of
God, we are al of us so to consider of the matter taught us in this
proposition, as of matter most weighty, most certain and true. For if John
himself had left it in writing but by the ordinarye direction of his Apostolic
spirit, we ought not at all to have doubted, either of the necessarinesse, or
certainety thereof. For even thereby both he and all the rest of his fellows,
writers of the Canonical Scriptures, were ever preserved in their writings
both from all erring in their writings, and also from committing unto writing
any needelesse or vnprofit able thing. How much less, it being (as you have
heard) most earnestly affirmed, and by most invincible authority confirmed
and strengthened, may we doubt of any thing taught us in this heavenly oracle:
Out of all doubt even hereby we are (to begin with all) al of us fast bound,
most readily to believe every thing to be most certainelye true, which herein
is taught, whatsoever we have taught heretofore, or flesh and blood can say
to the contrary hereafter otherwise most gracelessely we should call into
question, whether there be truth or no in a most vehement asseueration of the
almighty, which once to do were blasphemy.

The scope occasion and other circumstaunces thereof.
The scope and drift, that our most wise and loving GOD had in causing these
words to be registered, and recorded in this book after this sort, to the
eternal consolation of his, considered, we shall even thereby perceive, that
it was not without very great cause, why even thus they were set down. For it
appears in certain chapters before this, whereof these words are a part,
that it was revealed unto John, how Antichrist should come, grow, and flourish
in his kingdom to the ecclipsing of the truth marueilouslie. Wherefore in
this Chapter (as our very adversaries are compelled to confess) to his
comfort, and the farther consolation of the Church, the Lord vouchsafes to
reveal unto him the fall of Antichrist, and the manner how in this sort,
first in causing him to see an Angel fly in the midst of heaven, having an
everlasting Gospel to preach unto them, that dwell on the earth, to every
Nation, Kindred, Toungue and People, saying with a loud voice, Fear God, and
give glory to him, for the hour of his judgment is come, worship him that
made heaven and earth, the Sea and the fountains of waters: and then in
causing him to see another Angel following, saying, It is fallen, it is
fallen, Babylon the great city. For she made all nations to drink of the
wine of the wrath of her fornication: and thirdly in causing him to see and
hear a third Angel following the other two, saying with a loud voice: If any
man worship the beast and his image, and receive his mark in his foreheade,
or hand, the same shall drink of the wine of the wrath of God, yea of the pure
wine, which is powered into the cup of his wrath, and he shall be tormented in
fire and brimstone before the holy Angels, and before the Lamb, and the smoke
of their torment shall ascend evermore: and they shall have no rest day nor
night which worship the beast, and his image, and whosoever receives the Print
of his name. Wherein in effect is showed (as it is also written 2. These. 2.)
that after Antichrist shall have showed himself in his full, then yet, when
God shall see it time, that he would by the spirit of his mouth, that is, by
the effectual preaching again of the Gospel (which Antichrist had smothered)
bring him to a desperate consumption. Which once being brought to pass of the
great mercy of the Lord toward his church, by this light the^ so come into
the world and shining therein, the Lord teaches here by the voice of the 3.
Angel, that as many as be desirous to escape eternal damnation should in any
case so separate themselves from Antichrist and his religion, that neither in
forhead nor hand they bear his mark, that is, that neither openly nor secretly
they be any longer favorers of him and his abominations. And this more plainly
after chap. 18. upon occasion of a revelation like unto this, which he had of
the fall of the kingdom of Antichrist, he does warn us of by a voice from
heaven, saying, Go out of her my people, that ye be not partakers in her sins,
and that ye receive not of her plagues. Which admonition John by the spirit of
Prophecy foreseeing would take place in a number, and that thereupon
Antichrist and his confederates would take occasion of great grief and anger
seeing so their kingdoms to decay, he bursteth out into these words saying,
Here is the patience of the Saints, here are they that keep the commandments
of God and the faith of Jesus. As who should say, I foresee that when these
things should come to pass, which the Lord has foreshewed by the voices of
these three Angels shall; then they that leave Antichrist to cleave to Christ,
and forsake his abominable superstition to embrace the sincerity of the
Gospel, shall maruellously be assaulted by Antichrist and his, to reclaim
them again by all means both fair and foul, sweet and subtle, sour and
violent, insomuch that they then shall stand need of perfect patience. For if
it were possible (the devises and means which he will use to repair his
kingdom again withal will be such) that the very elect should be seduced, as
Christ has foretold Mat. 24.24. Whereupon the words of my text follow, where
incorageme^t is given to al men that shall live to see Antichrist and his
treachery by the preaching again of the gospel thus detected and brought to
his consumption, to embrace the doctrine of the Gospel, and to leave his, yea
and constantly to persevere both in the profession of their hatred and defiance
of his abominations (though never so universally liked before, yet and still
(the better to deceive) offered in a golden cup) and also in their love and
liking of the sincerity of the truth of the gospel, though never so much
slaundred by his to be a new doctrine and heresy, and persecuted also. For so
far off shall it be, that ye shall loose any thing (says the Lord unto such
in my text) if you take this course quite to forsake Antichrist and lean only
unto and upon Christ, that when he has done his woorst (which is, but to
kill your bodies, and so to cause your souls to flit the sooner out of them)
that I assure you without all doubt you shall immediately thence-foorth be
blessed, in that all manner of woe and pain shall be ended to you, and
besides your sincere profession and holy conversation must be rewarded with
joy and unspeakable felicity in heaven, Be therefore of good courage, the
light shining amongst you again, embrace it and walk in it, have no longer,
either secretly or openly any further fellowshippe with the works of
darkness: if you have, you have heard the third Angel tell you, that then
therefore ye shall be everlastingly accursed and condemned. But if you have
refused them and will live and die in the sincere profession, and belief of
the truth of the Gospel, whatsoever means Antichrist shall use to draw you
back again unto him, I say unto you (and I say it most earnestly) you shall be
for ever blessed and happy, My text therefore comes in, as a preoccupation,
to take away from al such as should fall from Antichrist to Christ by the
preaching of the Gospel, all objections whatsoever can or may arise in their
minds to make them waver or go back again unto him. And for as much as the
Lord saw that these would be many, yea and that in show so forcible to a man
consulting with flesh and blood, that he should even therewith be often amassed,
you see (right honorable) as I have said, that not without very great cause is
this proposition, tending to their comforce and strengthening, uttered and
recorded in such sort and manner as you have heard, Wherefore whenever there
arises any reason or motion in our minds to draw us back from the sincerity
of the Gospel, to take again the mark of the beast either in our forehead or
hand, then to strengthen our selves to withstand all such, let us make our
recourse unto this place, and well wey this point, that here is damnation
flatly denou^ced to all such, as after the sound of the gospel again revolt
to Antichrist: and that there is most certainly salvation and bliss promised
to those that refuse to do it, and choose rather to lose their lives.

The division.
Now in the proportion it self thus and upon this occasion uttered we have to
consider two things principally, yt is, who they be, of who^ the Lord therein
speaks, and what it is, yt he speaks of such. The first is expressed in
these words, They that die in the Lord: the later in these, Are blessed
thenceforth: even so says the spirit that they rest from their labors, and
their works accompany the^. Whereof orderly now I am to speak as the text
offers occasion, and as the time will permit me. Though this particle (all)
nor any like, he not prefixed, yet (no doubt) it is necessarily to be
understood. ^he pro^^sition is ^iuersall.
For the proposition being indefinit, and the latter part thereof so undoubtedly
and unseparably belonging to ye former, as it does, it must needs be equivalent
to an universal proposition, and therefore all one in effect with this. All
they that die in the Lord are blessed the^ceforth: besides the usual manner of ye
scripture, which is to set down universal propositions indefinitely, confirms
the same, as Ioh. 3.6. and 18. By the Lord is meant Christ.
And by the Lord we have here to understand our Lord and savior Jesus, whose
usual title in the scripture this is, as To. 1.3. 1. Co. 1.2. 2. Cor. 1.3. and
y^ worthily, both for that he is our creator, and also redeemer, What it is to
die in the Lord.
it is confessed of al, and denied of none. But what it is to die in the lord
here in this place al interpreters be not of one mind. Some understand it
generally of al those which die in the state of grace, and tauour of ye Lord
through a sound and right christian faith in him: other some take it, y^ only
hereby Martyrs are meant, and therefore these words (...), with word for word
sound, in the Lord, they translate for the Lord, or for the Lords cause. Which
later interpretation the papists best like of, as appears in ye Rhem. notes
upon this place. For the place so taken (say they) it makes not at al against
our doctrine of purgatory. For we never taught, y^ martyrs went thither, but
have always confessed, that such are immediately after their death blessed. Of
who^ with Aug. sermon de verb. Apost. 17. Cap. 1. we (say they) have always
said, that he does injury to a martyr, that prays for a m^rtyr. Wherefore it
shall be very necessary to consider whether of these interpretations is the
rather in this place to be followed. They that follow the later urge this as
the only reason of their so doing, that the circumstaunces of the place leads
them to take it as spoken only to the comfort of those that through the tyranny
of Antichrist shall loose their lives for the profession of the pure doctrine
of Christ. That it is spoken to the comfort of such, yea and especially to the
comfort of such, I will easily grant: but only to the comfort of such, and
therefore only of such, I cannot in any case think. For (no doubt of it) the
Lord having foreshewed unto John. the fall of Antichrists kingdom, and the
manner how, and consequently having let him in spirit foresee, how he would
free and chafe against all those, that being admonished by the Gospel should
fully separate themselves from him, to rest only in and upon Christ: as he did
thereupon foresee, that he would raise cruel persecution against the^, that
through the fear thereof he mihgt reclaim them; so he (without all
peradventure) in spirit foresawe, that no fair means, or subtle persuasions
would be omitted, to heal up the wound of the beast again withal: and that the
saints of god should find is as hard a matter to stand steadfast in Christ unto
their lives end against those assaults, as against the other, that is his
cruel persecution. For daily experience teaches, that this way he prevails
more a great deal, than by the other. And therefore if there were cause why
these words of my text should be uttered and recorded to animate and encourage
men in the time of persecution to stand steadfast in the truth against
Antichrist, there was as good cause, why they should be so also to the
stre^gthning of me^ to live and die in the same truth, what fair allurements,
subtle devises, or cunning perswasio^s soever were used to draw them from ye
same. So yt as well he is told here, that he is blessed, that dies in his bed a
right and sound Christian faith (notwithstanding these means used to him
before to seduce him) as he that dies in the fire for the profession of the
same faith. And yet though they have it granted them that the words especially
concern Martyrs, yet understanding the words generally, they serve as well to
the comfort of them, and rather better, than if they were true only in them.
For this argument follows strongly, whosoever dies in the Lord, that is in a
right and sound christian faith, he is thenceforth immediately blessed, and
therefore martyrs, who not only dye in ye faith, but for that faith. Further,
who knows not, that it is an usual thing in the scriptures, and in all other
good learning, to prove particulars by generals? And therefore what reason is
there to the contrary, but that here to the comforting of them that dye for the
Lord, the blessed state generally of all that dye in ye Lord, should be set
forth, wherein they might see themselves of al other undoubtedly included?
Hereby then it appears, that their reason of restraining the words to the^
only that dye for the Lord, is taken away, and therefore also the consequent,
which they would infer thereupon falls to ye ground. Besides this, diverse
reasons I have, which enforce me to understand the words generally of all
that die in the Lord, when and wheresoever, and they are these, first it is
somewhat hard to translate (...) which is, in the Lord, for the Lord.
Secondly, when the circumstance and coherence of the text will well suffer (as in
this place) that it carry a sense to the general comfort of Gods Church then
unnecessarily to restrain it to some sort of members thereof only, cannot be
but a fault. For it is, as it were a needless shrinking up of the sinnews, and
pulling in of the arms of the holy scripture. And lastly in the interpreting
of scripture it is a rule greatly to be commended, If the question of the sense
arise upon a phrase of speech (as here it does) to consider the use of the same
or like phrase in other places of scripture, and to take it in that sense, that
best agrees with the use thereof in other places of scripture, Now in this case
we neither find, that to live in the Lord, or to die in the Lord are taken in
any other place for to live or die for the Lords sake: but to dye in the Lord
to be taken in this general se^ se^, to depart this life in a sound and
right Christian faith, we find elsewhere in the Scripture. For 1. Thessal. 4.
(where it is evident that the Apostle speaks generally of all those that shall
have a joyful resurrection) he calls them first those that sleep in Jesus.
verse. 14. after those that be dead in Christ verse. 16. where it were absurd to
restrain these phrases to those only that die for Christ's cause. For it were to
restrain the comfort of the general resurrection only to such. These and some
other such like reasons (as it should seem) have enforced our Rhemists upon
this place (though they plainly show, that they would very gladly have the
words restrained only to Martyrs, that so easily they might shifte off the
place when it is alleged against their purgatory) to confess that yet it may
be taken as spoken generally of all that depart in the state of grace.
Wherefore seeing this general sense most fully and strongly answers the
circumstances of the text, best agrees with the letter thereof, offers more
general comfort to Gods children, accords best with the use of the same, and
other the like phrases in other places of the Scripture (in so much that our
very adversaries, against whom most that sensr makes, have in print confessed
that, that may be the sense) we may safelye conclude, that they which are here
spoken of, are all generally, that depart this life in Christ Jesus our Lord,
whether they lived or dyed before Christ, or since, or shall hereafter; and
children dying within Gods election and covenant. The necessity of
perseverance.


This thus concluded and determined, it is worthy to be marked, that it is
said, which die in the Lord. For thereby we learn, that unless we persevere
unto our end in refusing the beasts mark both in forehead and hand, that is,
any way to be favorers of the abhominatio^s and superstitions of Antichrist
(what means soever he use to seduce us) and continue also in a constant and
sincere profession of Christ's truth unto our death, that here is no comfort at
all offered unto us: but our portion is set down before by the voice of the 3.
Angel, to drink of the cup of Gods wrath, and to be tormented evermore.
Wherefore let every one of us not only take warning by the light of the gospel
shining now amongst us, to separate our selves quite from Antichrist and his
religion, and to be no favorers of him or his opinions, either secretly, or
openly, but let us also embrace the sincere religion of Jesus Christ, offered
unto us by the gospel, and persevere in ye zealous profession thereof, what
means soever fraudulent or violent he shall use to shake us: and so doing we
may be sure we are of ye number here spoken of, else not. For it is written, He
that perseuereth to the end shall be saved, Mat. 10.22. Be faithful unto the
end and I will give thee the crown of life. Apo. 2.10. and on the other side:
No man that puts his hand to the plough and looks hack is meet for the
kingdom of God, Luke 9.62. and most fearfully is ye judgment of God denou^ced
against al apostataes, and reuolters from a known truth, Heb. 6.4.5.6. and
10.26.27. and in the 2. epistle of Pet. 2.20.21.22. By this therefore that we
have heard already we see, that neither Turks, Jews, Pagans, nor Atheistes
can be of the number hear spoken of, that dye in the Lord; because they do
not acknowledge Jesus Christ so much as to be a Lord; yea, and that it is not
enough for a time never so well to acknowledge him to be Lord and king, and
profess faith in him; unless we persevere in our so doing unto our death,
let antichrist do what he can against us therefore: and that so al backsliders
from the sincere religion of Jesus Christ, are also shut out from this number
of the^ that dye in the Lord.

The necessity of spiritual union with Christ.
Further yet we are to weigh the force of this phrase (in the lord) for it is of
great importance, in that evidently thereby is taught us, that there is a very
nigh conjunction and union necessarily required to be betwixt the Lord and
them, that ever would be of the number of them that die in the Lord. It is
not enough therefore for such to know the Lord, what he is in nature, and
what he is in office, and to be able and willing to utter their knowledge,
unless therewithal they proceed even to be in the Lord. For the former is
but to come nigh him, which is nothing, except we get into him. The necessity
of this union betwixt us and our Lord and Savior Jesus (or else we cannot be
saved) arises of this, that whereas our salvation lies in an atonement and
union betwixt god and us, and there is no other means in the wisdom of God
found out and appointed to us men, having by our sins made a division betwixt
him and us, to recover this union again with God, but by, becoming one with
Christ Jesus our Lord, in whose person for our sakes, Godhead and ma^hoode be
united; so that thereupon it must needs thus stand with us, that until we be
in Christ, and so one with him, we remain still dead in our sins and
trespasses, at enmitye with God, and indeed without life before him. But when
it is once come to pass, that we are in him, ingrafted and growing in him,
then our heavenly father, being well pleased in him, becomes to be so also in
us for his sake. Whereupon it must needs be, that our sins are forgiven,
and that we are at one again with God, and live in deed in his sight, in that
Christ lives in us and we in him. So that as necessary as the union of the
soul and body of man be to cause this temporal life: so needful is the
union of Christ spiritually, to every man to cause him to live before God. For
as the body is dead when the soul is sundred from it; so whole man, though
otherwise in respect of this common life he be never so lively, is stark dead
spiritually, whiles Christ and he be severed. For as we read 1. Ioh. 5.11.
that this is a most certain truth, that God has given unto us eternal life: so
this is as certain (as it there follows) that this life is in his son.
Whereupon (as he says in the next verse) thus the case stands, that he that
has the son has life, and he that has not the son has not life. For
confirmation of this doctrine of the necessitye of our spiritual and mystical
union with Christ it serves, that he is called the head, and all that shall be
saved, his Church and body, Colos. 1.18. Ephesians. 1.22.23. and that he is compared
by himself (Ioh. 15.5.) to a vine whereinto his heavenly father, so ingrafteth
al those, as branches, that shall be saved, that they grow in him, and that
also Ioh. 6.55. where he compares his flesh to meat indeed, and his blood to
drink indeed, in the eating and drinking whereof lies salvation, and in the
not eating and drinking whereof lies damnation as there he says expreslye
verse 53.54, For by these metaphors it is evident (especially seeing the
ground of them is the similitude between the metaphor and the thing
metaphorised) even in this point, that as the body receives life from the
head, and is dead without it: as the branch though it be never so near the
vine stock, yet if it abide not in it, and grow not in it, has no life there
from, and therefore withers, and if it abide in it, then it likes and
fructifieth: and as the hungry and thirsty have not the benefit of meat and
drink to live by, by coming where it is seeing it, and knowing it, but by
eating and drinking thereof, and digesting it, so that by the force of nature
there may grow an union betwixt them and their meat: even so it is as
necessary, that the Church be united to her head Christ, engrafted into him,
and grow in him, and that every one that would be saved eat him and drink
him, and that so effectually, as that he may be their spiritual food. For if
it be thus they shall live for ever by him, otherwise they remain in death,
wither, and must perish. And therefore Christ (John. 15, 5.) says, He that
abides in me and I in him, the same brings forth much fruit. And in the
next verse he adds, If a man abide not in me, he is cast forth as a branch,
and withers, and men gather them and cast them in the fire, and they burn.
What a comfort is it then to al those that be the Lords to read, how Christ
(whose prayer we may be sure was heard) has prayed unto his heavenly father,
Ioh. 17.23, that he might be in them, and his father in him, that so they may
be made perfect in one?

And hereby we may be assured, that he will find the means so to marie
himself in spirit unto all the elect, that they shall be sure to be united
unto him, and made one in him, and he in them, It has pleased the father, that
in him should al fulness dwell, Colos. 1.16. and yet such is his goodness
toward his Church (in that he has taken upon him to be the redeemer
thereof) that he accounts himself as it were imperfect without his body the
Church, and therefore it is said to be his fulness, Ephesians. 1.23. Whereupon it
is, that he and his Church joined together by spiritual bonds appointed for
that purpose as the head and body of a man be by natural and bodily means, are
accounted in the sight of God as one perfect man, whereof he is the head, and
the Church his body, as it is evident to the diligent reader, Ephesians.
4.13.15.16. 1. Cor. 12.12. and. Gal. 3.16.

These things thus considered may breed in us al here present (and I hope they
have) an earnest desire to know how to get unto this union and conjunction
with Christ, whereby we may be in him, and so to be the readier, when it shall
please the Lord to call us hence, to die in him. And this is the thing that
now next we have to Consider of. Concerning which we are to understand, that
on Gods part offering this blessed union and fellowshippe unto us, his outward
means is the whole ministry of his word and Sacraments. For we read,
Ephesians. 4. that he has appointed it namely to this end, to gather together his
Saints, for the edification of the body of Christ, till we all meet together
unto a perfect man, and unto the measure of the age of the fulness of Christ, in
the unity of the faith, and knowledge of the son of god, by whom all the body
being coupled and knitte together by every joint for the furniture thereof
(according to the effectual power, which is in the measure of every part)
receaueth increase of the body unto the edifying of it self in love, verse
12.13.16. And Saint John. 1. Epist. 1.3. plainly confesses, that the end of
his ministry and his fellows the Apostles was this, saying. That which we
have heard and seen, declare we unto you, that ye may also have
fellowshippe with us, and that our fellowship also may be with the father, and
with the son Jesus Christ. By the word preached generally the doctrine of
this union is laid open to our ears: in the administration of the sacraments
it is also, the better to make us to embrace it, not only set before our eyes,
but confirmed, particularly offered, and ratifyed unto us. Gods inward means,
whereby he makes this outward effectual unto us, is the effectual
operation of his spirit in our hearts. For it was he that opened Lydias
heart to attend unto the things that Paul spoke to her salvation, Act.
16.14.15. And Paul may plant and Apollo water, but it is GOD, that must give
the increase, or else the other will be to no purpose, 1. Cor. 3.6.7. Now the
means on our part, whereby by the foresaid means we are enabled to take and
apprehend this union offered, is a sound and a right faith in Christ Jesus. I
say sound, because it must be unfeigned: and right, because it must not be
erroneous, nor heretical: in Christ Jesus, because to the apprehension of this
fellowshippe with Christ, and consequently to all the mercies of GOD laid up
for us in him, it is not enough to believe either that he is, or what he is,
unless we believe also rightly in him being such a one. But in this I speak
but of them of sufficient age and descretion. For, as for children borne in the
Church, dying in their infancy, and others borne and dying idiots in the same,
borne of such parents, as the covenant (Genesis 17. I will be thy GOD, and the
GOD of thy seed after thee) belongs unto, no doubt of it the Lord can and
does by the force of this election and other extraordinary means unite unto
his son. And therefore we are to hope, that such die in the Lord. Understand
therefore, that I herein have spoken, and in that, which follows, mean to
speak only of those, to whom the Lord gives years and discretion, so that
if the fault be not in themselves, they are capable of the doctrine of faith.

That by faith this union is attained.
Now to prove, that faith has this office appointed unto it of God, to
apprehend Christ, and to make him our own by the former means offered unto
us, the scripture is most clear and evident. For we read John. 1.12. that as
many as received him, to them he gave power to be made the sons of God. For
explanation whereof it follows immediately, even to the^ that believe in his
name. And Ephesians. 3.17. Paul prays, that Christ may dwell in their hearts by
faith. And in the 4. chapter of that epistle 13. ye have heard that by the
unity of faith and knoweledge of the son of God we all meet together unto a
perfect man in Christ.

And who so duly considers, what is written in the 6, of John, from the 27.
verse unto the 57. of the same, he shall there plainly find the premises,
whereupon this conclusion is directly to be inferred, ergo to eat the flesh of
the son of man and to drink his blood, is nothing else but to believe in him,
plainly and at large handled. For first there this proposition is handled, that
to eat the bread of life is to do nothing else, but to believe in the son:
and then this, but to eat the flesh of the son of man and to drink his blood is
nothing else, but to eat the bread of life: whereupon it directly follows,
that therefore it is nothing else to eat the flesh of the son of man and to
drink his blood, but to believe in him. Which also is evident, in that you shall
find in that chapter within the compass of the foresaid verses, the same
things both promised to the eaters and drinkers of Christ's flesh and blood,
and to the believers in him, and also the same things threatened to the not
eaters and drinkers thereof, which are to the not believers in him. Which
argues that they are both one, especially seeing the one is put for the other
in the Chapter following, verse. 37.38. In the former whereof we read thus,
Now in the last and great day of the feast, Jesus stood and cried, saying, If
any man thirst, let him come unto me and drink: but in the latter (whereas if
he had continued the metaphorical speech, wherein he began, he should have
said, he that comes unto me and drinks of me) changing his phrase, and
yet retayning his former meaning, to show us that to drink him is nothing
else, but to believe in him, he says in the steed thereof, He that
believes in me, as says the Scripture, out of his belly shall flow rivers
of waters of life. And therefore not without good ground said Augustine, Creed
and manducasti, Believe and thou have eaten. Tract. 25. upon John. And
Tertullian de resurrectione carnis: 29. writes, that Christ is auditu
deuorandus, and ruminandus intellectu, and fide digerendus, that is, to be
devoured by hearing, to be chewed on by understanding, and to be digested by
faith. So that by all these proofs laid together we see that Christ is
received by faith, that we grow in him by faith, yea to a perfect man in Gods
sight, and lastly that he is as surely apprehended of us by faith to our
spiritual maintenance in the word preached, and sacraments ministered (which
are the dishes wherein one and the selfsame Christ is offered unto us) as
meat and drink being set before us is taken in by eating or drinking thereof
to our temporal nourishment, Whereof the Sacrament of Christ's body and blood
is a most effectual ratification, and particular confirmation to every right
receiver thereof by faith. If it were otherwise that we could not get to be
in Christ, and he in us by faith in him, but to accomplish this it were
necessary bodily to take him into us by the mouth of our bodies, then
(forasmuch as there were never any that died that could be blessed, that died
not in him) all the good Patriarchs, Prophets, and other servants of GOD that
died before he had an humane body, must be condemned. But the contrary
thereof is evident, in that Abraham is placed in state of salvation by Christ,
Luke 16.24. etc. Yea and with Abraham; Isaac, and Jacob, in the kingdom of
heaven, Luke 13.28.29. And therefore Paul is bold 1. Cor. 10.3.4. to say of
them that were before Christ, that they all ate one spiritual meat, and
drank the same spiritual drink, that we do, Christ, which could not be
otherwise effectually, but by believing aright in CHRIST, to come. Let us
therefore labor by diligent use of the means, that GOD has appointed us for
that purpose, to attain to a right and sound faith in Christ, and to nourishe
it still by the use of the same means, seeing thereby we see it comes to
pass, that we put on Christ and be united unto him, so that we may be said
(according to the usual phrase of the Scripture) to be in him, and
consequently always found ready to dye in him. Of which number I count as well
them that died before Christ in a right faith in him to come, as since in him
already come.

But not by every kind of faith.
But now (least we deceive our selves in thinking we have attained unto this
faith, and so are in Christ, when it is nothing so) we are diligently to
consider what manner of faith that is, and of what nature it is, that works
this great and glorious effect. And the rather are we diligently to consider
hereof because this word Faith is not always taken in one and the selfsame
signification in the Scriptures: for there are diverse sorts and kinds of
faith. Not by the miraculous faith.
Understand therefore (Right Honorable and well-beloved in our Savior Jesus
Christ) that it is not fides miraculosa, a faith to work miracles by, that
is, a resolution by some extraordinary means of Gods will to work a wonder,
and therefore thereupon to attempt it in his name, and to bring it to pass,
that makes us have this fellowshippe with Christ. For of such as have this
faith we read thus, Mat. 7.22.23. Many will say unto me in that day (says
Christ) Lord, Lord, have we not in thy name prophesied? And by thy name cast
out Devils? And done many great works? And then will I profess to them, Not
by the historical faith.
I never knew you, depart from me you workers of iniquity. Neither is it an
historical faith only, whereby we assent to the truth of those things that
are written in the Scripture. For (no doubt of it) the very devils of hell are
enforced to yield thus much to their smart and woe. And therefore we read
James. 2.19, The devils believe and tremble. Not by the temporary says.
Neither is it a temporary faith, fleeting in the conceit of man not firmly
settled and rooted in his heart. For such as have that kind of faith only are
compared by our savior Christ Mat. 13. to the thornie and stony ground,
wherein though for a time the good seed of the word seemed to make fair
promise of a plentiful harvest, yet ere due time of harvest came, either
through the cares and pleasures of this life it was so choked and over grown,
or through the scorching heat of persecution so burnte up that it came to no
good. And therefore you have heard that it is said hear not without cause,
Which dye in the Lord, to show us that it must be a continuing and
perseuering faith unto the end (howsoever in the mean time it be assaulted)
that must serve the turn in this case to make us such, as of whom the LORD
here speaks. Not by the dead faith.
I say further, that a faith though seeming to be never so liuelye in words,
yet if it be fruitless in good works, it is not the faith that can make us
to be in Christ. For both immediatlye before the words of my text, and in the
end thereof it is evident, that a faith accompanied with good works is here
required. For before you read, that John set down these words, Here is the
patience of Saints, here are they that keep the commandments of GOD and
the faith of Jesus. And my text concludes, that the works of such accompany
them, as dye in the Lord. For the true faith purifieth the heart, Acts.
15.9. and it is of that nature, that it works by love, Galat. 5.6. And
therefore as, though a man have never so charitable and courteous words, yet
if he have no deeds aunswering thereunto, his charity is vain, Iam. 2.15,
16.^0^ (...) if it have no works is dead in it self, and cannot not save a
man, verse 17. etc. Howbeit this I say, and thus I teach with James, not that I
would have you to think, that faith saves, or justifies any for the
worthiness of these works that follow it, and accompanye it. For so far off am
I, and we all ought to be from that, that we may not once imagine, that faith
it self saves or justifies any for the worthiness of it self, but only
for and through the worthiness of Christ the object thereof, whom it
apprehends and applies withal his merits to her owner, and so thereby he
is justified. But this I say and constantly afferme, that that faith that
justifies a man indeed is two ways lively and effectual, namely in heaven
before GOD about her object Christ, first in apprehending and applying lit to
the justification of the owner: and then in earth amongst men in puryf^yng her
subject, that is, the person in whom it is, to bring forth fruits beseeming
a justified person. So that always he that has the iustifiyng faith, has
therewith the sanctifying spirit, whereby he is able (according to Saint
Peter's counsel to join virtue to his faith, 2. Peter. 1.5 and according to
Saint James request, to show his faith by his works, Chapter. 2.18. for the
^ounde and right faith in Jesus (...) into the heart of the owner, by the
operation of the spirit, such abundance of love to wards GOD for and in
consideration of his infinite love and goodness found out and apprehended
thereby, that it replenisheth the heart wherein it is withal thankfulness
and duetifulnesse toward him in obeying his commandments with all his
power chearefully and willingly: in so much that as it is impossible to separate
fire and heat, sun and light: so is it to find a iustiflyng faith without
good works. And therefore though we take the office of iustifiyng from good
works generally without distinction, and leave it soly and wholly to faith, as
Paul does, Romans. 3.28. where he says, Therefore we conclude, that a man is justified by faith without the works of the law: yet we say and
hold also with Saint James, that a man is justified of works, and not of
faith only, James 2.24. For though by warrant from Paul we hold that only
faith justifies before GOD, because the works of the Iawe, that is, works
commanded by the Law, which (if any other thing might be joined with faith
in this office) are most worthy, are shut out quite from intermedling therein:
yet we hold also, that this faith, which is sola, that is, alone in doing
this office, yet is not solitaria, that is, alone in her owner, when she does
perform it.

Faith therefore alone (with Paul) justifies before God, and works proceeding
from faith justify, that is, declare who is justified, with James. For that
appears to be his sense by his saying, She we me thy faith out of thy
works. Neither is his phrase strange in saying that works do justify,
which do but declare who is justified. For we say commonly, white hairs make
in old man, and yet our meaning only is, that they declare him to be an old
man. And for further proof yet of this point, that it is not a faith in the
sippes, but in the heart, not a woroy, but a worthy faith, that knitteth us
unto Christ, we are to call to our remembrance, that Christ expressly ( John.
15.5.) says, He that abides in me and I in him, the same brings forth much
fruit. And that as Saint Paul says, there is no condemnation to those that be
in Christ, to he adds, which walk not after the flesh, but after the spirit,
Romans 8.1. yea that he says, that they that are Christ's have crucified the
flesh with the lusts thereof, Galat. 5.24.and that with with, old things are
past away, and all things are become new, 2. Cor. 5.17. Either therefore
never pretend, that thou have a sound are a right faith, or else set thy life
and conversation be such, as God may be glorified in iustifiing such an one.
David could say) seeing Christ but a far off in respect of that purgation and
clen sing, that he hoped for by him, Psa. 51.7. Purge me with hysope, and I
shall be clean, wash me and I shall be whiter than snow. And therefore said
John very flacly 1. epist. 1.6.7, If we say we have fellowshippe with him, and
walk in darckenesse, we lie and do not truly: but if we walk in the light
as he is in the light, we have fellowshippe one with another, and the blood
of Jesus Christ cleanses us from al our sins. Wherefore let us assure our
selves, either that we are not purged at all by Christ's death or washed by
his blood, or else chat we are clean and white. For (no doubt of it) where
God for his sake pardons sin, there he purges it: and where he covers
it, there he cures it: and therefore to all that believe in him the spirit is
promised, John. 7.38. to be in that measure, that it shall be as rivers of water
of life flowing over the banks, for the force it shall have in all such
effectually to wash them, to soften them, to make them fruitful, and to quench
in them the flames and heat of sin. Unless therefore we find the spirit
in us to have this operation, we are without warrant in our selves to prove,
that we have a sound and right faith in Christ. By this then you mate see
(dearly beloved in Jesus Christ) seeing this is the general doctrine of us
all, that profess the Gospel with knowledge, how much we are wro^ged by our
adversaries the papists, who (this not withstanding) charge our doctrine to be
a doctrine of liberty, and licentiousness. For hereby, evidently you may see,
we shut out all those from the number of them that dye in the Lord which be
carnal, and worldly minded men, whatsoever they say; and al carnal and profane
Gospellers, which turn the grace of God into wantonness, what fair show
soever they can make of faith in words. And therefore here is no comfort at
all for any, that yet remain in their sins, having the^ reigning in their
mortal bodies, for Epicures, Libertines, or for any leude and lycentious
wretch whatsoever he be. For such do not live in the Lord, and therefore are
not slkely to dye in the Lord. For commonly qualis vita, finis ita, such life
such death, and in the just judgment of God it so falls out For he that
living and in health will not remember God, it is but right that God should
forget him sick and dying.

Not by the popish faith.
Howebeit as yet (will some say) for any thing that you have said, both Papist
and Protestant may seem to be such as dye in the Lord. For both profess
faith in Christ, and labor to show their faith by their works. I grant it
may seem so, to a simple man that sees not the difference betwixt them to be
such. as that the one holds the foundation, the other not. For though there
were a difference otherwise as great, as there is betwixt gold and silver,
precious stones and wood, heye and stubble; yet if both held the foundation,
though the builders thereupon of wood, hey and stubble, should in time, by a
more clear day of understanding, shining unto them, through the fire of Gods
spirit kindled in them, be caused to see their folly in building no better
matter, upon so good a foundation, with grief, sorrow, and some shame for
their so doing: Yet we learn by S. Paul, that even they also 1. Cor. 3.11.12,
13.14. and 15. shall be saved for holding the foundation. And therefore that
such, notwithstanding their wood, hey, and stubble, that is, their fond and
vain opinions not overthrowing the foundation, may dye in the Lord, and so be
partakers of the comfore set down in this place. But the truth is (right
honorable) that the Popish faith what good show soever it makes, has
forsaken the foundation, which is in this case, but one, even Christ Jesus;
Because it holds not the fou^datio^.
besides who^ no other foundation can any man lay, as there, ver. 11. Paul most
excellently affirms.

For better understanding of which point to be most true, as this would be
remembered, which we have heard S. Paul tell us, 1. Co. 3.11. yt other
fou^datio^ ca^ no man lay, the^ that which is laid, which is Christ Jesus, so
we are dillige^tly to consider the ground of yt metaphor, that is ye reason why
Christ is said to be the only foundation of his Church, whereupon all the
true members thereof, as living stones, must be built, 1. Pet. 2.5. that in
him the whole building being coupled together, may grow unto a holy temple in
the Lord, Ephesians. 2.21. No doubt of it, the ground and reason of the mecaphore
is the similitude, that is betwixt the foundation of an house, and the house,
and Christ and his Church; which is this, that as the whole frame of the house
stands and rests upon the foundation, and so thereby is borne up and
vpholden: so every one, that would stand up, and be vpholden, as any part of
Gods spiritual house, must wholly stand and rest upon Christ, and by him alone
be borne up, and vpholden. Let a house stand but halflings upon the
foundation, it cannot stand: it will fall: so in this case they that would
surely stand before the Lord, they must fully be settled, and rest upon the
only foundation Christ. Whereupon it must needs follow, that the popish
Church is not Gods spiritual house, because neither the whole house generally,
nor any member thereof particularly, takes it self only to stand, and to
be vpholden upon, and by Christ alone. For it is current doctrine with them
yet, that Christ by his sufferinges has not so satisfied the justice of his
heavenly father, as that he will not require further satisfaction at the hands
of him, that believes in him. For they plainly teach, that though to such,
their sins be forgiven, yet concerning the penalty due therefore, this is
only done, that by the merits of Christ, whereas it should be everlasting
misery, now for his merits God will be content to accept of a temporary
satisfaction; and so partly for that and partly for his sons satisfaction he
will acquit them. And here it is worthy to be noted, that the Lord has so
stricken that generation in his just judgment with blockish sottishnes, for
this their robbing of his dear son of his glory which is due unto him, that
whereas in this their doctrine they join other means and helps, to deliver
men from their sins, to the salve, and plaster which Christ has made, as
though his were either not broad enough to cover the sore, or not good enough
to cure it, the means that they devise are so childishe and so unfit to be
mingled with the precious blood of Christ, as that they make themselves
ridiculous, in attributing deliverance from sin unto them. As for example,
they attribute the power to deliver from sin to their holy water, holy oil,
holy salt, holy cream, holy bread, holy palms, holy cross; yea and to what
toye soever, if it be but a grain, or a beade hollowed of the Pope; as their
service books, which yet they use, and too too gross experience, have taught
us. Sin is so small a matter with them, that some sins must needs of their
own nature be venial, and therefore our learned Rhemistes in their notes upon
the 10. of Mat. hold that a Bishops blessing will wipe them out; going on
pilgrimage, offering of Candels to stocks and stones, and such like deeds of
devotion enjoined by a Ghostly Father in way of penance; yea saying of five
Aue Mary's, three Pater nosters, and three Creedes are counted of them good
means of satisfactions to deliver the believer from that which the precious
and bloody satisfaction of Christ has not delivered him from. And which is of
all the rest most absurd, a number of the^ (as it is too well known by their
atte^pts, and practices both in England and else where), are grown to be of
this opinion, that traiterouslie and treacherously to murder their natural
Prince, for that he or she favors not the Popish faith, is become now a
means to merit and to obtain plenarie remission of all sin, to the party
that will hazard his life to do it, and yet this they will not grant that the
believer in Jesus Christ can have, by Christ's dying a most bitter death.

O horrible blasphemy, and yet their daily practice puts us out of doubt,
that this is their opinion, and their covering and shrowding their manifold
treasons under the pretense of their religion confirms the same. And whereas
to salvation two things are necessary, first quite to be delivered from
sin and from the danger thereof, which otherwise would sink us down to
hell: and then a perfect righteousness, that can not but be so accounted in
the righteous and just judgment of God. Whereby a right claim and title may
be had to heaven, and both these are fully provided and prepared for all right
believers, in the Messiah, as after you shall hear. As they will not seek for
the former in his satisfactions alone, but partly also in their own: so
concerning the latter, they even with the blind and pharisaicall Jews Romans
10.3. are so ignorant of the righteousness whirh God in Christ has prepared
to make men righteous by, that they seek to that end still to establish their
own righteousness. For at no hand they can abide, that men should believe
that the righteousness of Christ should be imputed unto the believer in Christ
for righteousness. This they count absurd, and therefore in their Tridentine
Conuenticle accurse it as an heresy. In the mean time holding, that the
works which they themselves do after faith, is the formal righteousness,
whereby they deserve to be accounted righteous before God. In which point
(because their own consciences tell them, that their doctrine sou^deth greatly
to the derogatio^ of Christ's glory) to color the Antichristianity thereof as
well yet as may be, they have now found out this devise to say, that their
own works are not so of their own worthiness, and absoluteness, but through
the worthiness of the merits of Christ. Which in effect, in plainer terms is
to say, that Christ came not perfectly to save by himself, and to be a full
savior in his own person, but to merit: that me^ might by their own works be
their own saviors: as though Christ died to be our savior, to post over either
part, or the whole of that his office to any thing wrought by man. And as their
doctrine is, so is their faith. For to take it at the best (as now they have
fined it) thereby they seek in Christ but their former justification: which
they account nothing else, but the first translation from the state of mere
natural men, to the state of grace and favor of God. And yet eue^ herunto they
hold, that men may have works of preparation of their own common ability,
left unto them of nature: but as for sins done after this former
justification attained, they believe they must fly to a second refuge, which
they call the sacrament of Penance, for them: and so they believe they must
either in this life by themselves, or after in Purgatory, satisfy for these
sins, partly by their own sufferinges, and partly by deeds done for them by
others, after they be dead. And for the second justification, which is the
consummation and perfection of the former, they believe that that must be made
up, and finished by their own merits, made^ able to merice their salvation
by the merits of Christ. And that this is their faith and their docerine even
now, I could make it evident from point to point out of the Tridentine
council, the Censurer of Coled, Canisius Catechism, the Romish Catechism,
and our of our own coun^rimens writings, which are counted not the meanest of
the Jesuits. But I need not it ^^ble you with any further proof thereof. For
they themselves will not deny it. And ye hereby it cannot dee but you plaiuely
see, that Christ is not the only foundation to them, whereupon, as upon their
only foundation, they stand and test. For you see they trust to stand before
the Lord pa^tly by his satisfactions, pa^^y by their owns, par^ly by his
merits, and p^^tly ^y their own and others: and therefore they are built but
halflings at the most upon him, and halflings upon themselves and others. For
whatsoever he has done for them; yet unless their own satisfactio^s be full
and their merits such, as for which they may even in the justice of God clasme
heaven, they can be at no rest, nor peace in their consciences. And therefore
because they can never but doubt, whether their satisfactions be full, and
their meries perfect, they hold, that they may never have an assured trust and
confidence, that they shall be saved; but that lawfully they may always be in
some doubt thereof. O what an vuco^fortable doctrine of desperatio^ is this?
And ye so far off are they from being ashamed of this (which is the just
judgment of God upon them for leaving to rest upon Christ, the only and most
steadfast foundation) that they are not ashamed that their doctrine be
intitiled. A doctrine of doubtfulnesse: Yea they count that their doubtfulnes,
humility: and the assurance, that true faith breeds, presumption. Even the
bare opening unto you thus, what the popish faith is (I hope) sufficiently
proves unto you, that they that die in such a faith, cannot be said to die
in the Lord Jesus, because that out of the Lord Jesus (you see) in themselves
and others, they seek a great part of their salvation. Howbeit, because it is
a point of great importance and weight, and wherein as yet great multitudes will
not be so easily resolved, let us see how from point to point this their
faith and religion is opposite and contrary to Gods revealed will in his
word. The former doctrine and faith confuted first generally.


They hold (as you have heard) generally this, that Christ in his own person,
by that which he has done himself, has not already done, whatsoever is
necessary for man to be iustifled and saved by. And therefore they ad thereunto
their own satisfactions and merits, by his doings and this together, to make up
their justification, and salvation. But the scripture says. Heb. 7.25. he is
able perfectly to save those, that come unto God by him: Heb. 10.10. by the
will of God we are sanctified by the offering of the body of Jesus Christ once
made; and a little after verse 14. with one offering has he consecrated for
ever them that are sanctified. And Christ himself that knew best to give an
infallible note of his own body the Church, tells us Matthew. 22.1. that the
sound and earhand of the true Messengers therein is this. All things are
already prepared (namely in the marriage of the kings son) come unto the
marriage. Whereby it is most clear ye the word sets forth Christ unto us as
one that of himself, and by himself has already done what soever we are to
look to be saved by or for. Then particularly in three points.
To leave now the general ground of their faith, and to come to the
particulars thereof, first you hear that they hold, in the Scriptures. For
there it is thus written. The blood of the son of God does cleanse us from all
sin, John. 1.7. and least this should be taken as spoken only of sins
before faith, John adds, and puts himself in the number, and yet long
before that be had faith; If we say, we have no sin, we deceive our selves, and
the truth is not in us: If we acknowledge our sins he is faithful and just,
to forgive us our sins, and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness. If they
reply, that all this proves but remissionem omnis culpae, that is forgiveness
of the fault or guilt only, of all our sins, and not also of the punishment,
I proceed and ask them, whether the curse of the law and damnation be not
punishments due for sin, and then whether these be not the greatest, and
include not the rest. They cannot deny, but these are punishments due for
sin, and that the greatest also including all other. If therefore the
Scripture teach us, that Christ has freed us from these, then it is evident,
that he has freed us from all. Wherefore mark that it is thus written, Romans
8.1. There is no condemnation to those that are in Christ: and Gal, 3.13.
Christ has redeemed us from the curse of the law, when he was made a curse for
us. If it were not thus, that they that believe in Christ were assured, that
Christ had freed them both from all their sins, and also from their penalty
due therefore, how could it be true that we read: Romans 5.1.2. that they that
are justified by faith have peace with God through Christ, and access to his
grace, wherein they stand and re^olce? And if there were not yet enough done to
satisfy the justice of God, why did Christ say giving up the ghost cosummatum
est, it is finished? Ioh. 19.30. And why is the promise to al Gods children
uttered in these words, Ierem. 31.34. I will forgive their iniquity, and
remember their sins no more? Yea how can it stand with Gods justice, that
having for-giuen to the believer all his sins, he yet should punish him for
them, and cause him to satisfy for them: Will God punish and drive to
satisfaction, where the cause is already taken away? and when he has been
satisfied at once already to the uttermost farthing, as it is evident he has
been in Christ for all that believe in him? For other wise Christ having taken
upon him to satisfy the justice of his heavenly Father should not, nor
could not have risen again, ascended into heaven, and sit at the right hand
of his father. Thereby it is evident, that by his abasement, he has fully
satisfied his father and gone through with the work he took in hand, and is now
able to apply ye same to those ye be his. Yea but all this lets not (will
they say) but that we may hold still, that by our satisfactions God in part is
satisfied, seeing we grant that they are made auailable satisfactions by
Christ's satisfaction. Yea but that were yet to say, that Christ purges his
from their sins not by himself, but by the help and sufferings of others:
the plain contrary whereof we read, Heb. 1.3. in these words, He has by
himself, purged our sins. How say you then to manyfold afflictions, and in
the end to death, laid upon them, that believe, say they? I answer, that
these are no satisfactions to God for sins already committed, but they are
his fatherly chastisements, to admonish us to repent us of sins paste, and to
take heed of sin hereafter. And they are both occasions to them to exercise
their virtues, and to those that are without instructions to take heed of going
on in wickedness, seeing the Lord so chastises his own house. And as for
death, the stinge thereof is taken away in respect of such; soy howsoever it be
and remain the reward of sin to the unbeliever, yet to the^ ye believe, it is
but ye last strok of ye battle, and as the door through which they pass from
this world full of misery to the next full of joy and felicity. It is a
pitiful thing, that of these they cannot tell what to make, unless they make
them means to derogate from the most sufficient and infinite satisfaction made
by Christ. If the glory of Christ were dear unto them, as it ought, and they
were persuaded, as they should, that he was both able and willing to go through
with the work which he took in hand; that is, to be a perfect and a full
Savior in himself, and by himself, whatsoever they thought of the^, they
would not once dare to cause the^ to encroch thus upon his office. Alas it is
lighter then vanity it self for them to say, that by the virtue of Christ
there is deserved for them that believe in him, that eternal punishments due
to the^, should be turned into te^porall, and y for his sake God will content
himself with these. For first it is a mere devise of their own head, utterly
without warrant from Gods revealed will in his word: secondly how can it stand
with any reason, that he ye for Christ's sake will forgive the greater, will stick
at the less, that he that will forgive the eternal punishment, will not
for-giue the temporary: And lastly what a toy is it to imagine, that Christ
took so much pains to satisfy the justice of his heavenly father, to leave
the accomplishment thereof to the uncertainty of men's satisfactions?

the quistyon between us and them therein is not (as they would make the
woorlde believe) whether Christ be of power in them that believe aftertually to
cause them to dye to sin and live to righteousness For (as you have before
heard) I have already betermyned, that unless it be a faith arc^^panyed with
that power, it is a dead, and (...) faith. And therefore we as earnestlye
(...) them that believe to bring forth fruits worthy of forth; as they can do
for their lives. But herein lies the questyon, whether faith iustifye for the
work it brings forth, or for Christ's (...) whom it apprehends: and so
whether we may trust to these good fruits, when we have brought them forth,
as that the reby we may think and believe we are iustyfied before God, and
(...) ma^ited to be sai^ed. We say, we may not account other wise of them then
as of fruit as and ^^^rctes, of out full justification appre^^^ded in Christ,
serving to the glory of God, Mit. 5.16. and to testify, both to our se^^^^ and
others, that soluation is pr^p^^^d for us in Christ in heaven. John. 13.35.2
Pe^. 1.5. And in no case ^ar^ we make them any cause, either of our
justification or salvation. But we say with Saint Barnard ser. 1 de
ann^^^^^tione Mari^, that thou can not deser^e et ^^^all life by any works,
(...) merits are not such that ^rer^all life (...), as that God should do
man wrong if therefore he should not given it; for our good works are Gods
gifts, and so for them we are indebted to him, and not he to us. They
account of them as of a meritorious cause of their salvation, and as of the
formal cause of their justification, and therefore to that end they do them,
and trust in them. Whereas we hold, that we be in the state of justification
only, for Chrysts sake apprehended by faith: and that therefore we shall be
saved for his sake only, and not for our works at all Let us now therefore
hear, what the Scripture says to the determination of this question. That
saying of Christ to his (Luke. 17.10.) is directly contrary to their position,
where he says, when ye have done all those things that are commanded you,
say we are unprofitable servants: we have done that which was our duty to
do. For hereby not in way of courtesy (as some of them have said.) but in
sadness we are taught, that if we kept the whole law in every point, which
never man did, but Christ, that yet we are to account our selves so far from
having merited any thing thereby at Gods hands, that we are to think, we have
but paid him that which we ought him: and therefore merited no more at his
hands, than an old ill better may say he has merited at his creditours
hands, when he pays him but his hare own, How much more stronglye then
does this place bind us from having that conceit of our works, when we
have done them, that thereby we are justified and merit heaven? Seeing that
the very best woorkers of us al, when we have done what we can, yet find
our selves scarce able, where we owe God gold, to pay him lead, where we
owe him thousands to pay him hundredes, yea to answer him one of a
thousand, Job. 9.3. in so much that the righteousness of the righteous is but
as a steyned cloth, Isa. 64.6. And therefore Paul, though he wrote the
Epistle to the Phillippians a little before his death, when he was full of
sufferinges for CHRIST, and of all kind of good works, yet he in the 3.
Chapter thereof protests, not only in the preter tense, that he counted all
his pharisaicall righteousness before his, conversion, but all then in the
present tense, but doung, that he might win Christ, and might be found in
him, not haning his own righteousness, which is of the Law, but that which
is through the faith of Christ, even the righteousness which is of GOD through
faith, verse. 8.9. Wherefore he boldlye concludes, Titus. 3.5. thus, Not by
the works of righteousness (which no doubt, are works done in faith; for
otherwise they were not to be called works of righteousness, but rather
works of unrighteousness) which we have done, but according to his mercy
he saved us. Now to make it clear, that by this righteousness of GOD, whereby
Paul through faith in Christ would be righteous before GOD, is meant not an
inherent righteousness in man's own self, Paul opposes it to that
righteousness in himself. And besides Romans. 10.1.2.3. they are severed, in
that the one is called the righteousness of God, the other man's own
righteousness. But most clear is that Romans. 1.17. where he affirms that
that righteousness, which is called the righteousness of GOD, is revealed by
the Gospel from faith to faith. For it is written, The just shall live by
faith, Whereby* it is most evident, that this inherent righteousness, which they
would have to make the^ righteous by, is revealed by the moral law. And
therefore you shall find, that Paul. Romans 10.5.6, 7.8.9. distinguishes the
righteousness of the law, from the righteousness that comes by faith. And Romans
3.21. that he in plain terms thus determines this matter. Now is the
righteousness of God made manifest without the law, having witness of the Law,
and the Prophets, to wit the righteousness of God by the faith of Jesus
Christ unto all and upon all that believe. Which could not be, if the
righteousness of God were the good works that are in men, for we come to the
knowledge of the^ by the Law. This is called the righteousness of God in an
excellencye, because the righteousness of Christ is the righteousness of one
that is God, and is indeed a righteousness absolute before God, for the which
he cannot but account them righteous to whom it is imputed by faith. In an
inferior sort the godliness in Gods children may be called a righteousness
of God, because it is wrought in them by his spirit: but yet (as appears by
these places) it is not that righteousness, whereby we may dare persuade one
selves that we are made righteous before him, but only a fruit proceeding
from that, applied first unto us, and then testifiyng thereof. Further how
could it be said truly, that life everlasting is (...) that is, the free gift
of God, To. 6.23. if it come at all by merit? To imagyne that it may come of
grace and also of works, it is flat against Paul Romans 11.6. where he says, If
it be of grace, it is no more of works, or else were grace no more grace but if
it be of works it is no more grace, or else were work no more work. In which
words he de^ermineth, salvation to come by merit of works, and by grace, to
be so contrary the one to the other, as if it come the one way, it cannot
come at al by ^he other. It cannot be said to the shifting off of this place
with any reason, that here by works are meant works only done before faith,
for he speaks generally here of works without distinction. And therefore
very well said, August. contra Pelag. and Caelest. lib. 2. cap. 24. Gods grace
shall be grace no way unless it be free every way, and the drift of the Epistle
to the Galath. is flatly and directly against such as would be saved partly by
grace through faith in Christ, and partly by their works following faith. For
they were never taught by the false Apostles, neithee did they then hold,
justification by works done before faith, or by works alone. And yet Paul
speaking to the purpose to confute them says, If righteousness come by the
law, Christ died in vain, Gal. 2.21. and Chap. 5.4. ye are albolished from
Christ, whosoever are justified by the law, ye are fallen from grace. Upon
which ground said Augustine in his preface upon the 31. Psalm. If thou will
have nothing to do with grace, boast thy merits: and Chrysostom 3. ad Gal.
says thus, ^hey said, accursed is he, that leans only to faith. Paul
shows, that he that so does is blessed. And Ambrose also upon the same
warrant 1. Cor. 1. affirms, that it is appointed of GOD, that he that
believes in Christ shall be saved without works onele by faith, freely
receiving remission of his sins. And least they should cavil, and say (as
they are not ashamed to do) that by works of the law are understood only
works done before faith, by the direction of the Law, without the infusion of
the special grace of GOD through Christ, mark how notably to prevent that
popish shift chap. 2.15.16. he says, We that are Jews by nature and not
sinners of the Gentiles know, that a man is not justified by the works of the
Law, but by the faith of Jesus Christ. Even we (I say) have believed in Jesus
Christ, that we might be justified by the faith of Christ, and not by the
works of the law, because that by the works of the Law no flesh shall be
justified. In which words he excludes from the office of justifying not only
the works of unbelievers, but also of them that believe, saying, that he and
such as he was, which believed in Christ did so believe, not that they might
be enabled through their own works to justify up themselves, but the
plain contradictorie, that is, that they believed in him, that they might
still be justified by their faith in him, and not by their works, which were
works done after their faith, though he calls them the works of the Law,
because therein they were prescribed. Again, where have they any ground for
this point of divinity, that CHRIST merited that their works or the works
of any should be meritorious? Do they not see, that this were in effect to
say, that CHRIST communicates his own glorious office of being a Savior to
those works, and so remains not a full and a perfect Savior in himself
and by himself? Whereas we read flatly to the contrary Isai. 43.11. where he
says unto us thus, I, even I am the Lord, and beside me, there is no savior.
To conclude therefore this point, if the righteousness that GOD has provided
for us in CHRIST, were not the righteousness that should make us righteous,
why is it, that we read, that the faithful shall say, Isai. 45.24. In the
Lord have I righteousness and strength: and that his name shall be our
righteousness, Ierem. 23.6. and 33.16. And that the Messiah shall bring with
him an everlasting righteousness, Dan. 9.24. Who sees not, that it is, seeing
God has appointed, that we should be so justified, as that the whole glory
may be his, and none ours, (which cannot be, if it come by any works at all,
done by us, Romans 3.27. and 4.4.) to make us conclude with Paul, that he is made
of God unto us wisdom, righteousness, sanctification and redemption, that he
that rejoices, may rejoice in him, 1. Cor. 1.30.31.

If yet they will say, that this cannot be, that we should be termed or
accounted righteous by a righteousness that is not in our selves, but in
Christ I ask them why they hold so? They must answer, because it is a
principle in Philosophy, that the accident must be in the subject whereof it
has denomination. To whom fiest I answer, that it is not in vain that Saint
Paul has given us this warning, be w^^e least there be any, that spoil you
through vain Philosophy. Colos. 2.8. Secondly I say, that howsoever this be a
sound principle in Philosophy, yet it is false in divinity: which I prove
thus, Christ was one in whom there was no sin, Isai. 53.8. and yet we read that
the Lord laid upon him the iniquities of us all, verse. 6. In so much that he
was wounded for our transgressions, and broken for our iniquities, and the
chastisement of our peace was laid upon him and with his stripes we are
healed, ver. 5. Whereby I see that our unrighteousness was imputed unto him,
though there were no unrighteousness at all inherent in him. Where-uppon it
must needs follow, that as well may his righteousness be imputed unto us,
which believe, that of our selves are unrighteous. Yea no doubt of it, that
change has GOD made with us in him, to impute unto him our unrighteousness,
that his righteousness might be imputed unto us. For we read, that he was
made sin for us which knew no sin, that we should be made the
righteousness of GOD in him. 2. Cor. 5.12. By John therefore he wills the
Laodiceans ( Apoc. 3.) to come to him, to buy of him but freely Isai. 55. 1.)
long white garments to cover their nakedness, verse. 18. That is, to have at his
hands by faith perfect righteousness whereby they may be made righteous. And
what peeuishnes is this to deny the imputation of Christ's righteousness to
the believer in him, and to hold that the righteousness of Saints may be
imputed unto him that buyeth a pardon, which they all hold? And how can it be
otherwise but that his righteousness should be the righteousness of all the^
that believe in him? For it being, as it is, an infinite and absolute
righteousness, and they that believe in him thereby being (as you have heard)
in him and one with him, how can it be I say any otherwise, but that those
things that be in him should so far be communicated unto them, as is meet
and necessary for them? Whereupon it comes, that we read Apoc. 3.21. he
says, that he will grant to them that overcome, to sit with him in his
throne, as he ouercomining sits with the father in his.

them assurance and confidence of their salvation, but such a hope only as
may be joined with doubtfulnesse, whether it shall be so in the end or no. I
will easily grant them, that as long as they build beside the only foundation
Christ, as they do upon the satisfactions and merits of man, it cannot be
otherwise. Nay I say further, that (forasmuch as there is no covenant betwixt
God and man of any salvation, but only in Christ Jesus the promised seed, for
all the promises run in the singular number, In one which is Christ, Gal.
3.16. and they are all yea and amen in him, 2. Cor. 1.20.) it is horrible
presumption (so far off it is from being humility) for the^ once to hope, or
to call in question, whether they may or shall be saved, seeking for any part
thereof, for any thing that is not be. For it is to look after some fort to
be saved after a mere fancy and devise of man, full of robbery and blasphemy
against Jesus Christ: which how absurd it is let any man judge. And as long as
their own consciences enforce them to confess, that they have no better faith
than this, let them be assured, that though they we are their tongues to the
stumpes, and their knees till there grow bornes on thrm in praying to GOD for
their salvation, they shall never be heard. For it is written, Iam. 1.6.7. Let
him ask in faith, and waver not, for he that wauereth is like the wave of the
Sea tossed and carried away: neither let that man think that he shall receive
any thing of the Lord. And whereas an assured confidence of salvation in Christ
is counted of them presumption, I say they may be ashamed but once to think
so. For unto the right believer God has first given his general promise, that
such a one whatsoever he be shall not perish, but have eternal life, John.
3.16. And this word is in writing in the place before named, and else where
very often in GODS book, and in the use of the Sacraments it is particularly
applied to every one that so believes Roman. 4. verse. 11. And besides all
this the spirit of GOD inwardly in the hearts of all such teaches them to
cry Abba, Father, Romans. 8.15. and testifies to their spirits, that they
are the children of God, ver. 16. and so seals them up to the day of
redemption, 2. Corint. 1.22. Upon which evidence to ground an assured
confidence to enjoy the thing promised, who may not? Yea the Lord having given
such evidence and ground unto us, of assurance; who sees not, that this
notwithstanding to doubt, whether the thing promised shall be given us or no,
is most horrible sin against the Lord, calling his truth into question, 1.
John. 5.10? And therefore, whatsoever they say to the contrary, we know it is
our duties, to yield unto the exhortation made to all them that believe
aright in Christ, Heb. 10.19. etc. which is this, Seeing therefore (brethren,)
that by the blood of Jesus we may be bold to enter into the holy place by the
new and living way, which he has prepared for us through the veil, that is,
his flesh: and seeing we have an hie Priest, that is over the house of of God,
let us draw near in a true heart, in assurance of faith sprinkled in our
hearts from an evil conscience, and washed in our bodies with pure water, and
let us keep the profession of our hope without wavering, for he is faithful
that has promised. Thus I hope you see proof sufficient to prove, The popish
faith (...) antichristian, and popery antichristianity.
that the popish faith is not that faith, whereby men can grow into an union
with Christ, and consequently not the faith whereby any can die in the Lord.
Howbeit because they shall not say, ye I was driven to seek for foreign
profes to prove this, and have no proof or argument to confirm it in this my
present text; give me leave to use one argument more to prove it, and that
deduced from the very circumstances of my text: which I thus frame, Whosoever
dies bearing the mark of the beast either in forhead or hand, dies not in
the Lord, but in the Babylonish, that is, Antichristian religion: but
whosoever dies in this popish faith, dies bearing the mark of the beast in
the forhead or hand: ergo so far off is it, that such a one dies in Christ,
that in deed and truth he dies in Antichrist The first part of this
argument they neither can nor will deny. For they read verse. 9.10.11. that who
so worshippeth the beast and his image, and receives his mark either in his
forehead or hand, the same shall drink the wine of Gods wrath, and be
everlastingly tormented. Yea what then (will they say) your assu^ption or second
part of pour argument is utterly false. Well, that then being proved, the
conclusion must be yielded unto. This themselves grant that by Babylon ( the
fall whereof here denounced shall follow upon the preaching of the Gospel,
verse. 6.7.8.) is meant the flourishing kingdom of Antichrist, and they confess,
that by wearing the mark of the beast in foreheade or hand, is understood
perseuering still a favorer and liker of Antichristianity, notwithstanding the
warning here given to the contrary. And if they would deny either of these,
they could not for shame, the text in this book and the circumstaunces
thereof, are so preguant to prove them. If therefore I can prove, that by
Babylon here we have to understand Rome, By Babylon we are to understand Rome.
and that Antichristianitye and Popery be al one, then I am sure, that they
must needs grant my assumption. For the first of these I do boldly affirm,
that here by Babylon we must understand Romans My reasons are these, The phrase
used in this book generally is figurative, and not literallye to be taken,
and therefore it is not likely, but by Babylon is meant same other City, which
figuratively might be so termed. And it is evident, that John speaks of such
a Babylon, as flourished in his time, and should long after; and yet that should
in the end have a fall: and therefore not of Babylon in Chaldea, for that was
fallen and decayed before. Neither is it strange in the Scripture to find one
City and people called by the name of another, for the liklihood of manners
bewixt the one, and the other. For Isai. 1.10. we read, that God speaks
thus to the Princes and people of Israel, that dwelt in Canaan; Hear the word
of the Lord, O Princes of Sodom, harken unto the law of our God, O people of
Gomorrha. By which reason most aptly after the same figure of speech may Rome
be called Babylon, For as old Babylon vexed ye Church in ye old Testament with
long captiu^^y, so has Rome done the Church of Christ in the new; as that
overcame the Jews and burned their City, so has also this done by Titus and
Vespasian: as Babylon was the seat and fountain, when it floorished, of
Idolatrye and all abomination, so has Rome been both in the time of the
beast and his image, that is, both in the time of Paganism under the heathen
Emperors, and now in the time of Papisme under the Popes the Princes thereof.
And it is no small reason to mo^ue us by Babylon here to understand Rome, that
it is called Babylon the great City, that has made all nations drimke with the
wine of the wrath of her fornication, that is, that has infected all nations
with a false faith and religion, whereby men in falling from their fathonely in
the true and only husband Christ, fall to put their trust and confidence in
other things, that are not CHRIST, and to commit fornication spiritually, with
those things for the which the Lord is wroth with them, Which cannot be
said of Babylon in Chaldea, nor of any other City so called. For none of that
name have done so since John's time* but most fitly as appears by view of
the popish doctrine and faith, may be said of Rome, and the Princes thereof the
Popes. So that thus you see by the way, that their glory is turned to their
shaure. For they brag of their vninersalitye and general consent, which ye
see hear (their doctrine being as you have hard) is a most plain note of the
Antichristian Babylon. But which is of all reasons the most forcible, whereas
it cannot be denied, but by the purple, silken, and proud whore of Babylon is
meant Antichrist, Apoc. 17.4. their she is described sitting upon a Crimson
colored beast full of names of blasphemy, which had seven heads and ten homes
verse. 3. which seven heads are by the Angel verse. 9. expounded to be seven
mountains, on which the woman sits. The names of the bills be these,
Cap^olitius, Palatinut, Auentinus, Caelius, Exquilinus, Viminads, Quirinasis,
And the woman is said verse. 1^. to be that great City, which reigns over
the kings of the ^a^th. Then by which description it was impossible more
plainly to describe ^ome, which then w^^ the mistress and these of other
Cities; and a City compassing within the ^^ies that of sever (...), as even
voyes have learned in the section book of Virgils Georgickes; and as it is not
orsiously known otherwise. If (...) not have Rome to (...) the very (...) of
Antichrist, let them (...) us out another City, (...) this description agrees.
Again why should the standing and ^^^^^^oorishyng Empire of Rome, and the
continuance of the seem of the Empero ^^^ere, be that which let and should
let the settling of Antichrist in his seate^, until it were taken our of the
way, 2 Thessalonians 2.7. But to show that the very seat of the Empire shoulbe be
his seat, and that the place must be seft emptye for him by the departure of
the Emperor from thence before he (...) come into his chair of pessisonee?
The papists themselves confess that this is Paul's meaning there. And
therefore Sanders in his book of the visible Monarchy in his fourth
demonstration for the defense of the Pope, confesses that Hierom in his
eleventh question to Algasia, Tertullian in his Apollogie against the Gentiles,
that Chryfostome upon the place it self, and August. in his 20. book de
Ciuitate Der cap. 19. (unto whom he might ad Ambrose, Iraeneus, Lactantius,
with diverse others also) do understand Paul thereby to mean the Roman
Empire. Which when indeed it decayed in the West, and took his seat in the
East at Constantinople, the Popes found to be so taken out of their way, that
(as experience and al stories consitme) quickly after they grew to be so
Emperor like in the West, that in their kingdom, the wound that the former
beast had taken by thus ce^^ouing his seat from Rome, seemed to be healed, they
bare so lively the image of the former beast. As for the Empire that is now
lest in the West, it is (as it is well known) a thing in name but not indeed,
and they have so handled the matter, that it is as good as quite taken out of
their way, they may do for all it, what it pleases them: and the other part of
the Empire is swallowed up of the Turk. Lastly you are to understand, that I
am not the first, that by Babylon here understand Rome. For eue^ then when
these uisions of John were far harder to be understood than now, in that now
experience has opened many of them, which it had not then, the anciene fathers
saw that by Babylon here was meant Rome. As for example, Tertullian contra
Iudaeos, and Hierom in diverse places, as in his 11. question to Algasia, in
his preface of Didimus book of the holy Ghost, and in his 2. book against
Iouinian. Yea our Rhemistes, in their notes upon the last of the first of Peter
earnestly contend to prove, that there by Babylon is meant Rome, and upon the
17. of John they dare not flatly deny, but that there, by Babylon the seat of
the stru^pet, may be understood Rome. That the popish faith is an ^^christia^.
Wherefore these reasons considered. I conclude, that by Babylon here is meant.
Rome. Yea but yet you shall not find it so easy a matter to prove the popish
faith to be Antichristian, they will say. Yes verily: for even that, which I
have already said in the description and confutatio^ of their faith, proves it
to be Antichristian. For if Antichrist be he that is an adversary to Christ,
and if he be an adversary to Christ, yt robs him of that honor and glory,
that is due unto him, then it cannot he but that the popish faith is
Antichristian But S. John, say they, in his first Epistle ca. 4.3. has plainly
cold us, that that spirit that confesses not that Jesus christ is come in the
flesh, that is the spirit of Antichrist. Whereby they would gather, that they
cannot be Antichristian, because they confess, that Christ is come in the
flesh. I answer them with Aug. words upon S. John's epistle tract. 3. Non
attendamus ad linguam, sed ad facta, etc. Let us not consider what they say,
but what they do. For if they al should be asked with one mouth, they would
confess the Lord Jesus to be Christ. But let their tongue stay a while, and
ask their life: for howsoever in words they confess, that Jesus Christ is
come in ye flesh, yet indeed and truth they deny it. For he that denies the
fruit and cause of his coming (which was as I have proved to be a full, whole,
and sole savior in himself and by himself) they deny his coming indeed and
truth, whatsoever they say in words. And this is evident in the^, in ye they
trust not to his satisfactions and merits, weout, adding there to their own in
the cause of their salvation. The Jews and Turks say they know God, and
believe in him: but we christians say, and we say truly, that they neither
know him nor believe in him at all but only in an Idol of their own framing,
because they know him not in the face of his son Jesus Christ. Arius in
plain words denied not Christ to be God, yet because he denied that he was
equal to his father, he denied his godhead indeed. And so though the papists
in words confess Christ to be come in ye flesh, yet because indeed and
truth they will not let him be priest alone, to offer propitiatory sacrifice:
king alone, to govern by his own orders: prophet alone, to instruct by his
own word: but (as it is most evident) join unto him a succession of
priests to iterate his sacrifice, which he offered once for all, Heb. 9.25.26.
alter his laws and orders, ad and detract at their pleasure too and from his
revealed and written word, as the face and practice of their Church teaches,
indeed and truth they deny that he is come in the flesh. And it appears by
the prophecies that we have in the scripture of Antichrist, that he shall not
be so blunt a fool: as flatly and in plain terms to deny so manifest an
article of faith, as this is, but he and his shall come and set abroach their
false doctrine through hypocrisy. 1. Tim. 4.2. In so much that
antichristianitye 2 Thessalonians. 2.7. is called a mystery of iniquity, that is an
iniquity that not all at once and openly shall show is self, but that shall
come in by soft and stealing pases so shrouded and hid under a show of
godliness. that it should not easily be espied. And therefore Christ Mat.
13.25, 26. compares this bad seed to tares, which the good seedmans foe, sowed
amongst the good wheat, while men slept, and then slielye went his way; which
was not espied by and by of the good seedmans household nay not until the blade
was sprung up. And therefore Saunders is but a fool from hence to draw a
demonstration that the Pope is not Antichrist, because in words he confesses
Christ, How could he be ignorant, that it is noted. Apoc. 17.4. that the
Babylonish harlotte is described to hold out unto others her abominations and
filthy fornications in a golden cup: that is, that it should be yt property
of Antichrist (the more to allure men to receive his religion) to color it
with as glorious shows of Catholic and Christian religion, as he could
devise. By which note by the way we may see, how vain that their great reason
is, whereof our late Jesuits, and Rhemistes brag so much, namely, that
therefore Popery cannot be Antichristianity, because it cannot be showed (as
they say) in what Emperors time it began, and that it was then espied and
resisted as soon as it began. For howsoever it be the nature of some other
heresies to begin at once and to show themselves bluntly, as bad as they be,
at the first, yet we see it is not so with Antichristianity, the most perilous
apostasy, and hotch-potch of all heresies. And therefore it is no more proof
that popery is not Antichristianity, if it could not be told when it first came
in, and who then by and by with-stoode it, than it had been, that the tares
were no tares (when evidently by co^paring of them with the wheat they showed
themselves to be so) because that they that then espied them could not tell when
they were sown, and that any resisted the sower thereof, when he went about
to do it. As then it was sufficient to conclude them to be tares, because
they, compared with the fruit then of the wheat, that was sown, were found
so far to differ from it, as they did: so it is a sufficient argument to us to
prove the popish faith to be Antichristian, in that we have found it, as we
have, to differ from Christian doctrine. But to the further proof thereof
(because they brag they have faith, and that a true Christian faith, because
they with their mouth confess Jesus Christ to be the son of the living God)
they must be put in remembrance, that the Devils do as much as that comes
to, Mark 1.24 and Lu^. 4.34. and how that Judas kissed him with his mouth and
said, Hail master, when be had but a traitorous heart. Matthew. 26.49. and
Mark. 14.45. Nay I say yet more, that the Diuelles faith is far better than
theirs. For (no doubt of it) they know and are fully persuaded (though they
grieve at it) that the merits of Christ's own satiefaction performed in his
own person by himself are so infinitely auailable in the sight of his
heavenly father, that they need not the addition of any other satisfaction or
merit to save the believer, and this they will not be brought to confess.
Whereupon it must needs follow, that they imagine to themselves such a cruel
and merciless God the father, and will not grow to be at one with them for the
infinite merits of his own dear son, without the addition thereunto of
their own: and such a God the son they have framed unto themselves, as that
either could not, or would not fully in himself and by himself prepare
whatsoever was necessary for man's salvation. The very consequent whereof is
this, that indeed they neither know God nor believe in him, but worship an
Idol of their own heads. For it is most true that S. Cyprian has said in
his book de duplici Martyrio, of double Martyrdom, Non creditin Deum, qui in
eo solo non collocat totius suae salutis fiduciam: he believes not at all in
God, which reposeth not in him alone the confidence of his whole salvation.

That Popery* Antichristianity.
Yet to proceed one step further with them, not only their faith is
Antichristian (as it appears by their former reasons) but their Church and
kingdom is so also: in so much that popery is Antichristianity it self. Which
to be so, whosoever with a single eye will but consider the prophesies and
descriptions of Antichrist and his kingdom, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 1. Timoth. 4. and
through this book of the revelation, and compare them with the kingdom of
popery, shall see most evidently. For if time and opportunity now would
permit me, I would not doubt to make it most clearly appear to every one
here present that there was never cote made fitter for man's body, or glove for
his hand than these descriptions be for popery. For a little taste whereof,
consider either the original, the manner of proceeding and growing to his
perfection, the flourishing estate, the qualities or consumption of Antichrist
set down in these places, and you shall find them all notably to fit the
papacy. His original is said to be from the earth, Reu. 13.11. And 2 Thessalonians.
2. we read that the mystery of his iniquity was woorking in Paul's time. In that
no doubt (as it appears by the occasion that Paul had to write as he did, to
the Galathians) there were even the^ false Apostles, that taught men to seek
their salvation, partly by their own merits, and not only by faith in Christ:
And whence is popery sprung, but even from the earth, that is from earthly and
not heavenly grounds, from the wit and will of foolish man and uncertain
traditions of earthly men? And who sees not that the false Apostles doctrine
in Galatia is the very ground of all popery? His manner of proceeding (as you
have heard) is by hypocrisy, and (as you may further observe) by false
miracles, 2 Thessalonians. 2.9. and when these will not serve, by extreme persecution
without all mercy against the faithful witnesses of the truth, Apos. 17.6. All
which have bin the steps, whereby popery has proceeded and grown to his
perfection, as experience most evidently has taught. Antichrist could not
fully be borne, y^ is, show himself in deed in his right colors (as you have
heard) vncil the Roman Empire was removed out of his way, but then he should.
Which in stories we see justly verified in the papacy. For until he seat of the
Empire was removed from Rome, ^o Constantinople, and the Empire in the We^^
deca^ed, ye popes challenged not to themselves their blasphemous and
antichristian titles. But shorely after in the murderer Phocas his time they
took the upon the^. Antichrists flourishing estate is described to be such,
that al nations shall be made drunk with the wine of the wrath of her
fornication, and kings shall commit fornication with her, Ap. 18.2. that is,
there shall be a wonderful universal consent in embracing Antichrists religion:
and it is set forth to ve wonderful pompous, magnificent, and maiestical, for
the wealth and bravery of the world, e. 17.4. which be two of the things that
popery braggeth of, and trumpheth for against the true church of christ. As for
his qualities we read, 1. Tim. 4.2.3. that he shall teach that there lies
great holniesse in absteining from marriage and meats: and that therefore he
shall forbid marriage and command abstinence from eats, and that he shall speak
words full of blasphemy, as we read, Apoc. 17.3. And that he shall be an
adversary, that exalts himself against all that is called God, or that is
worshipped, sitting as God in the temple of God, showing himself that he is
God, 2 Thessalonians. 2.4. Of which qualities the two first are notoriously seen in
popery, in forbidding the marriage of ministers, and in the comma^ding, as a
holy and meritorious thing, abstinence from flesh. And as for the rest, who can
consider, how the Popes have brought kings and princes under to do them most
base service, and what otherwise they have taken upon them and do still to make
laws besides and often contrary to the word written, to bind consciences
yet under pain of damnation to obey; how they call themselves heads of the
universal Church, which is Christ's special, and peculiar title, Colos. 1.
Ephesians. 1. how they take upon them to forgive sins, and to confer upon
beggarly creatures by the halowing of them, power to put away sins, but he
must be enforced to confess, that all the other qualities are seen and found
notoriously in the raze of Popes for a long time? Lastly as it is prophesied
that by the spirit of Gods mouth 2 Thessalonians. 2.8. Antichrist shall consume, and
after the sound of the Gospel again, that Babylon shall fall, Apoc. 14.8. so
(the Lords name be praised for it) we have seen by experience papacy fallen
into a great consumption, and the popes credit and authority very well fallen
also in the consciences of men by the preaching of the Gospel again in these
latter days. And to our comfort we may learn out of the 2. to the These. 2.8.
that his consu^ption is so deadly, that he shall never recover it until he be
quite abolished by the brightness of Christ's coming. If he therefore win a litl^
in one place, both he and his may learn by this to make their account, that
they shall loose more in another. In stead therefore of hoping again for
their golden day, let them seat n^ for the fall of Babylon, which is
irreuocable, to take up weeping and wailing, and to cry alas, alas, for the
great city, as it is prophesied that Antichrists friends shall do at his
fall, Apoc. 18.19. Thus you see, or at the least may see, both that Babylon is
Rome, and also that Antichristianity is Popery. Wherefore the second part of my
argument is proved, which was this But who so dies in the popish faith, dies
bearing the mark of the beast both in forhead and hand: and therefore now
again I may conclude, therefore so far off is it, that he that dies a papist,
dies a christian, or in Christ, that most certainty he dies a limme of
Antichrist: and that consequently all Papists, dying Papists in this peevish
and Antichristian faith before deseribed and confuted, are shut out from this
number that my text speaks of (...) thus also in this short comparison of the
prophecies concerning the kingdom of (...)* you se^ once again their glory
(...) to their shame* For (you know) they brag that their Church must be the
true church, because they (...) allege an^iqui^^; universality, unity and
visibility, whereas al these (as you have he^r^) are (...) christianity. For
(...), it wa^ ^^ginning in Pa^^^ times for vi^^^^^^ity and (...) ^ll ^^tions
shall be drunk the (...) for the (...) you have heard, how glittering ^^sible,
and (...) the whore of Babylon shall be Let them (...) therefore dazel our eyes,
or deceive us by any such false marks to cause us to ^^^e the poor, little, and
persecuted flock of Christ, to (...) our selves with their garish synagogue.

(...) thus you have heard what faith will not (...) our (...) us unto Christ,
that so we may, when it pleases the Lord. ^e in him, even where by you may
also see ((...) I doubt not but you do) what manner of faith it must be that will
serve. Howbeit for your more full satisfying concerning that point, What faith
it is that will unite us in deed to Christ.
understand, that that faith the Lord by the ministry of his word and
Sacramente^ through the inward working of his spirit never yet (...) ^ought in
any, ^^^euer will, unless that first by his law he ^er^ one, that was (...)
only to see and know his sins, and the punishments therefore due (...) him,
but also to a true sorrow for the f^me, and an vnfe^^ed loathing thereof, and
conse^^ntly to an earnest hunger and this (...) to be deli^ered ^herefrom. ^or
Christ was not sent to comfort (...) by the Gospel, that were not first
^^comforted by the law* to (...) up any by the one, that were not first thr^
(...) down by the other; or to heal ^^y by the one, who the other before had
not made even sieke in the foul for the g^iefe of sin. And therefore it is
written, that he wa^sent to bind up the broken ha^^ (...), to appoint unto them
that mourn in Sion, and to give unto the^ beauty for a shes, the o^^e of joy
for mourning, the garment of gladness for the spirit of heau^nes, Isai. 6.13.
And such (says David Psa. 5.1^.) as are of a contrite and a broken heart are
^cc^p table unto him* and he will not despise them: and to him, even to him
that is poor and of a contritespirit, he says, he will look, Isai. 66.^. And
therefore Isai. 55.1. and John. 7.37. he ^^^leth only the thirsty unto him, and
Mat. ^^.28. the weary, and heavy laden, promising comfort, to such. Which
property of our God it seems yt he blessed virgin had well observed, and
therefore she sings L^k^ 1.53. He has filled the ^^^gry with good things,
^^^le ^^ch he ^^ath sent e^ty away. They therefore y^ by faith would find
Christ, and (...) ^e raised up, must first go to schole with the law ^^lea to
thereby effectually the former sess^^^ f^^ the law is our sch^^e^^^ster to bring
us to C^hrist, (...) 4. that so they finding out the depth and grieu^usnes of
their spiritual sickness may seek a sit and ^^^^cie^t ^layster and s^lue to
heal and (...) it. Unto with estate when the lord has brought his, knowing that
light after darkness, health after sickness, felicity after taste of misery will be
y^ more ^^le^^^ and more th^^kfully received; the^ effectually becauseth the^
so to pr^fice by the doctrine of the gospel, that first thereby they attain to a
sound and right knowledge of Jesus Christ, what he is in person, and what he
is in office. In person, that he is the 2 person in Trinity, very God, and very
man also: and yet that he is but one person consisting of (these 2 natures. In
office, king* priest, and prophet, the only messiah and means to be saved by.
Which saliatio^ thereby also they learn, he has dearly and fully merited in
and by his own abas^me^t, in that he ^^^a^e man, lived, died, was buried and
descended into ^el: and thereby likewise they learn, that by his ^dua^ceme^t,
that is, by his resurrection; ascension, and si^^ing on y^ right hand of his
father, he is now able to bestow and apply the same faluation by himself so
merited to all that be his. Whereupon they take decasio^ st^^fastly to believe,
that for his ^^ly sake they shall not only be quit of al their sins and the
punishmene^ due for the same, but that also God will vouch^^^^ to account the^
righteous, and wo^^thy or meet for the kingom of heaven for his righteousness
imputed unto the^. So that faith seeks for the whole matter and cause to be
saved by in Christ Jesus alone, and in him alone it finds, and apprehends
sufficient matter why the owner of it should be justified and saved. The ground
of this faith in the co^futation of the popish faith you have heard already:
whereunto ad yet these 2 manifest places, whereof the first is in the 10. of Ioh.
1. and 7. where Christ flatly teaches, that he is the only door into Gods
sheepfold, and that so earnestly. that he pronou^ceth the^ all thieves and
robbers, that seek to get in any other way. The other is in the 4. of the Act.
10.12. where we read, that Peter boldly before the high Priests and their
company in a solemn assembly says, Be it known unto you all, and to all the
people of Israel, that there is salvation in no other, but in Jesus of
Nazareth: For among me^ there is given no other name under heaven whereby we
must be saved. The wc 2 places (if there were no more to be found through out
the whole scripture) were sufficient to put us out of all doubt, that there is
no part of salvation to be looked for, but only in, through, and for Jesus
Christ. And therefore the greater is the judgment of God upon the Church of
Rome, which notwithstanding these places will yet seek for some part of the
cause of their salvation by their own satisfactions and merits. But (...), to
whom the Lord has given grace to see the glorious riches, which he has
prepared for us in this his son, hereby may be assured, ye seeing there lacks
in Christ, neither ableness, nor willingness to be such a one, that without all
wavering, we may he bold to believe that God as both able and willing freely
and fully, soly, and wholly to justify us here, and to glorify us elsewhere,
for this his sons sake alone. Which persuasion grounded upon this and other
such grounds in the Scripture before touched, is that which I boldly affirm
unto you, to be the faith that indeed makes us to be in the Lord, and so
ready to dye in the Lord. I exhort you therefore as many as be desirous to dye
in ye Lord, to seek in time by this says to live in the Lord. Remember that
it is the Lords gift, and that by the ordinary means of the word preached,
Gal. 5. To. 10.14. 1. Cor. 1.21. And therefore if you would have it and having
it once reteyne and keep it, you must diligently seek it at the Lords hands,
by the use of this means, and that while the Lord doch offer the means unto
you, least (as he threatens, Pro. 1.24.26.) Because he called and ye refused,
he will laugh at your destruction, and mock when your fear comes. Do not
defer off the seeking for it, and the stre^gthening of it until old age come.
If you will do in it, you must learn to li^^ in i^ first and there is no reason
y^ you should spend the strength of your days in vanity, ignorance, misbeliefe
and infidelity in the service of (...) in the and (...) these things are weary
of you, to think, that it is enough to serve God with your old, dry, and rotten
bones: God never liked to be served with the lame, blind and maimed of the
flock, but the strong, lusty, and unblemished he always called for, Mal. 1.8.
and 13. And therefore let every one in his youth and time of his strength
remember his creator, and turn unto him, Ec. 12.1.

A brief report and testimony of the Earl of Bedfords life and death.
Of this faith, and early and timely seeking for it, this noble person, whose
funeral and burrall we are now about, has bin a noble example unto us. For we
know, that not only in his later days in her Majesty's time that now is, when
to be of this faith, was and has bin safe and commendable unto him, but also
before, when to show himself of this faith was dangerous to his living and
honor he has showed himself in his life a zealous and constant professor and
confessor of this faith, using al good means both privately and publicly to
nourish it by the diligent use of the means aforesaid. I my self have bin both
an eye witness, and an ear witness, that both in respect of his sins, he had
infallible, tokens of a very broken and contrite heart, and thought as baselye
of himself in respect of himself as a true penitent man should: and that yet
casting his eyes upon. Gods mercyes toward such in Christ, no^^a^ could be
more comforted and r^ysed up again. Notwithstanding he was as free from the
common corruptions of the world (wherinto ^e^ of his place are greatly
assaulted and provoked to fall) and as full of love and charity and all the
fruits thereof as lightly amongst men any can be found: yet this I can
testify of him, and (I think) so can all that knew him and were acquainted
with him, that he was never the more puffed up with any conceyt of his own
righteousness: yea though his course of life and dealing with all men were such,
that he had got this title commonly in the mouths of al, The good Earl of
Bedforde, yet still his cry was, that only in Jesus Christ and his merits was
all his hope and trust concerning his salvation. And truly as he lived in this
faith in this sort, so, to the glory of his God, al our good example, and his
own everlasting comfort, he dyed constantly in the same. And therefore (as
they that were most about him can testify) a little before his death in this
his last sickness, out of the abundance of his heart, and faith that was
lodged therein, he uttered these words with great comfort, Satan is cheyned,
Satan is cheyned: The seed of the woman has broken the serpents head, The
seed of the woman has broken the serpents head: Even for me, Even for me.
And a little before his death he joined in prayer with a godly Minister, (whom
he kept in his house for the watering of himself and his family, from time to
time, with the water of life) unto the Lord most earnestly, and made in his
hearing (after some good comfort given him by him) a notable, sweet and
Christian confession of his faith in God the father, God the son, and God the
holy Ghost: showing how fully he hoped to be saved in and for Jesus Christ's
sake alone, co^cluding in the end thus, Thus I believe with my heart to
justification, and confess with my mouth to salvation: and so quietly within a
very little space after gave up the Ghost. I dare therefore be bold to place
him within the number of them that here in my text the Lord speaks of. For
he was no timeseruer or dissembler, none that either in forehead or hand bare
the mark of the beast, but that hated the^ least ragge, relicke, and clour of
the Romish harlote every day more and more unto his death. O you Nobles and
others, of what calling soever, learn and seek to be like to him living,
that ye may be like to him dying. Assure your selves that he loved Gods
sincere truth vnfeynedlye, thet he made not his religion a stepping stone to
clime up to promotion by, nor his drudge to serve his turn to compass his
worldly fetches and devices by. No, no, he was no vain and profane politic,
that favored and countenanced religion for his own turn: his unfeigned love
appeared toward it, in that even the feet, yea the very feet of them that
were messengers thereof unto him, were always beautiful in his ei^^ insomuch
y^ he took pleasure to reason and co^ferre with them most familiarlye and
courteously, taking it as, great honor unto himself, to patronise the^ in
their good cause and ^^^^mes, and to further to his utmost their honest suits.
Truly when I consider of the one side how faithful acounseller her majesty has
lost of him and of how trusty ^patron the co^monweal^ is by this his departure
from us, herea^ed, and of (...) and tender a father this our Church is thereby
also deprived, and when I have done, enter into a consideration on the other
side, of the blessed and happy change that he has made, which follows here
in my text: I cannot tell, whether we have grater cause to mourn in respect of
this threefold loss to us, tha^ to rejoice in respect of the blessed and happy
state hereby befallen to him. Sure I am we may now well conceive, y^ in this
threefolde respect there is great cause, why we s^^^ly mourn: but I ^eare we
shall every day more and more perceive this threefold miss and loss of him,
and therefore our mourning is rather likely to be increased than otherwise.
Howbeit, to moderate it let us proceed in ye ^e^t, that we may see thereby
again, what cause there is even of love toward him to make us in his respect
to be joyful again: In the handling whereof I will be, the briefer, because I
have been the longer in this. Wherefore leaving him most certainly enrolled
even by Gods ^wne hand within the number of those, that be undoubtedly dea^^
in the Lord, let us see what is here sai^ concerning the state of such, and
therefore consequently of hims^^

The second part of the general division wherein first is set down the method
and true sense of that part of the text, with proofs thereof, as follows.
It follows, Blessed are they immediately thence forth, Yea says the spirit,
they rest from their labors, and their works accompany the^. Wherein first
their state is fer bo^^e by y^ he ^^^^ly voice what it is, and when they enter
upon it, and then the same is iterated and somewhat explaned by the approbartion
and assem of the holy Ghost, in that forthwith they resto from their labors,
and their works accompany them Their state is blessed. As for them entrance and
continuance in that state, (...) pressed in this word (...), which, the
etin^^^logy of the word, the use of the word in ye best Greek authors, and
the very circumstance of the t^^^ considered, cause me to tra^^^^^^ ^h^s,
Immediately thenceforth. Which to he the sense yt it ha^h in this place,
understanding the place of ma^^yrs, the Rhe^ists themselves in the notes upon
this place ^il^ingly confess Yea they understanding the place also generally
of al diseased in ^ate of grace, confess it may the^ also (though they say it
doth^^^ properly so signify in this place, which they (...) never prove) ^efo
taken here vndersa^ding it only of these yt so deceased after Christ's
asce^sio^. unless that impediment be in themselves. Whereby it is evident, that
not the properly of the word, but a desire to maintain first their limbus
patrum, for those that departed in faith before Christ's ascension, and their
purgatory for some that depart so since, makes the^ unwilling to yield, that
the natural sense of the word here is as I have rendered it. But who so
co^sidereth, that the scope of ye place is to comfort the godly and sincere
servants of god, against the manifold assaults and afflictions procured them in
this life by Antichrist, eue^ with this, that if these notwithstanding they
persevere unto the end, they shall presently, and so forth for ever be blessed,
shall thereby perceive, that it must needs here have that sense, For to take it
any otherwise would minister unto them a cold comfort: as for example, say
unto them but in their sense (which they would feign utter for the sense, if
they durst for shame) be of good cheer, be constant unto the end, and then
perhaps presently thou shall go to bliss, and perhaps to purgatory, there to
feel pains that exceed all the pains of this life at the least, until thou
have satisfied up for thy sins partly by thine own bearing of those pains,
and partly by such other relief, as good men shall provide for thee when thou
art gone, and then thou shall go to bliss, and the comfort that it ministers
is as cold as lead Answers this the circumstance of the text? Nay tends it
not rather to the plain contrary, that is, to their discomfort? Well, it
seems they will not strive with us for this sense of the word, so we would be
content to understand it of all that die in grace since Christ's ascension only,
and but of so many of those also, as before their death have fully satisfied
for their sins: but we may not grant them either of these limitations: not
the first, because they that dyed in faith in Christ to come, as well as those
that die since in faith in Christ come, found their faith auailable to their
salvation. For Christ has bin the self same slain lamb for ever in the sight
of his heavenly father, Revel. 13.8. and is one and the self same yesterday,
to day, and for ever, Heb. 13.8. And he himself, to the plain confutatio^ of
this gross opinion, that ye faithful that died before his ascension went not
to joy and bliss, places Abraham and Lazarus with him in joy and bliss
before his death, Luke 16.24. etc. and promises the thief that day, when he
died, that he should be with him in paradise, Luke 23.43. And as for the later
the vainnes of the addition has bin laid open already, in that we have
learned, that there is no other satisfaction for the sins of the faithful, but
that which Christ made in his own person once for all: and yet they are so loath
that this place should be understood generally of all that depart in a right
faith in Christ, when, where, and howsoever that (mistrusting belike that (...)
would not serve their turns) in the next clause (...) they translate Now: where
as they know it is an aduerbe of affirming, and not of time, and signifies,
Yea, Also, and never now. Why do they not translate the saine word Mat. 5. and
Iam. 5. so also? Which if they did, the^ we should read there, for let your yea
be yea, let your now be now: and for let your speech be yea, yea, let your
speech be now now. But they found yt their vulgar translation reads it. Iam.
that is, now. Yea, but they were not ignorant, that is, now. Yea, but they were
not ignorant, that truly the word (...) could not be so translated: but that
they cared not for, as long as thus to cra^ state it (though against al reason)
seemed to sound better to countenance their Limbus Patru^, for so they gather
of it. Now says the spirit etc. (that is since Christ's ascension) that it in
thus with them that die in the Lord, as thought it had not been so before. And
it would be noted, that ye Greek word that is translated labors, does not
signify any a^tion or operation whatsoever, but such labor as is wearisome and
tedious to the doer or sufferer. For we must not think that the souls of the
righteous separated from their bodies live in idleness, without exercising
themselves in any kind of action. For (no doubt of it) they are occupied in the
contemplation of God, wherein their felicity lies and in praising him with
joyfulness. But we are thereby to understand, that such is the case of them that
die in the Lord, that thenceforth immediately for ever, al woe, grief, and pain
whatsoever cease to the^ both in body and soul, with is one part of their
blessedness and happiness here spoken of. But because blessedness lies not only
in a not feeling of woe and pain, but especially in fruition of some present
and permanent joy and comfort, therefore (the better to explane unto us, what
blessedness it is, that they that die in the Lord thenceforth for ever have
atteined unto immediately upon the dissolution of their soul and body) it is
farther added, that the works of such accompany them: that is, that presently
all the good works of such, eue^ unto the giving of a cup of cold water to one
of gods little ones in the name of a disciple shall be rewarded in heaven with
unspeakable joy and felicity, Mat. 10.42. I read it rather, And their works
accompany them, because so translated the force of the greek is the better
expressed. For (...) does not signify to follow a far off, but to follow hard
at the heels, and therefore (...) is a hand maid: and besides (...) is more
properly read, with the^, tha^ after them. Also thus reading it according to
the sense of ye greek, the circumsta^ce of ye place is better answered, which
was to animate those that lived in the Lord also to die in the lord, with hope of
present bliss upon their death. Whereas, if it were read. And their works
follow them, a cauiller to their disco^fort might say, that may be so, though
it be not before ye end of a thousand years after their death, and so in the
mean time they may fry in purgatory. And thus it is confirmed likewise, (...)
must here import immediately thence forth. For if the reward of their works
follow them, so, that it is present at their heels, then there is no mean
space betwixt. And yet I would not have it hereupon inferted, that my meaning
is, that souls departed in faith have straight their consummation and full
crown of glory, that is prepared for them. For I know that that shall not be
before the general resurrection, and yt the setting of the crown upon their
heads is deferred unto Christ's 2. coming. And therefore John in a vision ( Apo.
6.10. hears the blessed souls in heaven cry aloud for that day, though so,
yt they are contented without grief (for to obey the Lord is all their joy the^)
to tarry the Lords leisure, and to abide his pleasure. But hereby I would have
it gathered (for so it may well) that straight their bliss is such, and shall be
the^ceforth, ye neither body nor soul shall ever feel the least grief or pain
again, and that presently the soul is in possession and fruition of so
excellent an estate in heaven, in respect whereof it may worthily think it
self right blessed and happy, and so fully rewarded for all the works done by
it in the body, that it shall not have cause to complain that any one work is
forgotten and not rewarded. Even this therefore has the Lord from heaven in
and by this word (blessed) expressed, which is a word of greatest importance,
that he could use. For in blessedness and happiness both Philosophers and
divines hold, that man's chief felicity consists, whereunto in his whole life
he must aim. Wherefore (no doubt of it) even this state of them, that die in
the Lord, that by this word, and the phrases following to explane it, is meant,
is such a state, that ye state of princes and Emperors in this life, let the^
be otherwise as happy, as it is possible for me^ to be, in comparison hereof is
but a misery. For what state here is, ever was, or shall be so happy, which is
not intermingled, was, or shall be with some labor and pain? Yea even in the
delights here and greatest joys of this world there is saciety and
wearisomnes: and there is no certainty, nor unchangeableness in states here, the
best and most flourishing are so subject to mutability and alteration: but in
this there is no grief of mind, nor sickness or pain of the body, no
Gangrena, nor any other woe, Apoc. 21.4. And in the ioies there is continual
comfort, and delight without wearisomnes, and that such as is everlasting,
unutterable and inconceivable by the tongue or heart of man. And this is now
the state, and has bin ever since his departure, of this Noble Earl our
honorable brother, and shall be thenceforth, as both God and angels full well
know, and we men need not once to doubt, and this shall be ours also if we live
and die in the Lord, as he has done. It is told us all so from heaven, it is
recorded so by a faithful witness, and approved and ratified by the spirit of
God. God grant us al grace to believe it, and one day to try the truth and
certainty of it in our own persons by experience. In the mean time let us
somewhat further consider of the doctrine and of the words as they lie, wherein
it is uttered, that we may not only see thus, as we have done hither to, the
general and principal lesson therein taught us, but also every particular
truth confirmed thereby, and error confuted therein, that we may make the use of
it fully, for which it was written.

The particular lessons to be learned herein.
Because (no doubt of it) there are fools in the world, Psalm. 14.1. which in
their hearts think (though they dare not for shame with their congues say) there
is no God, and consequently, that there is neither Hell, nor Heaven,
resurrection of the body nor immortality of the soul: let us mark, The same
body shall rise again, and in the mean time rests in peace.
what doctrine this text teaches us to the contrary to the stopping up for
ever of the mouths of such profane Atheistes. Wherefore to begin with all I
say, how could it be here said, that they that die in the Lord are thenceforth
blessed, unless in respece of the whole man it were so in some force? Evident
it is, that if either the body were utterly perished, so that it should never
rise again, or the soul dead, that it could feel no joy, they could not at al
be said to be blessed. For blessedness (as you have hard confirmed unto you
eue^ out of my text it self) consists not only in ceasing from labor woe and
pain, but in a possession and fruition of a most heavenly reward. Nay it is
most certain that if either the body in the mean time until the resurrection
were not at rest and peace, or in the end should not rise again, the soul
could not be said to be blessed, and to enjoy the reward of works done by it
in the body. For it were a kind of misery unto it to have the body disquieted,
especially to be without hope of being ever restored and joined to the body
again. Wherefore in that they that die in the Lord are here pronounced blessed,
first for the bodies of such we learn, that they are in rest, and (as the
scripture speaks) as it were a sleep in the bosom of their mother the
earth, Acts. 7.1. These. 4.15. and therefore free from all woe and pain, and
not to be disquieted by devils, enchanters, or witches any manner of way, and
that most certainly they rest in hope of a blessed resurrection, which
(according to the Scriptures, Mat. 25.1. These. 4.1. Cor. 15.) at the last
general day of judgment by the power of the Lord shall be brought to pass.
Whereof we must needs be persuaded, in that otherwise God should not be perfectly
merciful, nor Christ a full savior. And why should Christ take unto his godhead
and unite therewith in person as well the body of man, as ye soul of man, unless
he meant to be a full savior of both? He our head rose again, in his own body one
in substance with that it was before though altered in properties, and so shall
it be with his members, 1. Cor. 15.1. These. 4. Notable therefore was Jobs
faith, his time considered, I know says he that my redeemer lives, and that I
shall see God in my flesh though after this skin the worms destroy this body,
whom I my self shall see and mine eyes shall behold, and none other for me,
Job. 19.25.26.27. Even the dying of ye corn first in ye earth and the after
growing up of the same, and the reviving of diverse worms and other creatures
at the spring toward su^mer, ye lay for dead all winter, are glasses in
nature our God has set before us to make us ashamed, of this point of
infidelity and Atheism once to call the truth of the resurrection into
question,

The soul is immortal.
And as touching the soul that it dies not, but (if it depart out of the body
in the Lord) that it passes straight to the Lord, with whom it not only
cease from al woe and pain, but also enioieth the reward of bliss, hereby
also we are plainly taught. For otherwise how should it be true, yt immediately
thenceforth such as die in ye Lord, are blessed in not only ceasing from their
labors, but also in present receiving reward of their works. For hereupon it
must needs follow to be most true, which we read, Eccl. 12.7. that the soul
returns to him, that gave it. And that also Mat. 10.28. that tyrants cannot
kill the soul. Wherefore we may with Peter count death but a flitting of the soul
out of the tabernacle of the body, 2. Pet. 1.14. and with Paul a going from an
earthly house to an heavenly, It sleeps not nor is without feeling of joy
assuredly until the resurrection.
2. Cor. 5. etc. and therefore with him upon good cause desire to be dissolved,
and to be with the Lord, Phi. 1.23. and when we dye, dying in the Lord, with
Christ, Luk 23.46. and with Stephen, Act. 7, 59. co^me^d our souls into the hands
of God. Whereupon it follows that there is a soul, and yt it dies not when
the body dies, but is immortal. Yea further in y^ (as we perceive by Christ's
placing of Lazarus immediately in present fruition of joy after his death in
Abraham's bosom, Luke 16.) the souls of such as die in the Lord are said here to
have their works accompany them, hereupon it follows, that the reward thereof
is not drousie sleep but a joyful feeling of heavenly bliss, and that
therefore the souls of such departed sleep not, but are awake, and in a
lively feeling of joy in heaven. Which fancy of these sleepers is confuted also
in that Ioh. Apo. 6. seeing in vision souls in heaven, heard them cry a loud
unto the Lord to hasten his second coming. Hereupon also (in that of
contraries there is contrary condition) may well be gathered, in that the state
of those that dye in the Lord, is blessed, that the state of those that dye not
in ye Lord, That is no purgatory for any that die in the Lord to go unto.
is accrused.

Now in that it follows (...) immediately thenceforth: and their works
accompany the^, and they cease from their labors, by three most evident
reasons it must needs follow that to such as dye in the Lord there is not any
mean place or Purgatory, and therefore to none other by our adversaries own
confession. For they themselves hold as well as we, that all that die out of grace
and favor of our God, they for their sins in soul go straight to hell: and that
none go to purgatory but such as dye in the Lord, which yet before their death
have not sufficiently satisfied for their sins, But here I say this their
doctrine is flatly confuted: first, in that they are imediatly after their
death thenceforth without any exception said to be blessed. Secondly in that it
is said, They rest from their labors. Thirdly in that it is said Their works
accompany the^. None of all which could be true, if any of them went to
purgatory. And yet our Rhemists upon this place are not ashamed to write in
their notes (notwithstanding it be their known and received doctrine, that the
p^ines that souls suffer in purgatory, be equal to the pains of hell for the
time, and that one principal torment there, is the gnawing worm of conscience)
that souls in purgatory may well be said to be blessed straight after their
death, and to rest there in peace. Which if it be true, then their doctrine of
the pains, that souls abide there is but a frai-bug and if their doctrine be
true, then this is false, which they write. Lo here the popish unity. But how
may they notwithstanding the p^^^es there be said to be blessed? Because (say
they) them notwithstanding they are ceased from the labors of this life, and
al danger to sin, and are put in security of eternal joy in the end, with
unspeakable peace of conscience in the mean time. Then it cannot be (say I once
again) that the pains of purgatory be so great for the time, as the pains of
hell. For there is no security of joy there in the end, nor in the mean time
any comfort at al in conscience, but extreme anguish and horror. Again, who
sees not that it is a poor blessedness to go from the afflictions of his life
(which the faithful with joy and rejoicing suffer, Act. 5.41. and that In full
assurance of joy in the end, To. 8.33. and so to the end of the chapter and
consequently with great comfort of conscience indeed) to a place where for the
space of ten men's lives, yea they cannot tell how long, they shall suffer
pains and torments, the least whereof (as they write) infinitely exceeds the
greatest of ye other. And if this were so, that it might stand with the
Apostles meaning, as they in their notes would feign make us believe, the^ (no
doubt of it) here is a cold hartning ministered to those ye live in the Lord,
to persevere to their death against all assaults to ye contrary, yt when they
dye they shall streightway make only this change. No, no (dearly beloved) the
scope of ye text, and the nature of the blessedness here spoken of will not abide
this their gloss. The greek word (...), which is here translated labors,
signifies as (I have told you) al labors with grief, wearisomnesse, or pain
generally, and cannot be restreyned to the afflicitions only of this life. And
though they could hold their purgatory by their cauilling, for all (...) and
(...), yet (seeing they must needs understand the last clause by a metonymie of
the reward of works. For the works themselves (they know) were either actions
or p^ssions, which are not extant but vanished and gone, when the action and
passion was finished: and seeing also the greek (...) cannot more properly be
englished, than their works go with them: and seeing in purgatory they will not
for shame say, that they have already the reward of their works) it must needs
follow ye presently after their death they go thither, where forwith they may
have the reward of their works, which they must needs confess is heaven: and
therefore that there can be no such purgatory, for them to stay in, as they
imagine, before they come there. The popish relife for souls in purgatory,
despised.
Yea further the due weying of these words as they clean quench the fire of
purgatory, so they overthrow all the relief, which the papists have devised;
and yet use to relieve the souls, that be there. For we read here, that their
own works (...) accompany them: and all these their reliefes consists of that
which others do for them, when they be dead, and here is no promise, that any
works shall follow them but their own. And therefore S. Paul 2. Cor. 5.10.
writes that we must be all manifested before the judgment seat of Christ,
that every manne may receive the things done in his own body, according to
that, which he has done, be it good, or evil. Now if when souls shall
appear in judgment with their bodies every one be but to receive according as
he has done in his own body, is it not most evident that in the mean time
what so ever is done for souls departed hence by others; it shall never
benefit them? And therefore here the spirit of God would not comfort them
that dye in the Lord with that Popish comfort, that things done for them by
others, when they be dead, should also follow them: only he tells them that
their own works shall go with them. And yet his purpose being to comfort
them in the best and most effectual manner without all doubt, if he could in
truth have comforted them with that, he would not have omitted it. But he
has (we see) quite past that kind of comfort over, and speaks only of
our own works. Wherefore let us not (after the manner of the Papists) be
slack in good works, while we are alive, trusting that by doles. Masses,
dirges, trentals, and pardons made, done, and procured for us by others when we
are gone, we shall have ye state of out souls departure relieved, but (as S. Paul
has commanded us.) Whiles we have time let us do good unto all men,
especially unto the householde of faith. Gal. 6.10. for where the tree falls
there it lies, until it be reared again. Eccle. 11.3. and the dead have no
portion of any thing, that is done under the Sun, Eccle. 9.6. And we see by
Christ's parable, Mat. 25.10. etc. that the foolish virgins that lacked oil in
their lamps of their own, sought it at the hands of others, could get none,
though they would never so feign have had some of them, whatsoever it had cost
them, and so were shut out from entering in with the bridegroom into his
chamber. O therefore the spiritual craftines of poperye, first in deuysing that
there is a third place between hell and heaven, or a mean place called
Purgatory for souls departed to go unto before they go to heaven: and then in
inuenting such a relief for them when they were gone thither by others. For by
the first they put souls departing into such fear, that they cared not what
they gave, and deprived their heirs, wives, and other children of, to buy at
their hands their prayers, masses, and pardons, whereby they wonderfully to the
spoil of others enriched themselves: and by the latter they greatly occasioned
men to be slack in godliness, and loose in life, whiles health lasted upon hope
of this provision in the end, and also so led them from the present faith in
Christ to a faith in these things, and consequently murdered their souls, and
yet marueilously enriched them selves. Whereby they have proved themselves to
be the cruellest, cunningest, and greatest thieves, that ever were in the
world. They may well pretend Scriptures, fathers and reasons for this their
devise, thereby to bleare the eyes of the simple, it is so passing gainefull
unto them: but in deed and truth the very only root and fountain thereof was
insatiable couecousnes to enrich themselves they cared not how, and
intolerable ambition to lift up themselves into credit among the people, in
that thus they made the^ believe it lay in their hands to ease them of the
pains of Purgatory, and to send the^ to heaven. As for scriptures Roffensis
Perionius, and Soto are enforced to confess (and yet they were great papists)
they have none plain enough to prove it. And how can they, seeing Christ the
father of the scriptures has divided al me^ but into two sorts, believers in
him, and not believers in him, John. 3.18. and has told us there are two ways
only, the one broad leading to hell and the other streite, leading to heaven,
Mat. 7.13.14. Luke 13.24. placing (for further explication of his mind
concerning the state of those two sorts of me^ taking ye one of those two
ways) Lazarus an example of the one sort straight in joy and felicity, and the
rich glutton example of the other sort straight in hell after death Luke. 16.
And truly as for Fathers to prove their purgatory withal they are to seek
also. Some of them (as Origin and his folowers) imagine a purgatory, through
which both good and bad shall go, and wherein the wicked and the devil also
after the judgment in the end after long torments shall be saved. Which
beastly heresy Aug. worthily conde^neth and confuteth in diverse places, as
they well know. And I am sure they will not hold such a purgatory neither. Some
other as Theodor. Oecumenius, Alcuinus) talk of a purgatory fire at the last
day wherewith Christ shall come, when he comes in glory, as they imagine:
through which al shall pass: but this is not their purgatory: neither is it
any thing but a mere pha^sie indeed. Some other among whom Aug. is (as they
take it) the chief man, seem somewhat to allow their purgatory: but indeed
the chief places which they cite out of him for it, are such, where he
speaks but doubtfully as thus, For sitan verum est: non est incredibile: An
sit quaeripotest: that is, perhaps it is so: It is not altogether incredible:
It may be a question, whether there be any such place or no, as in his book de
Ciuitate Deilib. 21. cap. 26. and in Enchirid. cap. 69. And yet in diverse other
places (belike better advised, and more settled) he flatly determines, that
there is no such third place. For in a sermon of his de vamiate huius saecul^,
I read thus, Scitote vos quod cu^ anima a corpore auellitur statim in paradiso
collocatur, aut in inferni tartara praecipitatur, that is, Know ye, that when
the soul is taken from the body either by and by it is placed in paradise, or
thrown into Hell. And in hie Hypognosticon the 5. book he says thus, The
first place the Catholic faith by Gods authority believes to be the kingdom
of heaven, the second place that same catholic faith believes to be hell,
where all runnagates and all that are without the faith of Christ shall taste
everlasting punishment. As for any third place penitus ignoramus, that is, we
utterly know none says he, neither shall we find in the holy scriptures that
there is any such. And in his book de peccatorum meritis, li. 1. ca. 28. he
has these words Non est vlli vllus medius locus vt possit esse nisi cum
diabolo qui non est cum Christo there is no middle place for any, but that he
must needs be with the devil if not with Christ. And truly for the releeuing
of souls departed by things done for the^ here by others as you have heard the
scriptures are against them, so the fathers be also. For Augustine says flatly
to Hesichius Epist. 80. In what state thy dying day finds thee, the last day
also shall come upon thee. And Hierom. upon the 9. of Eccles. before alleged,
gathers that there can nothing be added to the dead by any thing done
hereafter. And accordingly writes Cyprian de mortalitate, saying, Quale^ t^
inuenit Deus cu^ hinc euocat, tale^ pariter and iudicat, that is, In what state
God finds thee when he calls thee hence, such a one he will also judge thee.
Indeed they may have these fathers, the heathen philosopher Plato in his
Gorgia, Homer in his 1. and 3. Odyss, Virgil in his 6. book of AEneid Ovid in
his 2. Fastoru^, Aristotle, the Alcoran, and such like to fetch their purgatory
from, others of any sound credit they have none. And as for their reasons they
are but discourses of their own wit, or of others like themselves last before
named. And their best are, when they are driven to the utmost, but counterfeit
writings of fathers falsely bearing their names, and written by some of their
own crew of later time, false tales, lying apparitions of men and devils. For
rather than Purgatory shall be left without an author, the devil shall be he, and
they will make much of his authority also. For they write in Lombardica
historia, that Saint Odilio at Vulcania of Sicilia hearing that the howlinges
and cries of Devils were hard mourning, that souls were taken from them after
their departure out of the body by the alms and prayers of their friends
living; caused the feast of the co^memoration of the dead for the relief of
souls in purgatory to be ordained. The truth is, dearly beloved, that their
doctrine in this point is such, that if ten thousand angels and all the fathers
should tell us that it were true, we ought to bold both them and their assertion
accursed, it is so blasphemous and injurious to the precious boud-shed of Jesus
Christ, the only purgatory indeed both of soul and body. For to maintain this
they first must hold that the merits and satisfactions of Christ are not
sufficient of themselves, and by themselves (without these pains suffering in
purgatory also, and this other relief) to save the soul of the believer in
him. Secondly they must hold, that in the blood of Christ the believer has
forgiveness of sins, but not of the punishment due therefore. Thirdly that God
is such a God as will punish a soul with such hellish torments for the same
sins, which he has already forgiven in his son, and therefore promised to
remember no more, Heb. 10.17. And lastly they must attribute power to do that
to the pains of purgatory, and to this their relief, that they talk of,
which they hold the blood of Christ has not done without these to such. You
see therefore that these fellows that are so busy in purgatory are well worthy
for their labor to find nothing else when they depart, but hell and hellish
torments. And no doubt of it they sell heaven so fast to others, that (if they
repent not) there will be no place else left for them but hell. But to leave them
to their fained king the pope and to this his new kingdom, which he has
appropriated to him and his, it is further to be noted, that in that the word
(...) does not only signify up and by, but notes also a continuance of time
thenceforth, that to the full comfort of them that die in the Lord, The
blessed state of them that die in the lord is permane^t
they may hereby learn, that not only immediately after their death they shall
rest from their labors and enter upon their reward, and so be blessed: but
that also, this their state is certain without any falling back from it: and
therefore still their reward is called life everlasting in the scriptures. And
surely if this be their state immediately thenceforth without ever any danger of
falling back to worse, then of the contrary it must needs follow, that quite
contrary immediately after their death shall be the state and condition of all that
die not in the Lord, and that there is no hope for ever for them to attain
unto a better. What need there then a general judgment, will some say? I
answer for two causes; that the bodies the^ may be restored to their souls
again, that both the ioies of the faithful and pains of the faithles, to the
full manifestatio^ both of gods mercy and justice, may be co^summate and full:
and that so god the^ may outwardly and solemnly justify before all the world his
former particular judgment, which imediatly before at every ma^s death he had
laid upon them.

Lastly we are not to pass over, or forget how our adversaries the Papists
abuse this last clause of the text. For they hearing that works follow such,
thereupon infer, that works merit eternal bliss. The abuse of this place,
thereby to prove that works merit, confuted.
Indeed hereupon it follows (as I have noted before) that none have a right
faith in Christ, but those that have also good works to accompany them
whenever they dye in the Lord, which I would not have forgotten: But hereupon
to gather that our works merit heaven we may not. For then they should go
before our being in the Lord, and be a cause thereof, whereas here it is only
said, that they follow and accompany such. Which it should seem that
Augustine had observed li. de Fide and operibus ca. 14. when he said that good
works go not before justification, but they follow a man justified, Let them
therefore follow in Gods name, as a fruit of a man in the Lord, but let them
not step before as a cause of his being in the favor of the Lord. And
understand that this argument is stark naught, good works shall be rewarded with
heavenly bliss: therefore they merit it. Is no man rewarded but he which has
merited and deserved it first? The heir when he comes to his fathers lands
is then well rewarded for his pains he took in his fathers time, and yet he
has not his inheritance for those his pains, for then rather some servant
oftentimes should have the inheritance: but for that he was his fathers son and
heir before: Even so it is in this case, we are born the sons of God by faith
in Christ, Ioh. 1.12. and 13. and so coheires with him of heaven, Romans 8.17.
thereby first, and then follow good works in us not as a cause why we shall
have this inheritance, but as a fruit and effect flowing from our thankful
minds to our heavenly father for this notable inheritance thus freely prepared
for us. And yet when we come to the inheritance, because it comes after these
our works, after a sort we may say, that eue^ there by our pains in working
are rewarded, and yet we have not that reward for our works, but for that we
working so, were the sons and heirs of God. But for the better loosing of al
such popish knots, understand that it is not al one to say good works shall be
rewarded, and to say, good works have merited that reward. For there are
rewards given of mercy (and so is this) as well as of debt and duty, Romans 4.4.
Again there is great ods betwixt these two questions, who shall be saved, and
why man shall be saved: To the former we answer, the well worker: to the latter
only for Christ's sake apprehended by faith. And therefore take this for the
conclusion, we shall be judged Secundu^ operum indicium, non propter operum
meritu^, according to the testimony y our works give of us, not for the merit
of our works. For it is written Ephe. 2.8.9. We are saved by grace through
faith, and that not of our selves: it is the gift of God: not of works, lest
any man should boast himself. And yet this doctrine neither lets nor staieth
at al from good works, but is y^ only fountain indeed from whence al true works
do spring and flow. And therefore y^ Apo. Paul (as you may observe throughout al
his epistles) first laboreth to set down this doctrine, and then thereupon
after builds exhortation to godliness of life: and the like course took Peter
as you may see in his first epistle. And yet these knew how to provoke to good
works, and in no case may be counted teachers of a doctrine enemy to good
works. Yea there is none indeed that has grace to embrace this doctrine
effectually, but thereby he feels by experience his heart so enflamed with love
toward God for his infinite mercy hereby displaied unto him both in saving
him from perishing, and in thus freely preparing heaven for him, that from that
love of his there flows rivers and floods of al thankfulness in all true
obedience to his God* wherein he walks cheerfully and co^fortably. But the
Papists being bastards and no lawful children of the Lord, being not assured
of this full and free favor of his toward the^, of a slavish fear, and with a
servile mind to earn heaven at his hands do ye good which they do. Which
indeed in matter and manner of doing is such, that though it carrye the show of
godliness, yet it is not so indeed. For the matter of good works they will not
fetch warrant only from gods revealed will in his word, but matter good enough
with the^. For a good work is any thing for the which they can allege a
tradition of ye elders, or their own good intent, Which kind of works the Lord
rejects as stinking in his sight, Isa. 29.13. Mat. 15.9. and Co. 2.20. etc.
And as for their manner of doing, it is like ye Pharisees joined with a conceit,
that therefore they may despise others, and trust to be heard at Gods hands for
the merit of their works. Which kind of doing Christ has condemned, Mat.
6.1. and Luke 18.9, etc. in forbidding us to do our works as the Pharisees
did, and in sending home the proud Pharisee unjustified And therefore in very
deed, as they are without all true christian faith, so are they without al true
good works, And therefore whosoever has any thing to comfort himself by this
place, it is none of the^. No doubt of it, this noble man, whose body lies
here amongst us to be enco^bed, though even in outward show of alms giving
and other good works he ouermatched most merit mongers, yet seeing he trusted
only to the meries of Christ, and never to his own works, but did them only
of love and thankfulness towas his God, is among those, of whom it is here
said, Their works accompany them, and therefore now is in joyful fruition of
the reward thereof. Whose example as we that be of the same faith are to
follow, that so with him we may be in everlasting remembrance both with God,
and good men, (as no doubt he shall) so it is an example to stop the mouths
of the adversaries, that lyingly cry out that they that be of our religion
have no good works following them.

The second conclusion.
Thus at last (right honorable and dearly beloved) we have run through this
portion of scrpture, and considered both the general and particular use
thereof. And so first we have heard how strongly it is warranted to contain
nothing, but sound truth: namely that not whosoever knows or comes ny, but
whosoever is by a true and a lively faith united unto Christ, and dies in him,
(which is neither a miraculous, historical, temporary, dead, or popish faith,
but a faith seeking and apprehending salvation only in Christ Jesus) shall
the^ceforth be blessed immediately in resting from all woe in body and soul,
and in entering upon possession of their everlasting reward: and then thereby
more particularly we have observed, yt therefore, the body rises again, and
that the soul is neither mortal nor sleeps, that there is no popish
purgatory, nor any thing that can be done by others for souls departed, that
can do them any good to ease or better their estate: and finally that though
here be offered us great encouragement to good works, yet here is nothing to
prove that works merit any thing at Gods hand. All which doctrine and
lessons our honorable friend here departed (as I have from point to point
showed you) has already found true by experience. God of his mercy give us all
grace so to set his example before us, that we may so follow him, that we may
every one of us one day also to Gods glory and our own everlasting comfort
feel and find the truth thereof in our selves. This O Lord we beseech thee
to grant us all for thy only son Jesus Christ's sake, to whom with thee and
the holy Ghost, three persons and one everliving God, be all power, honor,
might and majesty now and for ever, Amen.

September 22. An. Do. 1594. The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, the love of
God the Father, and the most comfortable fellowship of the holy Ghost, be with
us all now and ever, to direct, sanctify, and govern us in all our ways,
works, and thoughts. Amen.
FINIS.

