England, Wales, Scotland and Ireland Described and Abridged with ye History
Relation of things worthy memory from a far Larger Voulume Done by John Speed

Anno Cum priuilegio

And are to be sold by Georg Humble at ye White-horse in popeshead Alley



A Catalogue of all the Shires, Cities, Bishoprics, Market Towns, Castles,
Parishes, Rivers, Bridges, (...) Forests, and Parkes, contained in every
particular shire of the Kingdom of England.
Shires. Cities Bishoprick^. Mark Towns Castles Parish Church Rivers Bridges
Chases Forests. Parkes Kente 02 02 17 08 398 06 14 00 00 23 Sussex 01 01 18 01
312 02 10 00 04 33 Surrie 00 00 06 00 140 01 07 00 0 1/4 17 Middlesex 02 02 03
00 073 01 03 01 00 04 H^nt-shire 01 01 18 05 248 04 31 00 04 22 (...) shire 00
00 18 06 248 04 29 01 02 12 W^lt shire 01 01 21 01 304 05 31 01 09 29 Somerset
shire 03 02 29 01 385 09 45 00 02 18 Devo^ shire 01 01 40 03 394 23 106 00 00
23 Cor^^all 00 00 23 06 161 07 31 00 00 09 Essex 01 00 21 01 415 07 28 00 01 46
Hartford shire 00 00 18 00 120 01 24 00 00 23 Oxford shire 01 01 10 00 208 03
26 00 04 09 Buckingham sh. 00 00 11 00 185 02 14 00 00 15 Barck shire 00 00 11
01 140 03 07 00 0 3/4 13 Gloucester shire 01 01 20 01 280 12 22 01 02 19 Suffolk
00 00 28 01 464 02 32 00 00 27 Norfolk 01 01 26 00 625 03 15 00 00 00 Rutlande
00 00 02 00 047 00 01 00 00 04 Northampton sh. 01 01 11 02 326 05 24 00 03 23
(...) shir 00 00 05 00 078 01 05 00 00 0^ (...) shir^ 00 00 10 00 116 01 06 00
00 12 (...) shire 00 01 06 00 163 01 07 00 00 05 (...) shire 01 01 12 01 158 07
21 01 00 16 (...) shire. 00 00 11 02 200 01 10 00 02 13 (...) shire 01 00 12 05
130 13 10 01 01 38 Worcester shire 01 01 07 03 152 05 13 01 02 16 Shrop shire
00 00 13 13 170 18 13 00 07 27 Hereford shire 01 01 08 07 176 13 11 01 02 08
Lincoln shire 01 01 26 02 630 09 1^ 00 00 13 Nottingham sh. 00 00 11 00 168 0^
17 00 01 18 Darby shire 00 00 08 04 106 13 21 00 01 34 Cheshire 01 01 09 03 068
09 19 00 02 18 York shire 01 01 46 14 563 36 62 04 08 72 Lancasshire 00 00 08
06 036 33 24 00 01 30 Durham 01 01 05 04 062 11 20 00 ^0 21 Westmoreland 00 00
04 06 026 08 15 00 02 1^ Cumberland 01 01 08 15 058 20 33 00 03 08
Northumbrland 00 00 11 12 040 21 16 00 01 0^ Mo^mouth 00 00 06 07 142 15 14 01
00 08 Glam^rgan 00 01 07 12 151 16 06 00 00 0^ Radnor 00 00 04 05 043 ^3 05 00
03 ^^ Brecknok 00 00 03 04 070 17 13 00 ^^ ^^ Cardigan 00 00 04 00 077 26 09 00
0^ ^^ Carmart^in 00 00 06 04 081 20 16 00 0^ ^^ Pembrok 00 01 06 05 142 06 07
00 0^ ^^ Montgomery 00 00 06 03 042 28 06 00 00 ^^ Meri^^idth 00 00 03 02 034
26 07 00 00 00 Denbigh 00 00 03 03 053 24 06 00 00 06 Fluit shire 00 01 03 04
024 04 02 00 0^ ^^ Anglesey 00 00 03 00 083 08 02 00 00 00 Caer^arvon 00 01 05
03 073 17 06 00 00 00

THE GENERAL OF GREAT BRITAIN. CHAPTER I.
THE State of every Kingdom well managed by prudent government, seems to me
to represent a Humane Body, guided by the sovereignty of the Reasonable Soul:
the Country and Land it self representing the one, the Actions and
State-affaires the other. Since therefore the excellencies of the whole are but
imperfectly laid open, where either of these Parts is defective, our intendment
is to take a view as well of the outward Body and Lineaments of the
now-flourishing British Monarchy (the Islands) Kingdoms and Provinces thereof
in actual possession, (for with others, no less justly claimed in the
Continent, we meddle not) which shall be the content of our first or
Chorographicall Tome, containing the four first Books of this our Theater: as
also of its successiue government and vital actions of State, which shall be
our second or Historical Tome, containing the five last Books. And here first
we will (by example of the best Anatomists) propose to the view the whole Body
and Monarchy entire (as far as conveniently we could comprise it) and after
will dissect and lay open the particular Members, Veins, and Joints, (I mean
the Shires, Rivers, Cities, and Towns) with such things as shall occur most
worthy our regard, and most behouefull for our use.

(2) The Island of Great Britain (which with her adjoining Isles is here first
presented) contains the Kingdoms of England and Scotland, and is of many
accounted the greatest Island in the World, though Iustus Lypsius gives that
praise to Cuba in America, as the Oriental Nauigatores do unto Sumatra (taken
for Ptolomees Taprobana) or to Madagascar, the Island of S. Laurence, both
which are near unto, or under the Equinoctial line; In which we will not
contend; as pleasing our selves with her other praises greater then her
Greatness; yet with this honor also, that it was (without question) the
greatest Island of the Roman World, and for any thing yet certainly known, of
all the rest. Concerning whose ^ositure in respect of Heaven, Lueretius (the
first of the Latin Writers that names Britain) seems to place it in the
same Parallel with Pontus, where he says: Nam quid Britannum coelum differ
putamus, etc.
What differs Britains heaven from that of Nile?
Or Pontus welkin, from Gadz warmer Isle?
In which, by a certain cross comparison, he opposes two likes against two
vnlikes, Britain and Pontus against Egypt and Gads. But to seek into profound
Antiquity, rather then present practice, for matters, in which Use makes
perfectness, were to affect the giving light by shadows, rather then by
Sunshine.

(3) It is by experience found to lie included from the degree fifty, and
thirty scruples of Latitude, and for Longitude extended from the 13. degree,
and 20. minutes, unto the 22. and 50. minutes, according to the observation of
Mercator. It has Britain, Normandy, and other parts of France upon the South,
the Lower Germany, Denmark, and Norway upon the East; the Isles of Orkney and
the Deucaledonian Sea, upon the North; the Hebrides upon the West, and from it
all other Islands and Ilets, which do scatteredly inuiron it, and shelter
themselves (as it were) under the shadow of Great Albion (another name of this
famous Island) are also accounted Britannish, and are therefore here described
altogether.

(4) Britain thus seated in the Ocean has her praises, not only in the
present sense, and use of her commodities, but also in those honorable
Eulogies, which the learned of Antiquaries has collected out of the noblest
Authors, that he scarce seems to have left any gleanings: neither will (...)
transplant them out of his flourishing Gardens, but as necessity compels, since
nothing (...) or other^^^ be^^^ said.

(5) That Britain therefore is the Seas High Admiral, is famously known: and
the Fortunate Island supposed by some, as Robert of Anesbury does show: whose
air is more temperate (says Caesar) then France; whose Soil brings forth
all grain in abundance, says Tacitus; whose Seas produce orient Pearl, says
Suetonius; whose Fields are the seat of a Summer Queen, says Orpheus; her
wildest parts free from wild beasts, says the ancient Pa^^gyricke, and her
chief City worthily named Augusta, as says Ammianus: So as we may truly say
with the royal Psalmist, Our lines are fallen in pleasant places, yea we have
a fair inheritance. Which whatsoever by the goodness of God, and industry of
man it is now, yet our English Poet has truly described unto us the first
face thereof, thus; The Land which warre-like Britains now possess
And therein have their mighty Empire raisde,
In ancient times was saluage Wilderness,
Unpeopled, vnmanur'd, vnprou'd, vnpraisde.


(6) And albeit the Ocean does at this present thrust it self between Dove,
and Callis, dividing them with a deep and vast entrenchment; so that Britain
thereby is of a supposed (...) made an Island: yet diverse have stiffly held, that
once it was joined by an arm of land to the Continent of Gallia. To which
opinion Spencer farther alluding, thus closes his Stanza.

Ne was it Island then, ne was it paisde
Amid the Ocean waves, ne was it sought
Of Merchants far, for profits thererem praisde,
But was all desolate, and of some thought
By Sea to have been from the Celticke Mainland brought.
(...) as a matter merely coniecturall (because it is not plain that there
(...) Islands nor hills before Noah's flood) I leave at large: Virgill surely (of
all Poets the most learned) when describing the Shield which Vulcan forged (in
Virgils brain) for Aeneas, he calls the Morini (people about Callis) the
outmost men, does only mean that they were Westward, the furthest Inhabitants
upon the Continent, signifying withal that Britain as being an Island, lay out
of the world: but yet not out of the knowledge of men, for the Commodities
thereof invited the famous Greek Colonies of Merchants, which dwelt at
Massilia in France, to venture hither, as has been well observed out of
Strabo.

(7) And as Julius Caesar was the first Roman which ever gave an attempt to
conquer it, so will we close its praises with a late Epigram, concerning the
outward face of the Isle, and the motive of Caesar's coming.

ALBIONIS vertex frondoso cri^e superbit.
Arboreas frondes plurimas ales habet.
Graminean Montes and ^undunt paseua p^^em;
Et carpunt, circum paseua, gramenoues:
Sed LATII caruit potioribus Insula donis,
Victori potior Gloria ni LATIO.
Albions high tops her woody locks far show,
With quiers of chanting Birds these Woods resounding.
Her Downs and Meadows cladin verdant hew,
Meadows and Downs with flocks and herds abounding.
Latium had greater Wealth, yet Caesar thought,
To British Glory, Latiums Wealth worth naught.
(8) The division of Britain concerning the government and Territories
thereof; at such time (...) Ceaser here arrived, does not sufficiently appear.
Caesar himself makes so sparing mention therein, that we have little cause to
believe Florus, where he makes Lauie say, that after Caesar had slain (...)
multitude of Britains, he subdued the residue of the I Will, but rather with
exquisite Hora^e, that he did not at all touch them, as the word intactus does
in him purport.

(9) Kings they were, and therefore that division which was here in Caesar's
time, was into Kingdoms; the old names of whole Nations, as also the knowledge
of their several abodes, hidden under the rabbish of so many ages, have of
late with infinite labors and exquisite judgment, been probably restored and
abounded; yet that no man's expectation and desire be too much frustrated,
reason wills that we briefly set forth such divisions of the Land, as many
repute not ancient only, but authenticke.

(10) Our seeming ancient Historians begin it at Brute, who to every of his
three sons gave a part, called presently after their names; as Loegria to
L^^rme his eldest son: Cambria to Camber his second son; and Albama to
Albanist his third son: And doubtless, if there had been more Nations of
fame in this Island, Brute should have had more sons fathered on him: which
conceit some ascribe to Monmouth, holding that before him it was never so
divided.

(11) Ptolemie naming Britain the Great and the Less, has been by some
mistaken, as so dividing this Island into two parts; but his proportion and
distance from the Equator, compared with his Geographicall description will
euince, that he calls this our Island Great Britain, and Ireland Britain the
Less.

(12) Howbeit some later do make indeed the South and more Champion to be
called Great Britain, and the North more Mountainous, Britain the Less;
whose Inhabitants anciently were distinguished into the Maiatae, and Caledonij,
and now by the Scots are into Heghlandmen and Lawlandmen. But that Northern
clime being more piercing for the Romans constitutions, and less profitable or
fruitful, they set their bounds not far from Edinburgh, and altogether
neglected the other parts more Northward.

(13) This nearer part of Britain they then divided into two parts; for the
more Southern tract, together with Wales, Dio terms the Higher, and that
more Northward the Lower, as by the seat of their Legions does appear; for
the second Legion Augusta (which kept at Caerleon in South Wales) and the
twentieth called Victrix (which remained at Chester) he places in the Higher
Britain: but the sixth Legion surnamed also Victrix, resident at York, served
(as he writes) in the Lower Britain; which division, as seems, was made by
Seuerus the Emperor, who having vanquished Albinus, General of the Britains,
and reduced their State under his obedience, divided the government thereof
into two Provinces, and placed two Prefects over the same.

(14) After this again the Romans did apportion Britain into three parts,
whose limits our great Antiquary assigns by the ancient Archiepiscopall
Seats, grounding his conjecture on the saying of Pope Lucius, who affirms
that the Ecclesiastical Jurisdictions of the Christians, accorded with the
precincts of the Roman Magistrates, and that their Archbishops had their Sees
in those Cities wherein their Presidents abode: so that the ancient Seats of
the three Archbishops here, being London in the East, Caerleon in the West, and
York in the North; Londons Diocese (as seems) made Britain prima;
Caerleon, Britain secunda; and York, Maxima Caesariensis.

(15) But in the next age, when the power of their Presidents began to grow
ouer-great, they again divided Britain into five parts, adding the three
former Valentia and Flauia Caesarie^sis: the first of which two seems to have
been the Northerly part of Maxima Casarie^sis, recovered from the Picts and
Scots by Theodosius the General, under Valence the Emperor, and in honor of
him, named Valentia: and Flauia may be coniectured to receive the name from
Flauius the Emperor (son of Theodosius) for that we read not of the name
Britain Flauia, before his time.

(16) So these five partitions had their limits assigned after this manner:
Britain prima contained those coasts that lay betwixt Thamesis, the Seuerne,
and the British Sea: Britain secunda extended from Seuerne unto the Irish
Seas, containing the Country that we now call Wales: Flauia Caesariensis, was
that which lay betwixt the Rivers Humber and Tyne: and Valentia from the said
River, and Picts wall reached unto the Rampire near Edinburgh in Scotland, the
farthest part that the Romans possessed when this division was in use. For the
several people inhabiting all those parts, with their ancient Names and
Borders (whether designed by the Romans, or the old Britains) together with
our modern Names and Shires, answerable to each of them: we will refer you
to the Tables thereof elsewhere.

(17) This whole Province of Britain, as in our History shall appear, was
highly esteemed of the Emperors themselves, assuming as a glorious surname
Britanicus: coming thither in person over those dangerous and scarce known
Seas; here marrying, living, and dying; enacting here Laws for the whole
Empire, and giving to those Captains that served here, many Ensigns of great
honor; yea Claudius gave Plantius (the first Prefect of that Province) the
right hand, as he accompanied him in his Triumph: and his own Triumph of
Britain was set out with such magnificence, that the Provinces brought in
golden Crowns of great weight, the Governors commanded to attend, and the
very Capt^ines permitted to be present at the same: A Nauall Coronet was fixed
upon apinnacle of his Palace, Arches and Trophies were raised in Rome, and
himself on his aged knees mounted the stairs into the Capitol, supported by
his two sons in Law: so great a joy conceived he in himself for the Conquest
of some small portion of Britain.

(18) How the Romans found it, held it, and left it, as times ripened and
rottened their success, with the Names, the Inhabitants, Manners and
Resisters, I leave to be pursued in the following Histories: and will only now
show thee these three Kingdoms, that are (in present) the chief Bodies of
Great Britains Monarchy; two of which (Scotland and Ireland) shall in their
due places have their farther and more particular Descriptions.

ENGLANDS GENERAL DESCRIPTION. CHAPTER II.
THE Saxons glory now near to expire, by his appointment who holds both
times and Kingdoms in his all ordering hand; their own Swords being the
Instruments, and the Danes the maules that beat their beautiful Diadem into
pieces; the Normans, a stirring Nation, (neither expected, nor much feared)
under the leading of William their Duke, and encouragement of the Roman Bishop
(an usual promoter here of broken titles) made hither suddenly into England,
who in one only battle, with the title of his sword and slaughter or Herold,
set the Imperial Crown thereof upon his own head: which no sooner was done,
but the English went down, and the Normans lording it, became Owners of those
Cities which themselves never built; possessed those Vineyards which they never
planted; drank of those Wells which they never had dug; and inhabitted
those houses, filled with riches, for which they never had labored: for they
found it to be as the land whereupon the Lord set his eye, even from the
beginning to the end of the year: not only drinking water of the rain of
heaven, but having also rivers of waters and fountains in her valleys, and
without all scarsitie, whose stones are iron, and out of whose mountains is
dug brass. This made them more resolute at first to settle themselves in
this fairest and fruitfullest part of the Island; the Conqueror using all
policy both Martial and Civil, to plant his posterity here for ever. How he
found the Land governed we showed in the Heptarchy; but his restless thoughts
were not contented with conquering the Nation and their Land, unless he also
overcame their very Customs, Laws, and Language.

(2) Touching the distribution of the Kingdom, whereas other Kings before him
made use of it, chiefly for the good of the people, and better ministering of
Justice, he made use of it, to know the wealth of his Subjects, and to enrich
his Coffers: for he caused a description to be made of all England, how much
land every one of his Barons possessed, how many Knights fees, how many Plow.
lands, how many in villenage, how many head of beasts, yea how much money every
man from the greatest, to the least did possess, and what rents might be made
of entry man's possession, the Book of which inquisition (yet in the Exchequer)
was called Domesday, for the generality of that Judgment on all the Land:
Whereunto we may add his other distribution of this Land (worse then any
former) when thrusting the English out of their possessions, he distributed
their inheritances to his Soldiers; yet so, that all should be held of the
King, as of the only true Lord and possessor.

(3) For the Laws by which he meant to govern, he held one excellent rule and
purpose, which was, that a People ought to be ruled by Laws written and
certain: for otherwise new Judges would still bring new Judgments: and
therefore he caused twelve to be chosen out of every County, which should on
their oath, without inclining one way or other, neither adding nor detracting,
open unto him all their ancient Laws and Customs. By whose relation
understanding that three sorts of Laws formerly were in the Land, Merchenlage,
West Saxonlage, Danelage; he had preferred these last, (himself and people
being anciently derived from those Northern people) had not all the Barons
bewayling to the King, how grievous it was for a Land to be judged by those
Laws which they understood not, altered his resolute purpose: yet in bringing
in the strange forms of Norman Process, and pleading in the French tongue
(which continued till Edward the thirds time,) that grieuance was but slenderly
prevented. So likewise did he much alter the old Courts of Justice, where these
Laws should be ministered: but whereas the ancient Kings of England, according
to Moses his example, sat in person in the seat of Justice, to right the
greater affairs of their Subjects, as William La^bert shows in King Alfred,
Edgar, Canutus, etc. and proves out of the Kings Oath, out of Bracton,
Britain, Saxon Laws, etc. King William not only continued this; but besides
erected some other Courts of Justice, as the Exchequer, and certain Courts and
Sessions to be held four times every year: appointing both Judges (some to
hear causes, others to whom appeals should be made, but none from them) and
also Prefects to look to good orders. Those last Polydor calls Justices of
Peace; but their institution seems to be far later: and no less is his
error on the other side, in saying the Conqueror first instituted Sheriffs,
and the trial by twelve men, which were both ancienter.

(4) And because the Conqueror, for honor of Bishops, caused them to remove
from small obscure places to Cities of more renown; we have therefore reserved
to this last place that division of this Kingdom, which is according to
Jurisdiction Episcopal. Formerly in the year of salvation, 636 Honorius the
fifth Archbishop of Canterbury, first divided England into Parishes, which at
this day are contained under their several Dio^^sans, and these again under
their two Metropolitanes, (Canterbury and York) in manner following.

CANTERBVRIE.
Bishoprics. Counties, Parishes. Canterbury. Kent. 257. Rochester. 98.
London. Essex. 623. Middlesex. Hertford-shire part. Lincoln. Lincolnshire.
1255. Leichestershire. Huntington. Bedford-shire. Buckingham-shire.
Hertford-shire part. Chichester. Hertford-shire. 250. Suffex. Winchester.
Hant-shire. 362. Surrey. Wight Isle. Gernesey Isle. Iersey Isle. Salisbury.
Wilt-shire. 248. Bark-shire. Exester. (...)-shire. 604. Cornwall. Bath and
Wells. Sommerset-shire. 388. Gloucester. Gloucester-shire. 267. Worcester.
Worcestershire. 241. Lichfield and Couentry. Warwicke-shire. 557.
Warwicke-shire part. Staffordshire. Derby-shire. Shrop-shire part. Hereford.
Shrop-shire part. 313. Hereford-shire. Ely Cambridge-shire. 141. Ely Isle.
Norwich. Norfolk. 1121. Suffolk. Oxford. Oxfordshire. 195. Peterborow.
Northamton. 293. Rutland-shire. Bristow. Dorset-shire. 236. Glamorgan.
Landaffe. Monmouth-shire. 177. Brecknock-shire. Radnor-shire. S. David.
Pembroke-shire. 308. Caermarden. Bangor. Caernaruon-shire. 107. Anglesey Isle.
Merioneth-shire. Denbigh-shire. S. Asaph. Denbigh-shire part. 121. Flint shire
part. YORK. York. Yorke-shire. 581. Nottingham-shire. Chester. Ches^^re. 256.
Richmond-shire. Cumberland part. ^anca-shire. Flint part. Carlisle. Cumberland
part. 93. Westmorland Durham. Durham. 135. Northumberland. Sodor. Man Island.
17. Total Bishoprics. 27. Parishes 9285.

(5) To speak nothing of these twentie-eight Flamins the Priests of Idolatry,
and the three Arch-Flamins, whose seats were at London, Caerlion, and York;
all of them converted by King Lucius into Christian Bishops Sees: let us only
insist upon the three last, by the same King appointed to be Metropolitanes
over the rest; among whom London is said to be chief: whose first Christian
Archbishop was Thean, the builder of S. Peter's Church in Cornehill for his
Cathedral, as by an ancient Table there lately hanging, was affirmed, and
tradition to this day does hold. Our British Historians do bring a succession
of fifteen Archbishops, to have sat from his time unto the coming of the
Saxons, whose last was Vodius, slain by King Vortiger, for reprehending his
heathenish marriage with R^w^n, the Daugher of Hengist. At what time began the
misery of the Land, and of holy Religion, both which they laid wast under their
profane feet: until Ethelbert of Kent, the first Christian Saxon King,
advanced Christainitie, and Augustine to the Arch-bishopricke of Canterbury,
when London under Melitus became subject to that See.

(6) At Caerlion upon Vske, in the time of great Arthur, sat Dubritius, a man
excellently learned, and of an holy conversation: he had sat Bishop of
Landaffe a long time, and with Germanus and Lupus, two French Bishops greatly
impugned the Pelagian Heresy, infecting at that time the Island very far,
whose fame and integrity was such, that he was made Archbishop of all Wales:
but grown very old, he resigned the same unto Dauia his Disciple, a man of
greater birth, but greater austeritie of life, who by consent of King, Arthur,
removed his Archbishops See unto Meneuia, a place very solitary and meet for
meditation: the miracles of the man, (which are said to be many) changed both
the name of the place into his own, and robbed Caerlion of her Archiepiscopall
seat: This See of S David's, (as in an ancient Register belonging to that
Church is recorded) had seven Bishops Suffraganes subject unto it which were
Exceter, Bathe. He eford, Landaffe, Bangor, S. Asaph, and ^e^nes in Ireland:
notwithstanding, either for want of Pall, carried into Britanny by Archbishop
Sam^son, in a dangerous infection of sickness, either by poverty or
negligence, it lost that Jurisdiction, and in the days of King Henry the
first, became subject to the Sea of Canterbury.

(7) York has had better success then either of the former, in retayning her
original honor, though much impaired in her circuit, challenging to have
been some time Metropolitan over all the Bishops in Scotland: and although it
was made equal in honor and power with Canterbury, by Pope Gregory, as Beda
relates; and had twelve Suffragan Bishoprics that owed obedience, only
four now acknowledge York their Metropolitan, but Canterbury the Superior:
for William the Conqueror thinking it dangerous to have two in like
authority, least the one should set on his Crown, and the other strike it
off, left York to be a Primate, but Canterbury only the Prin^^^ of all
England.

(8) The Lichfield was made an Archiepiscopall See by Pope Hadrian the first,
at the suit of Offa, the great King of Mercia, is manifested by Matthew of
Westminster, unto whose Jurisdiction were assigned the Bishoprics of
Winchester, Hereford, Leicester, Sidnacester, Helm^am, and Dunwich, and whose
first and last bishop was Aldwin. That Winchester also had intended an
Archiepiscopall Pall, the same Author records, when Henry Bloys, of the blood
royal, greatly contended with the Arch bishop of Canterbury for superiority,
under the pretense of being Cardinal de latere; to him an Archiepiscopall Pall
was sent, with power and authority over seven Churches, but he dying before
that the design was done, the Sea of Winchester remained in subjection to
Canterbury. And that (long before) the Sea of Dorchester by Oxford, had the
Jurisdiction of an Archbishop, is apparent by those Provinces that were under
his Diocese, which were Winchester, Oxford, Lincoln, Salisbury, B^estow,
Wells, Lichfield, Chester, and Excester; and the first Bishop of this great
circuit, Berinu^, was called the Apostle and Bishop of the West- Saxons: which
in his next successor was divided into two parts, Winchester and Dorchester,
and not long after into Lichfield, Sidnacester, and Legecester; and lastly, the Sea removed from Dorchester to Lincoln, as now it is And thus far for the
division of this Realm, both Politic and Ecclesiasticke, as it has stood
and stands at this day.

(9) But the whole Islands division, by most certain Record was anciently made,
when Julius Agric^la drew a trench or fortification upon that narrow space of
ground betwixt Edenbrough Frith, and Dunbretton Bay, making the Southern part
a Province unto the Roman Empire. Afterward Hadrian the Emperor seeing
perhaps the Province too spacious to be well governed without great expense,
drew back these limits almost fourscore miles shotter, even to the mouth of
the River Tyne, whence he fortified with a wall of admirable work unto
Carlisle, which stood the Lands border, while it stood as a Roman Province: yet
the conquering Saxons did spread again over those bounds, and (as seems)
enlarged their government to that first Tract, as by this inscription in a
Stone Cross, standing upon a Bridge over the water of Frith, appears.

I am a free March as Passengers may ken,
To Scots, to Britains, and to Englishmen.
(10) But afterward William the Conqueror, and Malcolme King of Scotland,
falling to an agreement for their limits, arreared a Cross upon Stanemore,
where on the one side the portraiture and Arms of the King of England was
sculptured, and of the King of Scots on the other (a piece whereof is yet
remaining there near to the Spittle) thence called the Rev-Crosse, there
erected to be a Meare-stone to either Kingdom. His successors also abolished
the two partitions in the West, whereby the Welsh became one Nation and
Kingdom with the English It is also said that King Stephen to purchase
friendship with the Scottish Nation, gave unto their King the County of
Cumberland who with it held both Westmorland and Northumberland; but as
Newbrigensis writes, he restored them to King Henry the second, wisely
considering his great power and right to those parts.

(11) The last known borders were from the Sulway in the West bay, along the
Cheuiot hills, unto the water of Tweed by Barwicke in the East, no maintain
which, on each part many Laws have been made, and many inrodes, robberies,
and fewdes practiced; all which by the hand of God is now cut off, and by the
rightful succession of King JAMES our Sovereign, who has broken down the
partition of this great Island, and made the extremes of two Kingdoms, the
very midst of his great united Empire.

KENT. CHAPTER III.
KENT, the first Province appearing in the South of this Kingdom, is bounded
upon the North with the famous River Thamisis: on the East with the Germane
Ocean: on the South with Sussex and the narrow Seas: and upon the West and
Sussex and Surrey. The length thereof extended from Langley in the West, unto
Ramsgate Eastward in the Isle of Thanet, is about 53. English miles. From
Rother in the South, unto the Isle of Grain Northward, the breadth is not much
above 26. and the whole circumference about 160. miles.

(2) Inform it somewhat resembles the head of a hammer or Battle-axe, and
lies corner-wise into the Sea: by Strabo, Caesar, Diadorus, and Ptolemie,
called Cantium, of Cant or Angle or Corner: either of Caine a British word,
which signifies Bushes or Woods, whereof that County in those former times
was plentifully stored.

(3) The air, though not very clear, because of the vapors arising from the
Sea, and River: that enuiron the same, is both wholesome and temperate, as
seated nearest to the Equino^ticall, and the furthest from the North Pole, not
touched with cold as the other parts of the Land are.

(4) The soil toward the East is uneven, rising into little hills, the West
more level and woody, in all places fruitful, and in plenty equals any other
of the Realm, yea, and in some things has the best esteem: as in
Broad-clothes, Fruits, and feedings for Cattle. Only Mines (except Iron) are
wanting: all things else delivered with a prodigal heart and liberal hand

(5) Sundry nauigable Rivers are in Kent, whereof Medwey, that divides the
shire in the midst, i^ chief; in whose bosom securely rides his Majesty's
Navy Royal, the walls of the Land, and terrors of the Seas; besides ten
others of name and account, that open with twenty Creeks and Havens for Ships
arriuage into this Land, four of them bearing the name of Cinque Po^t^, are
places of great strength and privileges, which are Do^er Sandwich, Rumney, and
Winchelsey: among which Dover with the Castle is accounted by Matthew Paris the
Monk, the lock and key to the whole Realm of England; and by John Rosse and
Lidgate is said to be built by Julius Caesar, fatal only for the death of
King Stephen, and surrender of King John therein happening.

(6) A conceit is, that Goodwin Sands were sunk for the sins of himself and
his sons. Shelues indeed that dangerously lie on the North east of this
County, and are much feared of all Nauigators. These formerly had been firm
ground, but by a sudden inundation of the Sea were swallowed up, as at the
same time a great part of Flanders and the Low Countries were: and the like
also at the same time befell in Scotland, as Hector Boethius their
Historiographer writes A like accident happened in the year 1586 the fourth day
of August, in this County, at Mottingham, a Town eight miles from London,
suddenly the ground began to sink, and three great Elmes thereon growing, were
carried so deep into the bowels of the earth, that no part of (...) could any
more be seen, the hole left in compass fourscore yards about, and a line of
fifty fadomes plummed into it does find no bottom.

(7) The Kentish people in Caesar's time were accounted the ciuillest among the
Britains: and as yet esteem themselves the freest Sub^^cts of the English,
not conquered, but compounded with by the Normans: and herein glory, that their
King and Commons of all the Saxons were the first Christians, converted in Anno
596. yea, and long before that time also Kent received the faith: for it is
recorded that Lucius the first Christian British King in this Island, built a
Church to the name and service of Christ, within the Castle of Dover, endowing
it with the Toll of the same Haven.

(8) This County is enriched with two Cities and Bishops Sees, strengthened
with 27. Castles, graced with 8. of his Majesty's most Princely Houses, traded
with 24. Market-Townes, and beautified with many stately and gorgeous buildings
The chiefest City thereof, the Metropolitan and Arch bishops See, is
Canterbury, built (as our British Historians report) 900. years before the
birth of Christ; by Henry of Huntington, called Caier Kent, wherein (as M.
Lambard says) was erected the first School of professed Arts and Sciences,
and the same a pattern unto Sigibert King of the East Angles, for his
foundation at Cambridge: notwithstanding by the computation of time, this
Sigibert was slain by P^n^a King of Mercia, thirty years before that
Theodore the Grecian was Bishop of Canterbury, who is said to be the ^^ector of
that Academie. But certain it is, that Aust^^ the Monk had made this City
famous before that time, by the conversion of these Saxons unto Christianity,
and in building a most magnificent Church to Gods service, wherein eight of
their Kings have been interred, but all their Monuments since over shadowed by
the height of Beckets Tomb, that for glory, wealth, and superstitious
worships, equalized the Pyramides of A^gypt, or the Oracle of Delphos, yet now
with Dagon is fallen before the Ark of God.

This City has been honored with the presence and Coronations of King John
and Queen Isabell his wife, with the marriages of King Henry the third, and of
King Edward the first, and with the interments of Edward the Bl^^ke Prince,
King Henry the fourth, and of Queen (...) his wife: as Feuersham is with the
burials of King Stephen, and of Maud his Queen and wife But as in glory so in
adversity has this City borne a part, being d^^ers times affl^cted by the
Danes, but most especially in the days of King Eth^red, who in that r^uenge of
their massacre made hauock of all, and herein slew forty three thousand and two
hundred persons, the tenth besides reserved to live. Afterward it recovered
breath and beauty by the liberality of Bishop (...); Charters and (...) by
King Henry the third; strength in Trench and Fortifications from king Richard
the second; and lastly, Walls for her defense by Simon Sudbury Archbishop of
that See: whose Gradu^tion is placed for Latitude 51. 25. and parallelized for
Longitude 22 8. her sister Rochester differing not much in either degree.

(9) Which City (as Beda says) was built by one Rof, Lord of the same, though
some ascribe the foundation of the Castle Julius Caesar, and has been often
ruinated by the injuries of war, both in the times when the Saxons strove for
superiority among themselves, wherein this City was laid waste, Anno 680. as
also in the assaults of their common enemy the Danes, who about the year 884.
from France sailed up the River Medwey, and besieged the same, so that had not
King Elfred speedily come to the rescue, it had been overthrown by those
Pagans. And again in Anno 999. the Danes miserably spoiled this City in the
time of King Ethelred: neither has it stood safe from danger since (though not
defaced so much by war) for twice has it been sore endammaged by chance of
fire: the first was in the reign of King Henry the first, Anno 1130. himself
being present with most of his Nobility, for the consecration of the
Cathedral Church of S. Andrew And again almost wholly consumed about the
latter end of the Reign of King Henry the second, Anno 1177. Yet after all
these calamities it recovered some strength again, by the bounty of King
Henry the third, both in buildings, and in ditching her about for defense.

(10) Civil broils and diffentions has this County been burdened with, and
that not only under the Saxons and Danes, whose desolations were many and
grievous, but also by other rebellions since the Normans Conquest, both in
those infamous insurrections, called The Barons Wars, in the reign of King
Henry the Third, wherein much harm was done: as also under King Richard the
second, when Wat Tiler, Captain of a dreadful commotion, assembled at
Black Heath, Mile end, and in London, doing many outrages, where in Smithfield
he was lastly struck down by William Walworth then Mayor of the City, and
worthily slain for his notorious treasons. Again, upon Black Heath, Michael
Joseph, the Lord Dawbeny, with their Cornish Rebels, were overthrown by King
Henry the seventh, Anno 1497.

(11) Kent in the time of Julius Caesar was governed by four several Kings.
Under V^rtigern the Britain, by a Lieutenant called Gu^^ong, from whom the
said King gave it to Hengist the Saxon, in favor of his Daughter Rowen, who
seeking to make himself absolute King thereof, e^ght years after his first
entrance, fought a victorious battle against the Britains near unto Crayford,
and thenceforth accounted that Province his own. Yet afterward Vortimer the
valiant Britain, gave him battle at Aylesford in the which both Horsa and
Ca^gern, brethren to both the Generals, were sla^ne, and the Saxons driven into
the Isle of Thanet, their first assigned habitation, not daring to enter the
Continent so long as Vortimer lived Cot^ger^ was inter^ed upon that plain,
where to this day remains his Monument, being four stones pitched in manner
of the S^^^henge, and is vulgarly called Citscotchouse The like Monument was of
Horfa at Ho^sted, which storms and time have now devoured. Hengist made this
Province a Kingdom for himself and successors, which name and power it
retained the space of three hundred and twenty years, when Egbert King of the
West Saxons subdued and joined it to his own: in which subjection it stood
until the time of the Normans. Then it was given under the title of an
Earldom by the Conqueror, unto Ot^^ bishop of Baye^x his halfe-brother,
whose succesors in that diginite were those most honorable Families, whose
Arms and Names within this plot are blazed and expressed. It is divided
principally into five Lathes, subdivided into 66. Hundreds, and them again
into 398. Parishes* and wherein had been seated twentie-three Religious
Houses.

SUSSEX. CHAPTER IIII.
SVTH-SEX, a word compounded of the sire th^reof Southward; lies stretched
along the British Seas. The North confronts upon Sur^^y and Kent, and the West
butteth upon Ha^apshire.

(2) For form it lies long and narrow, so that all her R^pes do run quite
through the Shire, and contains from We^^harting in the West, to Kent-ditch
that diuides it from Kent in the East, sixty four miles, but in the broadest
part little above twenty, the whole in circumference about one hundred fifty
eight miles.

(3) The air is good, though somewhat clouded with wists, which arise forth of
her South bordering Sea, who is very prodigal unto her for Fish and Sea-sowle,
though as sparing for Harbors or Ships ariuage, and those which she has, as
uncertain for continuance, as dangerous for entrance.

(4) Rich is the Soil and yields greatplentie of all things necessary, but
very ill for travelers, especially in the winter, the Land lying low and the
ways very deep, whose middle tract is garnished with meadows, pastures, and
Cornfieldsd: the Seacoast with Hills which are called the Downs, abundantly
yielding both Graint and Grass, and the North side ouershadowed with pleasant
Groves and thick Woods, where sometimes stood the famous wood Andradswald,
containing no less then an hundred and twenty miles in length, and thirty in
breadth, taking the name of Anderida a City adjoining: both which were won
from the Britains by Llla the first Saxon King of this Province, and the place
made fatal to Sigebert King of the West Saxons, who being deposed from his
Royal Throne, was met in this Wood by a Swine-heard, and slain in revenge of
his Lord, whom Sigebert had murdered.

(5) The ancient people in the Romans time were the Regni, of whom we have
spoken, and who were subdued by Vespasian the Leader of the second Legion under
A^lus Plautius, Liceutenant in Britain for Claudius the Emperor. But after
the departure of the Romans, this, with Surrey was made the South Saxons
Kingdom: yet that giving place to the West Saxons, as they in time to the
Normans, it became a Province under the Conquerours power, who gave to his
followers much Land in these parts*

(6) The place of most account in this Shire is Chichester, by the Britains
called Caercei, a City beautiful and large, and very well walled about, first
built by Cissa the second King of the South Saxons, wherein his Royal palace
was kept. And when King William the First had enacted that Bishops Seas should
be translated out of small Towns unto places of greater resort, the Residence
of the Bishop (until then held at Selsey) was removed to this City, where
Bishop Raulfe began a most goodly Cathedral Church: but before it was fully
finished, by a sudden mischance of fire was quite consumed. Yet the same
Bishop, with the helping liberality of King Henry the First, began it again,
and saw it wholly finished; whose beauty and greatness her fatal enemy still
envying, again cast down in the days of King Richard the First, and by her
raging flames consumed the buildings both of it and the Bishops Palace
adjoining, which Seffrid the second Bishop of that name reedified and built a
new. And now to augment the honor of this place, the City has borne the
Title of an Earldom; whereof they of Arundell were sometimes so styled. Whose
Gradustion for Latitude, is removed from the Equator unto the degree fifty,
fifty five minutes; and for Longitude, observing the same point in the West,
whence Mercator has measured, are twenty degrees.

(7) With whom for frequencie, bigness, and building, the Town Jews seems
to contend, where King Athelstan appointed the mintage of his Moneys, and
William de Warron built a strong Castle, whereunto the disloyal Barons of King
Henry the Third in warlike manner resorted, and fought a great Battle against
their own Sovereign and his son, wherein the King had his Horse slain
under him, Richard, King of the Romans surprised and taken in a Windmill, and
Prince Edward delivered unto them upon unequal conditions of peace. But a
greater Battle was fought at Battle, when the hazard of England was tried in
one days fight, and Harold the King gave place to his Conqueror by losing of
his life, among sixty seven thousand nine hundred seuentie-foure English men
besides; whose blood so spilt, gave name to the place, in French, Sangue lac.
And the soil naturally after rain becoming of a reddish color, caused
William of Newbery untruly to write, That if there fell any small sweet
showers in the place where so great a slaughter of the Englishmen was made,
presently sweateth forth very fresh blood out of the earth, as if the evidence
thereof did plainly declare the va^ce of blood there shed, and cried still from
the earth unto the Lord.

(8) But places of other note in this Shire are these: from Basham, Earl
Harold taking the Sea for his delight, in a small Boat, was driven upon the
Coast of Normandy, where by Duke William he was retained, till he had sworn
to make him King after Edward Confessors death; which oath being broken, the
Bastard arrived at Pensey, and with his sword revenged that Perjury at
West-Wittering also Ella the Saxon before him had landed for the conquering of
those parts and gave name to the shore from Cimen his son. But with greater
glory does Gromebridge raise up her head, where Charles Duke of Orleaunce,
father to Jews the twelfth, King of France, taken prisoner at Agincourt, was
there a long time detained.

(9) The commodities of this Province are many and diverse, both in Corn,
Cattle, Woods, Iron, and Glass; which two last, as they bring great gain to
their possessors, so do they impouerish the County of Woods, whose want will
be found in ages to come, if not at this present in some sort felt.

(10) Great have been the devotions of religious Persons in building and
consecrating many houses unto the use and only service of Christ; whose
Beadmen abusing the intents of their Founders, has caused those Foundations to
lament their own ruins: for in the tempestuous time of King Henry the Eight,
eighteen of them in this County were blown down, whose fruit iell into the
^appes of some that never meant to restore them again to the like use.

This County is principally divided into six Rapes, every of them containing
a River, a Castle, and Forest in themselves, besides the several Hundreds
whereunto they are parted, that is, the Rape of Chichester into seven, of
Arundell into five, of Bramber into ten, of Jews into thirteen, of Peuensey
into seventeen, and of Hastings into thirteen, in all fifty six; wherein
are seated ten Castles, eighteen Market-Townes, and three hundred and twelve
Parish-Churches.

SVRREY. CHAPTER V.
SVRREY, by Beda called Suthri, lies separated upon the North from the
Counties of ^^^kingham and Mia^lesex, by the great River Tha^^s^s; upon the
East Kent does inbound it; upon the South is held in with Sussex and Hampshire:
and her West part is bordered upon by Hamp-shire and Bark-shire.

(2) The form thereof is somewhat square, and lies by Northand by East,
whereof Redrith and Frensham are the opposites, betwixt whom are extended
thirtie-foure miles. The broadest part is from Awfold Southward, to Thamisis by
Stanes, and them asunder twenty two: the whole in circumference is one hundred
and twelve miles.

(3) The Heavens breathing air in this Shire is most sweet and delectable, so
that for the same cause many royal Palaces of our Princes are therein seated,
and the Country better stored with game then with grain, insomuch that this
County is by some men compared unto a home-spunne freeze cloth, with a costly
fair lift, for that the out-verge does exceed the middle itself. And yet is
it wealthy enough both in Corn and Pasturage, especially in H^^esdale, and
toward the River of Thamisis.

(4) In this Shire the Regni (an ancient people mentioned by Ptolemie) were
seated, whom he brancheth further through Sussex and some part of Hamp-shire And
in the wane of the Romans government, when the Land was left to the will of
Inuaders, the South Saxons under Ella here erected their Kingdom, which with
the first was raised, and soonest found end. From them no doubt the Courtie was
named Suth-rey, as seated upon the South of the River; and now by contraction
is called Surrey.

(5) And albeit the County is barren of Cities or Towns of great estate, yet
is she stored with many Princely Houses, yea and five of his Majesty's, so
magnificently built, that of some she may well say, no Shire has none such, as
is Nonesuch indeed. And were not Richmond a fatal place of Englands best
Princes, it might in esteem be ranked with the richest: for therein died the
great Conqueror of France, King Edward the Third, the beautiful Anne daughter
to Charles the Fourth, Emperor, and entirely beloved wife to King Richard the
Second; the most wise Prince King Henry the Seventh, and the rarest of her
Sex, the Mirror of Princes, Queen Elizabeth, the worlds love, and Subjects
joy.

(6) At Merton likewise Kenulph King of the West Saxons came to his untimely
end: and at Lambeth the hardre Canute, and last of the Danish Kings, died among
his Cups But as these places were fatal for the last breath of these
Princes, so other in this County have been graced with the body and beginning
of other worthy Monarkes: for in Cherts^y Abbey King Henry the Sixth, who was
deposed and made away in the Tower of London, was first interred without all
funeral pomp, but for his holy life was imputed a Saint, and lastly
translated, and intombed at Windsore. At Kingston likewise stood the Chair of
Maiestic, wherein Athelstan, Edwin, and Ethelred sat at their Coronation, and
first received their Seepter of Imperial Power Guildfor^ likewise has been
far greater then now it is, when the Place of our English-Saxon King^ was
therein set. And seeing it is the midst of the Shire, the Graduation from hence
shall be observed, where for Latitude the Pole is raised from the degree 51.
22. scruples: and her Longitude from the West in the degree 20. and 2. scruples.

(7) Neither can we account Okam and Ripley, two small Villages, the least in
this Shire, which have brought forth the well known men, William de Okam, that
deep Philosopher, and admirable Scholar, and George de Ripley, the rung leader
of our Alchymists and mystical impostors; both of them borne in this County,
and very near together. But why speak I of these, since a place nearer to
sight, and greater for fame, even Lambeth, is the High Seat of Ecclesiastical
Government, Piety, and Learning, and Palace of Canterburies Archbishops, the
Metropolitan^ of England. First erected by Archbishop Daldwin, and ever since
has been the residing of all those worthy Prelates of our Church, who in a
long succession (even from Anno 596) have continued to him that now most
worthily sits at the Churches stern, Richard by Gods providence Lord
Archbishop of that See, a most faithful and prudent Counselor unto King
JAMES, and a most learned and provident Guide of our most flourishing Church:
whose gracious favor undeservedly conferred upon me, has been a great
encouragement to these my poor endeavors.

(8) Memorable places for Battles sought before the Conquest, were Wembledon,
where (when the fullness of prosperity burst forth into Civil Dissensions
among the Saxons) a bloody Battle was fought betwixt Cheau^in the West Saxon
and young Ethelbert of Kent, wherein he was discomfited, and two of his
principal Leaders slain, about the year of Christ 560. and three hundred
thirty three years after, King Elfred with a small power overcame the Danes
with a great slaughter at Faruham in this County, which somewhat quelled the
courage of his savage enemy.

(9) Religious Houses erected in this Shire by the devotion of Princes, and set
apart ffom public uses to Gods Divine Service, and their own Salvation, as
then was taught, the best in account were Sbene, Chertsey, Merton, Newarke,
Rygate, Wauerley, Horsleg; and in Southwarke, Bermundsey, and S. Mary's. These
all flourished with increase, till the ripe^esse of their fruit was so pleasing
in sight and taste unto King HENRY the Eight, that in beating the boughs he
brake down body and all, ruinating those houses, and seazing their rich
possessions into his own hands. So jealous is GOD of his honor; and so great
vengeance follows the sin of Idolatry.

(10) In this Shire have stood eight fair and strong Castles: such were (...),
Darking, Starburg, Rygate, Guilford, Fara^am, Goseford, and Brenchingley: but
of greater State are Oking, O^lands, Non-such, and Richmond, his Majesty's
royal Manors. And for service to the Crown or Commonwealths employments,
this Counties division is into thirteen Hundreds, wherein are seated eight
Market-Townes, and one hundred and forty Parish-Churches.

HANT-SHIRE. CHAPTER VI.
HANT-SHIRE, lying upon the West of England, Is bordered upon the North by
Barkshire, upon the East with Surrey and Sussex, upon the South with the
British Seas, and I Will of Wight, and upon the West with Dorset and Wilt-shires.

(2) The length thereof from Blackwater in the North upon Surrey, unto Bascomb
in the South upon the Sea, extended in a right line, is fifty four English
miles: and the breadth drawn from Peters-field in the East, unto Tidworth in
the West, and confines of Wilt-shire, is little less then thirty miles, the
whole Circumference about one hundred fifty and five miles.

(3) The Air is temperate, though somewhat thick by reason of the Seas, and
the many Rivers that through the Shire do fall, whose plenty of fish and
fruitful increase, do manifoldly redeem the harms which they make.

(4) The Soil is rich for Corn and Cattle, pleasant for pasturage, and
plenteous for woods; in a word, in all commodities either for Sea or Land,
blessed and happy.

(5) Havens it has, and those commodious both to let in, and to loose out
Ships of great burden in trade of Merchandise, or other employments: whereof
Portsmouth, Tichfield, Hamble, and South-hampton are chief: besides many other
creeks that open their bosoms into those Seas, and the Coast strengthened with
many strong Castles, such as Hurst, Calshot, South-hampton, S. Andrews, Worth,
Porchester, and the South Castle, besides other Bulwarks, or Blockhouses that
secure the Country: and further in the Land, as Malwood, Winchester, and Odiam,
so strong, that in the time of King John, thirteen Englishmen only defended
the Fort for fifteen days against Lewis of France, that with a great Host
assaulted it most hotly.

(6) Anciently it was possessed upon the North by the Segontians, who yielded
themselves to Julius Caesar, and whose chief City was Vindonum, Caer Segonte,
now Silcester; and upon the South by the Belga, and Regni, who were subdued by
Plausius and Vespasian the Romans, where Titus rescuing his Father, straightly
besieged by the Britains, as Dio and Forcatulus do report, was grasped about
with an Adder, but no hurt to his person, and therefore taken for a sign of
good luck. Their chief Town was Rincewood, as yet sounding the name: and
more within Land inhabited the Manures, as Beda calls them, whose Hundreds also
to this day give a relish of their names.

(7) Near Ringwood, and the place once Y^EN^, from God and peoples service, to
Beast and luxury, thirtie-sixe Parish-Churches were converted and pulled down
by the Conqueror, and thirty miles of circuit inforrested for his game of
Hunting, wherein his sons Richard and Rufus, with Henry the second son to
Duke Robert, his first, felt by hasty death the hand of Justice and Revenge:
for in the same Forest, Richard by blasting of a pestilent air, Rufus by shot
taken for a beast, and Henry as Absalom hanged by a bough, came to their
untimely ends At so dear a rate the pleasures of dogs, and harbor for beasts
were bought in the blood of these Princes.

(8) The general commodities gotten in this Shire, are Woolls, Clothes, and
Iron, whereof great store is therein wrought from the Mines, and thence
transported into all parts of this Realm, and their Clothes and Karsies
carried into many foreign Countries, to that Countries great benefit, and
Englands great praise.

(9) The Trade thereof, with other provisions for the whole, are vented through
eighteen Market-Townes in this Shire, whereof Winchester, the Britains Caer
Gwent, the Romans Venta Belgarum, is chief, ancient enough by our British
Historians, as built by King Rudhudibras, nine hundred years before the
Nativity of Christ: and famous in the Romans times for the weauings and
embroderies therein wrought, to the peculiar uses of their Emperors own
persons. In the Saxons time, after two Calamities of consuming fire, her walls
was raised, and the City made the Royal Seat of their West Saxons Kings, and
the Metropolitan of their Bishops See, wherein Egbert and (...) their most
famous Monarchs were Crowned: and Henry the third, the Normans longest (...),
first took breath: And here King Aethelstane erected six houses for his Mint^
but the Danish desolution ouer-running all, this City felt their fury in the
days of King Ethelbright, and in the Normans time, twice was defaced by the
misfortune of fire, which they again repaired and graced with the trust of
keeping the public Records of the Realm. In the civil wars of Maud and
Stephen, this City was sore sacked, but again receiving breath, was by King
Edward the third appointed the place for Mart of Wool and Cloth. The
Cathedral Church built by Kenwolf King of the West Saxons, that had been
Amphibalus, S. Peter's, Swithins, and now holy Trinity, is the Sanctuary for
the ashes of many English Kings: for herein great Egbert, Anno 836. with his
son King Ethelwolfe, 857. Here Elfred, Oxfords founder, 901 with his Queen
Elswith, 904. Here the first Edmund before the Conquest, 924. with his sons
Elfred and Elsward: Here Edred, 955. and Edwy, 956 both Kings of England: Here
Emme, 1052. with her Danish Lord Canute, 1035. and his son Hardicanute, 1042.
And here lastly the Normans, Richard and Rufus, 1100. were interred; their
bones by Bishop Fox were gathered and shrined in little guilt coffers fixed
upon a wall in the Quire, where still they remain carefully preserved.

This Cities situation is fruitful and pleasant, in a valley under hills, having
her River on the East, and Castle on the West, the circuit of whose walls are
well near two English miles, containing one thousand eight hundred and eighty
paces; through which opens six gates for entrance, and therein are seven
Churches for divine Service, besides the Minister, and those decayed; such as
Callender, ^uell Chapel, S. Mary's Abbey, and the Friars, without in the
Suburbs, and Soo^^; in the East is S. Peter's, and in the North Hyde Church and
Monastery, whose ruins remaining, show the beauty that formerly it bare. The
Graduation of this City by the Mathematickes, is placed for Latitude in the
degree 51. 10. minutes, and for Longitude 19. 3. minutes.

(10) More South, is South-hampton, a Town populous, rich and beautiful, from
whom the whole Shire deriueth her name, most strongly walled about with square
stone, containing in circuit, one thousand and two hundred paces, having seven
Gates for entrance, and twentie-nine Towers for defense, two very stately Keys
for Ships arriuage, and five fair Churches for Gods divine service, besides an
Hospital, called G^ds house, wherein the unfortunate Richard, Earl of
Cambridge, beheaded for treason, lies interred. On the West of this Town is
mounted a most beautiful Castle, in form Circular, and wall within wall, the
foundation upon a hill so topped, that it cannot be ascended but by stairs,
carrying a goodly prospect both by Land and Sea, and in the East without the
walls a goodly Church sometimes stood, called S Mary's, which was pulled
down, for that it gave the French direction of course, who with fire had
greatly endangered the Town: in stead thereof, is newly erected a small and
unfinished Chapel. In this place, says learned Cambden, stood the ancient
Clausentium, or fort of the Romans, whose circuit on that side extended it
self to the Sea: this suffered many depredations by the Saxon Pirates, and in
Anno 980. was by the Danes almost quite overthrown. In King Edward the thirds
time, it was fired by the French, under the Conduct of the King of Sicils
son, whom a Country man encountered and struck down with his Club, He crying
Rancon, that is, Ransom: but he neither understanding his language, nor the
Law that Arms does allow, laid on more soundly, saying: I know thee a Frankon,
and therefore shall thou dit: and in Richard the seconds time it was somewhat
removed, and built in the place where now it stands In this Clausentium,
Canute to euict his flatterers, made trial of his Deity, commanding the Seas
to keep back from his seat: but being not obeyed, he acknowledged God to be
the only supreme Governor, and in a religious devotion gave up his Crown to
the Rood at Winchester. More ancient was Silcester, built by Constantius, great
Constantines son, whose Monument (they say) was seen in that City, and
where another Constantine put on the purple roabe against Hono^^^, as both
Ni^ius and Geruase of Canterbury do witness. Herein by our Historians record,
the warlike Arthur was Crowned. Whose greatness for circuit contained no less
then fourscore Acres of ground, and the walls of great height, yet standing
two miles in compass about. This City by the Danish Rouers suffered such
wrack, that her mounted tops were never since seen, and her Hulke (the walls)
in mured to the middle in the earth, which the rubbish of her own desolations
has filled.

(11) Chief Religious houses within this County erected and again suppressed
were these, Christs-Church, Beautieu, Whorwell, Rumsey, Redbridge, Winchester,
Hyde, South-hampton, and Tichfield. The honor of this Shire is dignified with
the high Titles of Marquis, and them Earls of Winchester and South-hampton;
whose Arms of Families are as thou see^t, and her division into thirty seven
Hundreds, and those again into two hundred fifty three Parishes.

VVIGHT ISLAND. CHAPTER VII.
VVIGHT ISLAND was in times past named by the Romans Vecta, Vectis, and
Vectesis, by the Britains, Guyth, and in these days usually called by us, The
I Will of Wight. It belongs to the Country of South-hampton, and lies out in
length over against the midst of it Southward. It is encompassed round with
the British. Seas, and severed from the Maine land. that it may seem to have
been conjoined to it, and thereof it is thought the British name (Guyth) has
been given unto it, which betokens separation, even as (...) being broken
off and cut from Italy, got the name from Secando (which signifies cutting.)

(2) The form of this Isle is long, and in the midst far more wide then at
either end: from (...) I Will in the (...), to (...) Castle in the West it
stretches out in length 20. miles, and in (...) Northward, to (...) Southward
12. miles. The whole in circumference (...).

(3) The ay^e is commended both for health and delight, whereof the first is
witnessed by the (...) continuance of the Inhabitants in the state of then
bodies before they be decayed, and the other for quantity gives place to no
neighboring Country.

(4) The ground (to say nothing of the Sea, which is exceeding full of fish)
consists of soil very fruitful; yet the husbandmans labor deserves to be
thankfully remembered, by whose pains and industry it does not only supply it
self, but affords ^orne to be carried forth to others. The ^and is plenteously
stored with Cattle and Grain, and breeds every where store of Conies, Hares,
Patridges and Phesants, pleasant for meadow, pasturage, and Parkes; so that
nothing is wanting that may suffice man. The midst yields plenty of pasture;
and forage for Sheep; whose wool the Clothiers esteem the best; next unto
that of Leinster and Cotteswold: If you cast your eyes toward the North, it is
all over garnished with Meadows, Pastures, and Woods: If toward the South
side, it lies (in a manner) wholly bedecked with Cornefields enclosed, where at
each end the Sea does so incroach^t self. that it makes almost two Islands
besides, namely, Freshwater Isle, which looks to the West, and B^nbridge isle
answering it to the East.

(5) The Commodities of the whole chiefly consist of Cattle, Sea foul, Fish,
and Corn, whereof it has sufficient: Woods are not here very plentiful; for
that it is only stored with one little Forest; yet the Country of Hamshire
for vicinitie of Site, is a friendly neighbor in that behalf; so (as it were
being tied together in affinity) they are always ready, and propense to add
to each others wants and defects by a mutual supply.

(6) The ancient Inhabitants of this Island were the Belga, spoken of in the
several Provinces of S^merset-shire, Wilt-shire, and Hamshire. Such as did
then possess it were called Lords of the Isle of wight, till it fell into the
Kings hands, by R^ger (Son to William Fits Osburne, slain in the war of
Flanders) that was driven into exile. And Henry the first King of England gave
it unto Richard Riduers, with the sea or Inheritance of the Town of
Christs-Church, where (at in all other places) he built certain Fortrestes.

(7) The principal Market-Towne in the Isle is Newport, called in times past
Medena, and Novus Burgus de Meden; that is, the new Burgh of Meden, whereof the
whole Country is divided into East- Meden, and West Meden. A Town well
seated, and much frequented; unto whose Burgesles his Majesty has lately
granted the choice of a Major, who with his Brethren, do govern accordingly.
It is populous with Inhabitants, having an entrance into the Isle from the
Haven, and a passage for Vessels of small burden unto the Key. Not far from
it is the Castle Caresbrooke, whose founder is said to have been Whitgar the
Saxon, and from him called White-Garesburgh: but now made shorter for easier
pronunciation; the graduation whereof for Latitude is in the degree 50. 36.
minutes: and her Longitude in 19. 4. minutes, where, formerly has stood a
Priory, and at Quarre a Nunnery; a necessary neighbor to those Penitentiaries.
And yet in their merry mood, the Inhabitants of this Island do boast, that they
were happier then their neighbor Countries, for that they never had Monk that
ever wore hood, Lawyers that cauilled, nor Foxes that were crafty.

(8) It is reported, that in the year of man's salvation, 1176. and
twentie-three of King Henry the second, that in this Island it rained a shower
of blood, which continued for the space of 2 hours together to the great
wonder and amazement of the people that beheld it with fear.

(9) This Isle of Wight is fortified both by Art and Nature: for besides the
strength of Artificial Forts and Blocke-houses (wherewith it is well
furnished) it wants not the assistance of natural Fences, as being enriched
with a continual ridge and range of craggy Cliffes and Rocks, and Banks very
dangerous for Sailors, as the Needles, so called by reason of their sharpness:
The Shingles, Mixon, Brambles, etc.

(10) Vespasian was the first that brought it to the subjection of the
Romaenes, whilst he served as a private person under Claudius Caesar. And
Cerdic was the first English Saxon that subdued it, who granting it unto S^uffe
and Whitgar, they jointly together slew (almost) all the British Inhabitants
(being but few of them, there remaining) in the Town aforesaid, called of his
Name Whitgaresburgh. Wolpher King of the Merciam reduced this Island afterward
under his obedience, and at that time when he became Godfather to Edelwalch
King of the South Saxons, and answered for him at his Baptism; he assigned it
over unto him, with the Province also of the Menuari. But when Edelwalch was
slain, and Aruandus the petty King of the Island was made away, Coedwalla King
of the West Saxons annexed it to his Dominion, and in a tragical and
lamentable Massacre put to the sword (almost) every mothers child of the
in-borne Inhabitants.

The thing that is best worthy note and observation is this, That Bishop
Wilfrid was the first that instructed the Inhabitants of this Island in
Christian Religion, and brought them from Idolatrous Superstition, with the
which (unto that time) they were obscurely blinded.

For Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, this Country belongs to the Bishop of
Winchester, and for Civil government to the County of South-hampton. It is
fortified with the strength of six Castles, traded with three Market-Townes,
and has 36. Parish-Churches planted in it.

DORCESTER-SHIRE. CHAPTER VIII.
DORCESTER, from her ancient people DVROTRIGES, is most likely to have received
that name: by the Britains called DVVRGVVEIR, lies bounded upon the
North-side with Somerset and W^lt-shire; upon the West with D^^^shire, and some
part with Somerset; upon the East altogether with Hampshire: and her South part
is wholly bounded with the British Seas.

(2) The form grows wider from the West, and spreads her self the broadest
in the midst, where it extends to twentie-foure miles, but in length is no
less then fortie-foure: the whole in Circumference about, is one hundred and
fifty miles.

(3) The air is good, and of an healthful constitution: the soil is fat,
affording many commodities, and the Country most pleasant in her situation:
for the Inland is watered with many sweet and fresh running Springs, which
taking passage through the plain Valleys, do lastly in a loving manner unite
themselves together, and of their many branches make many big bodied
streams: neither does the Sea deny them entrance, but helps rather to fill
up their Banks, whereby Vessels of burden discharge their rich Treasures, and
her self with open hand distributeth her gifts all along the South of this
Shore.

(4) Anciently it was possessed by the Durotriges, whom Ptolemie places along in
this Tract, who being subdued by the Romans, yielded them room, and unwilling
subjection. After them the Saxons set foot in these parts, whereof Portland
seems from that Port to take name, who in this place arrived in Anno 703. and
did sorely infest and annoy all the South Tract. And at Bindon before him
Kinegillus King of the West Saxons, in the year of Christ 614. in a doubtful
and dangerous Battle vanquished the Britains Neither were the Saxons so surely
herein seated, but that the Danes sought to defeat them thereof: for twice
these bold Rouers landed at Chartmouth, the first was in Anno 831. and reign
of King Egbert; and the other eight years after, when Ethelwulfe was King: in
both which they went away Victors. Yet when the Iron-side wore the English
Diadem, and these fierce people sought to pluck it from his Helmet, he met
them at Pen ham in Gillingham Forest, and with a small power obtained a great
victory, causing their King Canute with discourage to retire.

(5) Commodities arising in this County are chiefly Wools and Woods in her
North, where the Forests are stored with the one, and the pleasant green
Hills with the other. The inner part is ouer-spread both with Corn and
Grass, and the Sea yields the Isidis Plocamos, a Shrub growing not unlike
the Corrall without any leaf; besides her other gifts, turning all to great
gain: which the more is made manifest by the many Market. Towns in this
Shire, whereof Dorchester is the chief, in Antonius his (...) termed
Durnouaria, situated upon the South side of From, and the (...) called
^osse-way, wherein some of their L^gions kept, a, by the Rampires and Coins
there daily dug up is probably coniectured; at which time it seems the
City was walled, whereof some part yet stands, especially upon the West and
South sides, and the Tract and Trench most apparent in a Quadrant-wise almost
meets the River, containing in circuit one thousand and seven hundred pases,
but were cast down by the Danes, whose tran^pling feet destroyed all things
wheresoever they came, and hands here razed the Trenches Mandbury and
Poundbury, theseales of their Siege, and signs of times misery. About three
hundred pases Southward from hence, stands an old Fortification of Earth,
trenched about, and mounted above the ordinary plain, thirty pases,
containing some five Acres of ground; wherein (at my there-being) plenty of
Corn grew. This the Inhabitants call The Maiden-Castle, having entrance
thereunto only upon the East and West This is thought to have been a
Summer-Campe or Station of the Romans, when their Garrisons kept the Frontiers
of this Province.

The government of this City is yearly committed to two Bailiffes, elected out
of eight Magistrates or Aldermen, a Recorder, Towr^-Clerke, and two Sergeants
attending them: whence the North Pole is elevated 50. degrees 48. minutes in
Latitude, and for Longitude is removed from the first West-point unto the
Meridian of 18. degrees.

(6) Other places also are memorable through the actions therein happening, or
antiquities there yet remaining: such is Badbury, now nothing but a Trench and
decayed Castle, hardly seen, though sometimes it was the Court of the
West Saxons Kings. Such also is Cerne, where Augustine the English Apostle
brake down the Altars and Idols of the Saxons God HELL, whom they devoutly
honored as the only conseruer of their health. Shaftesbury also, wherein one
Aquila (whether a Man or Eagle I know not) by our Historians report, is said to
have prophesied the future times of this our Empire, and that after the reigns
of the Saxons and Norman* it should again return unto the government of the
British Kings. But with such vain predictions our Nation is more then once
taxed by Philip(...) the famous French Writer. In this City Edward the son
of great Edgar, and one and thirtieth Monarch of the Englishmen, was interred,
being murdered at Corfe, a Castle seated in the I Will of Purbeck, by his
Stepmother Aelfrith, to make way for her son to enjoy his Crown: in
repentance whereof, and to pacify Heaven for his blood, she built the
Monasteries of Ambresbury and Whorwell, in the County of Wilt-shire and
South-Hamton. In the former of which with great penitency she spent the rest of
her life.

(7) As upon the like occasion the Monastery of Middleton was laid in this
Shire by King Ethelstan to appease the Ghost of Edwine his innocent brother,
and to expiate the sin of his own soul for the blood of that just Prince,
whom most unjustly he caused to die: and with the like devotion, though not to
satisfy for the like blo^die sins* did Queen Cuthbarga sue a Divorce from
her second husband the Northumberlands King, and it Winburne built her a
Nunnery, whereof her self bec^me Abbess, where afterward was raised a most
stately Minster, which added not only more glory to the place, but withal
enlarged the name, and made it to be called Wimburn-minster, where King
Ethel^^^. a most virtuous Prince, after much disqu^^^nesse had with the Danes,
in peace here rests, with his Tomb and Inscription, as in his History
(Christ assisting) shall be further seen. Neither among these may I omit
Sherburne, which in the year of grace 704. was made a Bishops See, in whose
Cathedral Church were interred the bodies of Ethelbald and Ethelbert,
brethren, both of them Monarkes of the Englishmen.

(8) Seven more besides these were set apart from worldly employments,
consecrated only to God and his service in this Shire; which were Camestern,
Cranborn, Ab^ottesbury, Bindon, Sturmister, Tarrant, and Warham These with the
others came to their full period under the hand of King Henry the Eight, which
lay with such weight upon their fai^e buildings, that he crushed the juice
thereof into his own Coffers.

(9) Castles for defense in repair and decayed, were at Sherburne, Dorchester,
Branksey, Portland, Corfe, Newton, Woodford. and Wareham. So that with these
and others the County has been strengthened with twelve Religious Houses,
their poor relieved, with eighteen Market-Townes at this day is traded, and
principally into five divisions parted, subdivided into thirtie-foure Hundreds,
and them again into two hundred fortie-eight Parishes.

DEVON-SHIRE. CHAPTER IX.
DEVON-SHIRE, by the Cornish Britains called Deuinan; and by contraction of
the vulgar Denshire, is not derived from the Danes, as some would have it, but
from the people Danmonij, the same we will speak of in Cornwall, and whom
Ptolemie has seated in these Western Borders.

(2) The West of this County is bounded altogether by the River Tamar: the East
is held in with the verge of Somersetshire: and the North and South sides are
washed wholly with the British and Severne Seas: Betwixt whose shoares from
Cunshere in the North, unto Salcombe Haven entering in at the South, are fifty
five miles: and from the Hartland Point West, to Thorncombe East, are fifty
four: the whole Circumference about two hundred and two miles.

(3) The Air is sharp, healthful and good: the Soil is hilly, woody and
fruitful, yet so as the hand of the Manurer must never be idle, nor the purse
of the Farmer never fast shut, especially of them that are far from the Sea,
whence they fetch a sand with charge and much travel, which being spread upon
the face of the earth, bettereth the leanness thereof for grain, and gives
life to the Glebe with great efficacy.

(4) As Cornwall, so this has the same commodities that arise from the Seas:
and being more inlanded has more commodious Havens for Sh^ppings intercourse,
among whom Totnes is famous for Brutes first entrance, if Geffry say true, or
if Hau^llan the Poet took not a Poetical liberty, when speaking of Brute, he
wrote thus: The Gods did guide his sail and course: the winds were at command:
And Totnes was the happy shore where first he came on land.
But with more credit and lamentable event, the Danes at Teigne-mouth first
entered for the invasion of this Land, about the year of Christ 787. unto whom
Brightrik King of the West Saxons sent the Steward of his house to know their
intents, whom resistantly they slew: yet were they forced back to their Ships
by the Inhabitants, though long they stayed not, but eagerly pursued their
begun enterprises*

With more happy success has Plymouth set forth the purchasers of same, and
stopped the entrance of Englands Inuaders, as in the Reign of that eternized
Queen, the mirror of Princes, Elizabeth of everlasting memory: for from this
Port Sir Francis Drake, that potent man at Sea, setting forth Anno 1577 in the
space of two years and ten months did compass the circle of the earth by
Sea. And the Lord Charles Howard, Englands high Admiral, did not only from
hence impeach the entrance of the proud invincible Spanish Navy, intending
invasion and subversion of State, but with his Bullets so signed their passage;
that their sides did well show in whose hands they had been, as seals of
their own shame, and his high honor.

(5) The commodities of this Shire consist much in Wools and Clothings, where
the best and finest Kersies are made in the Land Corn is most plenteous in the
fruitful Valleys, and Cattle spreading upon the topped Hills; Sea Fish and
Foul exceedingly abundant. Veins of Lead, yea and some of Silver in this
Shire are found: and the Lodestone (not the least for use and esteem) from
the Rocks upon Dart-more has been taken Many fresh Springs do bubble from
the Hills in this Province, which with a longing desire of Socretie search out
their passage, till they meet and conjoyne in the Valleys, and gathering still
strength with more branches, lastly grow bodyed able to bear Ships into the
Land, and to lodge them of great burden in their Bosoms or Falls: whereof
Tamar, Taue, and Ex are the fairest and most commodious*

(6) Upon which last the chief City and Shire-Towne of this County is
seated, and from that River has her name Excester: this City by Ptolemie is
called Is^a; by the (...) Emperor, Is^a Danmoniorum; and by the We so (...).
It is pleasantly seated upon the gentle ^scent of an hill, so stately for
building, so rich with (...) strangers, that a man can desire nothing but
(...). The walls of this City first built by King (...) but toward the Ex
rangeth almost in a straight line having six Gates for entrance, and many (...)
betwixt, whose compass contains about fifteen hundred paces: upon the East
part of this City stands a Castle called Rugemont, sometimes the Palace of
the West Saxon Kings, and after them of the Earls of Cornwall, whose prospect
is pleasant unto the (...) magnificent Cathedral Church, founded by King
Athelstan also, in the honor of S. Peter, and by Edward the Confessor made the
Bishops See, which the removed from (...) in this County unto the City of
Excester (as says the private History of that place:) whose ^^^apidations the
reverend Father in God William now Bishop of the Diocese with great cost has
repaired; whom I may not name without a most thankful remembrance for the
great benefits received by his careful providence toward me and mine. This
City was so strong and so well stored of Britains, that they held out against
the Saxons for 465. years after their first entrance, and was not absolutely
(...) until Athelstan became Monarch of the whole, who then peopled it with
his Saxons, and (...) the beauty thereof with many fair buildings: but in the
times of the Danish desolations this City with the rest, felt their destroying
hands; for in the year 875. it was by them fore afflicted, spoiled, and
shaken, and that most grievously by Swane in the year of Christ Jesus 1003.
who razed it down from East to West, so that scarcely had it gotten breath
before William the bastard of Normandy besieged it, against whom the Citizens
with great manhood served, till a part of the wall fell down of it self, and
that by the hand of Gods providence, says mine Author: since when it has
been three times besieged, and with valiant resistance ever defended. The
first was by Hugh Courtney, Earl of Deuenshire, in the Civil broils betwixt
Lancaster and York: then by Perbin Warbeck, that counterfeited Richard Duke of
York: and lastly, by the Cornish Rebels, wherein although the Citizens were
grievously pinched with scarsitie, yet continued they their faithful
allegiance unto King Edward the sixth; and at this day flourishes in
tranquillity and wealth, being governed by a Major, twentie-foure Brethren,
with a Recorder, Towne-Clerke, and other Officers their Attendants. This Cities
graduation is set in the degree of Latitude from the North Pole 50. and 45.
scruples: and for Longitude from the West, to the degree 16. and 25. scruples.
Neither is Joseph that excellent Poet, whose birth was in this City, the least
of her Ornaments, whose Writings bare so great credit, that they were divulged
in the Germane language under the name of Cornelius Nepos.

The like credit got Crediton in her birth-child Winefred the Apostle of the
Hassians, Thuringers, and Frisians of Germany, which were converted by him unto
the Gospel and knowledge of Christ.

(7) Places memorable in this County remaining for signs of Battles, or other
antiquities are these: upon Exmore certain Monuments of Anticke-worke are
erected, which are stones pitched in order, some triangle-wise, and some in
round compass: these no doubt were trophies of victories there obtained,
either by the Romans, Saxons, or Danes, and with Danish letters one of them is
inscribed, giving direction to such as should travel that way. Hublestowe
likewise near unto the mouth of Tawe, was the burial place of Hubba the Dane,
who with his Brother Hungar, had harried the English in diverse parts of the
Land: but lastly was there encountered with, and slain by this Shires
Inhabitants, and under a heap of copped stones interred, and the Banner Reasen
there and then taken, that had so often been spread in the Danes quarrel, and
wherein they reposed no small confidence for success.

(8) A double dignity remains in this County, where Princes of State have
borne the Titles both of Devonshire and Excester: of which City, there have
been entitled Dukes, the last of whom, namely, Henry Holland, Grandchild to
John Holland, halfe-brother to King Richard the second; siding with Lancaster
against Edward the fourth, whose Sister was his wife, was driven to such
misery, as Philip Comineus reports, that he was seen all torn and
barefooted to beg his living in the Low Countries: and lastly, his body was
cast upon the shore of Kent (as if he had perished by shipwreck) so uncertain
is Fortune in her endowments, and the state of man, notwithstanding his great
birth.

(9) Religious houses in this Shire built in devotion, and for Idolatry pulled
down, were at Excester, Torbay, Tanton, Tauestoke, Kirton, Ford, Hartland,
Axmister, and Berstable.

(10) And the Counties divisions are parted into thirtie-three Hundreds,
wherein are seated thirtie-seauen Market-Townes, and three hundred ninety
four Parish-Churches.

CORNWALL. CHAPTER X.
CORNWALL (as Matthew of Westminster affirms) is so named partly from the
form, and partly from her people: for shooting it self into the Sea like a
Horn (which the Britains call Kerne) and inhabited by them whom the Saxons
named Willia; of these two compounded words it became Cornwallia. Not to
trouble the Reader with the Fable of Corineus, cousin to King Brute, who in
free gift received this County in reward of his prowess, for wrestling with
the Grant Gogmagog, and breaking his neck from the Cliffe of Deuer, as ^e of
Monmouth has fabuled.

(2) Touching the temperature of this County, the air thereof is cleansed as
with Bellows, by the Billows that ever work from o^t her enuironing Seas,
where through it becomes pure and subtle, and is made thereby very
healthful, but withal so (...) and shar^e, that it is apter to preserve then
to recover health. The spring is not so early as in the more Eastern parts;
yet the Summer with a temperate heat recompenceth his slow fostering of the
fruits, with their most kindly ripening. The Autumn brings a somewhat late
harvest: and the Winter, by reason of the Seas warm breath, makes the cold
milder then elsewhere. Notwithstanding that Country is much subject to stormy
blasts, who^e violence has freedom from the open waves, to beat upon the
dwellers at Land, leaving many times their houses uncovered.

(3) The Soil for the most part is lifted up into many hills, parted a sunder
with narrow and short valleys, and a shallow earth does cover their outside,
which by a Sea-weede called Orewood, and a certain kind of fruitful
Sea-sand, they make so rank and batten, as is incredible. But more are the
riches that out of those hills are gotten from the Mines of Copper and Tin;
which Country was the first, and continues the best stored in that
Merchandise, of any in the world Timaeus the Historian in Pliny reports,
that the Britains fetched their Tin in wicker-boats, stitched about with
Leather And D^octo^us (...) of Augustus Caesar's time writes, that the
Britains in this part dug Tin out of (...) ground, which by Merchants was
carried into Gallia, and thence to Narborne, as it were to a Man: Which
howsoever the Englis-Saxons neglected, yet the Normans made great benefit
thereof, especially Richard brother to King Henry the third, who was Earl of
Cornwall, and by those Tin-(...) became exceedingly rich: for the in^^^sions
of the Mo^res having stopped up the Tinne-Mines (...), and them in Germany not
discovered before the year of Christ 1240. these in Cornwall (...) the want in
all parts of the world. This Earl made certain Tinne-Lawes, which with
liberties and privileges were confirmed by Earl Edmund his son. And in the
days of King Ed^^^ the third the Commonweal of Tinne-workes from one body
was divided into four, and a (...) of the Stan^^^rs appointed then Judge.

(4) The Borders of this Shire on all parts but the East is bound in with the
Sea: and had Tamer (...) his course but four miles further to the North,
betwixt this County and Devonshire, it might have been rather accounted an
Island, then stood with the May^e Her length is from Launston to the (...),
containing by measure 60 miles: and the broadest part, stretching along by the
Tamer, is fully forty, l^s^ening thence still lesser like a horn.

(5) The ancient Inhabitants known to the Romans, were the Danmonij, that
spread themselves (...) into Devonshire also, by the report of Diodorus
Siculus, a most courteous and civil people: and by Mechael their Poet extolled
for (...) and strength of lim^^es: nor therein does he take the liberty that
Poets are allowed, to add to the subject whereof they write, but truly
reports what we see by them performed, whom actiuitie surmount many other
people.

When the Heathen Saxons had seated themselves in the best of this Land, and
forced the Christian Britains into these rockie parts, then did Cornwall
abound in Saints, unto whose honor most of the Churches were erected, by whose
names they are yet known and called. To speak nothing of Vrsula that Counties
Dukes daughter, with her company of canonized Virgin-Saints, that are now
reputed but to trouble the Calendar. These Britains in Cornwall so fenced the
Country, and defended themselves, that to the reign of King Athelstant they
held out against the Saxons, who subduing those Western Parts, made Tamar the
Bounder betwixt them and his English, whose last Earl of the British Blood was
called Candorus.

(6) But William the Bastard created Robert (his halfe-brother by Herlotta
their mother) the first Earl of the Normans race: and Edward the Black
Prince, the ninth from him, was by his Father King Edward the third invested
the first Duke of Cornwall, which Title ever since has continued in the Crown.

(7) The commodities of this Shire, ministered both by Sea and Soil, are many
and great; for besides the abundance of Fish that do suffice the Inhabitants,
the Pilchard is taken, who in great skuls swarm about the Coast, whence being
transported to France, Spain, and Italy. yield a yearly reuenew of gain
unto Cornwall: wherein also Copper and Tin so plentifully grow in the utmost
part of this Promontory, that at a low water the veins thereof lie bare, and
are seen: and what gain that commodity begets, is vulgarly known. Neither
are these Rocks destitute of Gold nor Silver, yea and Diamonds shaped and
pointed Angle-wise, and smoothed by Nature her self, whereof some are as big
as Walnuts, inferior to the Orient only in blackness and hardness.

Many are the Ports, Bays, and Havens that open into this Shire, both safe for
arriuage, and commodious transport; whereof Falmouth is so copious, that an
hundred Ships may therein ride at Anchor apart by themselves, so that from the
tops of their highest Masts, they shall not see each other, and lie most safely
under the winds.

(8) This County is fruitful in Corn, Cattle, Seafish, and Foul: all
which, with other provisions for pleasures and life, are traded through
twentie-two Market-Townes in this Shire, whereof Launston and Bodman are the
best; from which last, being the middle of the Shire, the Pole is elevated to
the degree of Latitude 50* 35. minutes, and for Longitude from the first West
point, 15. 13. minutes, as Mercator has measured them.

(9) Memorable matters both for antiquity and strangeness of sight, are
these: At Boske^^^ upon the South-west of her Promontorie, is a Trophy erected,
which are eighteen Stones placed round in compass, and pitched twelve foot
each from others, with another far bigger in the very center. These do show
some Victory there attained, either by the Romans, or else King Athelstane. At
the foot of the Rocks near unto S. Michaels Mount, in the memory of our
fathers, were dug up Speare-heads, Axes, and Swords of Brass, wrapped in
linen, the weapons that the Cimbrians and ancient Britains anciently used.

At Camelford likewise pieces of Armours both for horse and man, are many times
found in digging of the ground, imputed to be the signs of that fight wherein
Mordred was slain, and wherein great Arthur received his deaths wound. And at
Cas^le-Dennys are the Trenches wherein the Danes lodged when they first minded
to subdue the Land, In the Parish S Clare, two stones are pitched, one of them
inscribed with a strange Character, and the other called the other half stone
The Hurlers also, fabuled to be men metamorphosed into stones; but in truth
show a note of some Victory, or else are so set for Land-markes Bounders. There
also the Wring-cheese does show it self, which are huge Rocks heaped one upon
another, and the lowest of them the least, fashioned like a Cheese, lying
pressed under the rest of those Hills, which seems very dangerous to be passed
under (...) near to Pensans, and unto Mounts-bay, a fa^^e more strange Rock
stands, namely, Main Amber, which lies mounted upon others of meaner size,
with so equal a counterpoize, that a man may move it with the push of his
finger, but no strength remove it out of his place.

(10) Religious houses built, and suppressed within the limits of Cornwall, the
fairest and greatest for account, were Launston, S. Neotes, S. Buriens, S.
Michaels Mount, and S. Germans a Bishop^ See: so was Bodman also, from whence
King Edward the Confessor removed it unto the City of Encester.

(11) The division of this Shire is into nine Hundreds, wherein are seated
twentie-two Market-Townes, and 161. Parish-Churches.

SVMMERSET-SHIRE. CHAPTER XI.
SVVMMERSET-SHIRE is both a rich and spacious Country, having the Seuerne Sea
beating upon it on the North-side, the South part bordering upon Deuon and
Dorset shires, the West confined with Deuon-shire, and the East and North-East
upon Wiltshire, and Gloucester-shire. It took the name of Sommerton (sometime
the chief Town of this Shire) whence in the ancient Historian Asserius, this
County is called Sommertunensis, that is, Sommertun-shire.

(2) The form thereof is large, bearing it self still wider as it stretches
into the middle part thereof, and contains in length from Brackley near unto
Frome-Selwood Eastward, to Our in the West, Miles 55. In breadth from Porshut
point in the North, to Chard Southward, is somewhat above forty miles. The
whole circumference is about 204. miles.

(3) The air is mild and pleasing, and for the most part subject to such
temperate dispositions as the Sommer-season affords, whence some have
erroniously conceited, that the Region borrowed her name from the nature of her
Clime: yet how delightefull so ever it is in the time of Summer, with change of
the season it may well change her pleasing name, and borrow some Winterly
denomination; so full of wet, so myrie and moorish it is; in so much as the
Inhabitants can hardly travel to and fro without their great encumbrance.

(4) Howbeit they pass over this with all patience, knowing their ensuing
seasonable profits far to exceed any present detriments and displeasures:
for as it is foul, so it is fruitful, which makes them comfort themselves
with this Proverb, that What is worst for the Rider, is best for the Abider:
the Soil and Globe thereof being very fertile, and every side garnished with
Pastures and delightful Meadows, and beautified with Manor houses both many
and fair; and (in a word) has every thing in it to content the purse, the
heart, the eye, at home: and sufficient Ports to give entertainment to
commodities from abroad.

(5) The ancient Inhabitants that possessed this Province were the Belgae, who
spread themselves far and wide, as well here as in Wiltshire, and the inner
parts of Hamshire: who being branched from the Germans, conferred the names of
those places from whence they came, upon these their seats where they resided.

(6) The general profits of this Province are Corn and Cattle, wherewith it
is so plentifully stored, as it may challenge any neighboring Country for the
quantity to make show of Cattle so fat, or Grain so rich. Some places are
peculiarly enriched by Lead-mines, as Mindiphiis, (perchance so called of the
deep Mines) by Leiland aptly termed Minerarij, Minerall-hils, which yield
plenty of Lead, the most Merchantable Commodity that is in England, and vented
into all parts of the world Some are beautified with Diamons, as S Vincent
Rock, whereof there is great plenty, and so bright of color, as they might
equalize Indian Diamonds, if they had their hardness yet being so many and so
common, they are less sought after or commended

(7) This Country is famoused by three Cities, Bath, Wels, and Bristow The
first takes name of the hot Bathes, which Antonine called Aqua Solis, The
waters of of the Sun; Stephanus, Badiza; we at this day Bathe, and the
Latinists Bathonia: a place of continual concourse for persons of all degrees,
and almost of all diseases, (whence it was sometimes called Ak^man cester) who
by divine providence do very often find relief there, the Springs thereof by
reason of their Mineral and sulphurous passage, being of such exceeding power
and medicinable heat, as that they cure and conquer the rebellious
stubbornness of corrupt humors, in respect of which admirable virtues, some
have fabled, that they were first conuayed by Magic Art. To testify the
antiquity of this place, many Images and Roman Inscriptions are found in the
walls, which can now be hardly read, they are so worn and eaten into by age.
Wels (as Leiland reports) was sometimes called Theodorodunum, but from whence
it had that denomination he makes no mention: The name it now bears is taken
(as some think) from the River there, which King Kinewulph in his Charter An
766. calls Welwe, or (as others) from the Wel^ or Springs which there break
forth, and whereupon that See (under whose Jurisdiction is also the City of
Bath) has been anciently called Pontanensis Ecclesi^, the Fountaine-Church:
where the Cathedral built by King Inas to the memory of S. Andrew, is very
beautiful and richly endowed. The City is likewise well replenished both with
Inhabitants and seemly buildings. Whose government is managed by a Major
yearly elected, a Recorder, and seven Masters, having the assistance of
sixteen Burgesses, a Towne-Clerke, and two Sergeants at Mace. Whose Latitude
is 51. 20. minutes, and Longitude 17. 31. minutes. Bristow is not so ancient,
as it is fair and well seated: The beauty of it being such, as for the
bigness thereof, it scarce gives place to any City of England, and does
worthily deserve the Saxon name Bright-stad: whose pleasantness is the more,
by reason that the River Auon scowres through the midst of it, which together
with the benefit of Sewes under all the streets, cleares the City of all
noisome filth and uncleanness. It is not wholly seated in this County of
Sommerset, but one part thereof in Gloucestershire but because it is an entire
County of it self, it denies subjection unto either, having for its own
government both a Bishop, with a well furnished College, and a Major, with a
competent assistance of Aldermen, and other Officers for Civil affairs.

(8) This Province has been the Theater of many Tragical events and bloody
Battles: the Danes did grievously afflict Porlock by cruel Piracies, in the
year eight hundred eight^e six. Yet near unto Pen a little village
^eighbouring upon North Cadbury, Edmund, surnamed Iron-side, gave them a
notable soil, as he was pursuing Ca^^tus from place to place, for usurping the
Crown of England. And Keniwalth (a West Saxon) in the same place had such a
day against the ^ritaines, that they ever after stood in awe of the
English-Saxons prowess. Marianus relates that not far from Bridge-water as
the D^^es were straggling abroad, Ealstan Bishop of Sherbourne did so foil
their Forces in the year 845 as their minds were much discomfited, and their
powers utterly disabled. Ni^ius also writes, that King Arthur did so defeat
the English-Saxons in a battle at Cadbury, that it deserved to be made
perpetuously memorable. Neither is Mo^s Badonicus (now Bannesdowne) less
famous for Arthurs victories. And King Elfred in another battle not far from
hence gave the Danes such an overthrow, as he forced them to submission, and
induced Godrus their King to become a Christian, himself being Godfather to
him at the ^ont. So happy is this Region, and so beholding to Nature and Art
for her strengths and fortifications, as she has always beeene able to defend
her self, and offend her enemies.

(9) Neither has it been less honored with beauteous houses consecrated to
Religion: such was that of Black-Charons at Barelinch in the first limit of
this Shire Westward: and King Athelstan built a Monastery in an Island called
Muchelney (that is to say) the great Island, which is between the Rivers Iuel
and Pedred, running together, where the defaced walls and ruins thereof are
yet to be seen King Henry the third also erected a Nunnery at Witham, which
was afterward the first house of the Carthusian Monks in England, as Hin^^n
not far off was the second. But above all other for antiquity, glory, and
beauty was the Abbey of Glaste^bury, whose beginning is fetched even from
Joseph of A ^^athea, which Deni Bishop of S. David's repaired, being fallen to
ruin, and King Inas lastly builded a fair and stately Church in this
Monastery, though it be now made even with the ground, the ruins only showing
how great and magnificant a Seat it has anciently been; which several houses
were thus beautified by bounteous Princes, for religious purposes, and to
retire the mind from worldly services, though blinded times and guides diuerted
them to superstitious and lewd abuses.

(10) Other memorable places are these, Camal^t a very steep hill hard to be
ascended which appears to have been a work of the Romans by diverse Coins
digd up there, on the top whereof are seen the lineaments of a large and
ancient Castle, which the Inhabitants report to have been the Palace of King
Arthur. Ilchester, which at the coming of the Normans was so populou^, that it
had in it an hundred and seven Burges^es, and it appears to be of great
antiquity by the Roman Caesar's Coins, oftentimes sound there. The Church
yard of Aualonia or Glastenbury, wh^re King Arthurs Sepulcher was searched for
by the command of King Henry the second, which was found under a stone, with an
Inscription upon it fastened, almost nine foot in the ground. Also Dunstere,
where (as is reported) a great Lady obtained of her husband so much Pasture
ground in common by the Town side, for the good and benefit of the
Inhabitants, as she was able in a whole day to go about bare-foote.

This County is divided into 42. Hundreds for the disposing of business
needful to the State thereof, wherein are placed 33. Market-Townes, fit for
buying and selling, and other affairs of Commerce. It is fortified with four
Castles, and planted with 385. Parishes, for concourse of divine service.

VVILT-SHIRE. CHAPTER XII.
VVILT-SHIRE, is enclosed upon the Northwith Gloucestershire, upon the East is
bounded with Bark-shire, upon the South with Dorset and Hampshire, and upon the
West is confronted against partly by Gloucester, and the rest by Somerset shires.

(2) The form thereof ^s both long and broad; for from Inglesham upon Thamisis
in the North, to Burgat Damarum in the South, are thirty nine miles: the
broadest part is from Bu^termer Eastward, to the Shire-stones in the West,
being twenty nine; the whole in Circumference is one hundred thirty nine
miles.

(3) For Air, it is seated in a temperate Climate, both sweet, pleasant, and
wholesome; and for soil (says John of Sarisbury) is exceeding fertile and
plentiful, yea, and that with va^ietie.

(4) The Northern part which they call North Wilt shire, rises up into
delectable hills, attired with large Woods, and watered with clear Rivers,
whereof Isis is one, which soon becomes the most famous in the Land. The
South part is more even, yielding abundently grass and corn; and is made the
more fruitful by the Rivers Wily, Adder, and Au^n. The midst of this County
is most plain, and thereby is known and commonly called Salesbury (...), and
lie so leuall indeed, that it does limit the Horizon: or hardly can a man see
from the one side to the other. These Plains grase an infinite number of
sheep, whose fleeces and flesh bring in an yearly reuenew to their owners.

(5) Anciently this County was possessed by the Belga, who are seated by
Ptolemie in Hampshire, Somerset shire, and in this Tract; and they (as it
seems by Casar) were of the Belga in Gaul These (as some hold) were subdued
by Vespasian, Lieutenant of the second Legion under Claudius, when the
foundations of his future greatness were in these parts first laid by his many
Victories over the Britains. And herein surely the Romans seated; for besides
Yan^sburie Trench, by Tradition held to be his, in many other Forts in this
Shire the Tract of their footing has been left, and the stamped Coins of
their Emperors found, an apparent testimony of their abode.

(6) After them the West Saxons made it a part of their Kingdom, whole border
was Auon, as witnesses Athelward, though the Mercians many times encroched
upon them, whereby many great Battles, as Malmesbury tells us, betwixt them were
fought, when in the young years of their Heptarchie each sought to enlarge
his, by the lessening of the next: but grown unto more ripeness, they
assigned their limits by a great and long ditch crossing through the midst of
these Plains, which for the wonder thereof is supposed by the vulgar to be the
work of the Devil, and is called of all, Wansdike, undoubtedly of Woden, the
Saxons Ancestor and great reputed God, where a little village yet stands, and
retains to name Wodens-burg At this place, in Anno 590. Ceaulin the
West Saxon, received such a foil of the Britains and his Contrymen, that
he was forced to forsake his Kingdom, and to end his days in exile, becoming
a pitiful spectacle even unto his enemies. And in this place Ina the
West Saxon joined Battle with Ceolred the Mercian, whence both of them departed
with equal loss. The like was at Bradford by Ke^^lwach and Cuthred; at
Wilton, betwixt Egbert and Beornwolfe; at Edindon, where King Elfred was
vanquisher of the Danes; and at Wilton, where the Danes won the day against
him. With as bloody success, though not happening by sword, was the issue of
that Synod assembled at Colne, a small Town in this County, in the year of
Christ Jesus 977 where being hotly debating for the single life, and against
the marriages of the Clergy, what wanted by the Word to prove their divorce,
was supplied by a Stratagem, and that very bloody; for suddenly the maine
timber brake, and down fell the floor with the Nobles and Prelates, the
Gentlemen and Commons, whereby a great number were hurt, and many more slain;
only Dunstan the President and mouth for the Monks, escaped untouched, the
Ioist whereon his Chair stood remaining most firm: which confirmed the
sentence of their separations, whom God had conjoined, and became the fall and
snare of much incontinencie in both sexes.

(7) The chiefest City of this Shire is Salesburie, removed from a higher, but
a far more convenient place; whose want of water was not so great in the
mother, as is supplied and replenished in the daughter, every street almost
having a River running through her midst; and for sumptuous and delicate
buildings, is inferior to none. The Cathedral, a most rich magnificent
Church, was begun by Richard Poor, Bishop, and with forty years continuante
was raised to her perfect beauty: wherein are as many windows as there are
days in the year, as many cast pillars of Marble, as there are hours in the
year, and as many gates for entrance as there are months in the year.
Neither does this City retain true honor to her self, but imparteth hers,
and receives honor from others, who are entitled Earls of Salesburie,
whereof eight noble Families have been dignified since the Normans C^^quest.
This Cities situation is in the degree of Latitude 51. 10 minutes, and from the
first West point observed by Mercator, 18 Degrees, and 31. minutes of Longitude.

(8) Over this, old Salesburie shows it self, where K^n^^k overcame the
Britains, and where Canutus the Dane did great damage by fire. This formerly
had been the Seat of the Romans: as likewise was Lecham, as by their Coins
dug up is apparent: so were Brokenbridge and Cosham, the Courts of the Saxon
Kings But Fortune long since has turned her face from all these, as lately she
did from many ancient and religious foundations planted in this Province,
whereof Mal^^esburie was the most famous I will not with Monmouth avouch the
foundation thereof unto Mulmutius, but by true Records from Maidulph a Scot, a
man of great learning, that therein built a Cell, and lead an Hermits life,
whereof Beda calls it the City of Maidulph, and we by contraction,
Malmesburie, Adelme his Disciple and Successor, built here a fair Monastery,
which Athelstan the Monarch richly endowed, and left his body after death there
to rest. Neither has any graced this more then William her Monk, in recording
to posterities the Chronicles of our Land, concerning both the Church and
Commonweal, wherein himself lived and wrote those Histories.

(9) Ambresburie for repute did second this, built by A^fritha, King Edgar his
wife, to expiate the sin of murder which she committed upon young Edward her
son in law, that hers might be King. In this place Queen Eleanor, widow to
King Henry the third, renounced all royal pomp, and devoted her self unto
God in the habit of a Nun. Other places erected for piety, were at
Salesburie, Lacock, Stanley, Wilton, Luichurch, Farnleg, Bradstole, Briopune,
and Brombore. These grafts grown to full greatness, were cut down by the
Pruiner, least the cankers thereof should infect the whole body (as by them was
alleged) and their Revenues bestowed upon far better uses, both for the
bringing up of youth, and the maintenance of estate.

(10) With eight strong Castles this County has been guarded; in nineteen
Market-Townes her commodities are traded: into twentie-nine Hundreds for
business is divided, and in them are seated three hundred and four
Parish-Churches.

BARK-SHIRE. CHAPTER XIII.
BARK-SHIRE, whether of the Eo^-woods there sited, according to the censure of
Asserius Meneuensis, or from a naked and beare-lesse Oke-tree, whereunto the
people usually resorted in troublesome times, to conferte for the State, I
determine not: only the County a long time has been so called, and bounded
with other in manner as follows: The North-part is parted by Thamisis from
Buckingham and Oxford-shires; the South near Kennet does tract upon Hampshire;
the East is confined with the County of Surrey; and the West with Wiltshire
and Glocestershire is held in.

(2) The form of this Shire does somewhat resemble a Sandall for a man's foot,
lying long-wise from East to West, in which part she is broadest, the middle
most narrow, and then spreading wider like to the heel: though for her rich
endowments and stately magnificence, it may be well accounted the heart of the
whole.

(3) The length thereof from Inglesham in the West, to old Windsor in the East,
extends unto forty miles; from Inkpen to Wightham, the broadest part from
South to North are twentie-foure; the whole in Circumference, about one hundred
and twenty miles.

(4) The Air is temperate, sweet, and delightful, and prospect for pleasure
inferior to none; the Soil is plenteous of corn, especially in the Vale of
White-horse, that yields yearly an admirable increase. In a word, for Corn
and Cattle, Waters, and Woods, of profit and pleasure, it gives place unto none.

(5) Her ancient Inhabitants, by Ptolemie and Caesar, were the Attrebat^, and
them of those that descended from Gallia, among whom Comius (conquered by the
Dictator) was of good respect, and could do much with the Britains, who (as
Frontinus reports) used this stratagem, though it proved nothing at last: he
flying before Caesar to recover aid of these Attrebatians, light bedded upon a
shelfe in the Sea, whereupon hoysting his sails as before a fore-winde, gave
show to his pursuer that they were in swift flight; so that hopeless to hayle
them, he gave over the chase: yet no sooner had Caesar made over among them,
but that some of these people, by name the Bibroces, yielded him subjection,
which prued the ruin of all former liberty But when the Romans had rent their
own Empire, and retired their Legion into a narrower circuit, the Sa^^ns set
foot where their forces had been, and made this County a parcel of their
Western Kingdom.

The Danes then setting their desire upon spoils, from their ^oauing Pinnaces
pierced into these parts, and at Redding fortified themselves betwixt the
Rivers Kennet and Tham^^sis, whither after their great overthrow received at
Inge^efield by the hand of King Ethelwolfe, they retired for their further
safety.

(6) This Town King Henry the first most stately beautified with a rich
Monastery and strong Castle, where, in the Collegiate Church of the Abbey,
himself and Queen (who lay both veiled and crowned) with their daughter Maud
the Empress, called the Lady of England, were interred, as the private History
of the place avouches, though others bestow the bodies of these two Queens
elsewhere. The Castle King Henry the second razed to the ground, because it
was the refuge for the followers of King Stephen From whence the North Pole is
raised in Latitude 51 degrees and 40 minutes, and in Longitude from the first
West-point observed by Mercator 19 degrees and 35. minutes.

(7) A Castle and Town of greater strength and antiquity was Wallingford, by
Antonie and Ptolemie called Galtena, the chiefest City of the Attribatians,
whose large circuit, and strong fortifications, show plainly, that it was a
place of the Romans abode, and since in a conceived safety has made many very
bold, especially when the sparks of Englands civil dissentions were forced to
flame in case of the Crown betwixt Maud the Empress and King Stephen, whither
her self and associates resorted as their surest defense.

(8) But of far greater magnificence and state is the Castle of Windsor, a
most Princely Palace and Mansion of his Majesty. I will not with Ieffrey
affirm it to be built by King Arthur, but with better authority say, it was
so thirsted after by the Conqueror, that by a composition with the Abbat of
Westminster, whose then it was, he made it to be the Kings Possession, as a
Place besides the pleasures, very commodious to entertain the King In this
Castle that victorious Prince King Edward the third was borne; and herein after
he had subdued the French and Scots, held he at one and the same time, as his
Prisoners, John King of France, and David King of Scotland Neither was it ever
graced with greater Majesty then by the institution of the most honorable
Order of the Garter, a signal Ornament of Martial Prowess: the invention
thereof some ascribe to be from a Garter falling from his Queen, or rather
from Joan Countess of Salisbury, a Lady of an incomparable beauty, as she
danced before him, whereat the bystanders sm^^ing, he gave the impresse to
check all evil conceits, and in golden Letters imbelished the Garter with
this French Posie, HONI SOIT QVI MALY PENSE. And yet that worthy Clarenceaux
alleging the book of the first institution, finds the invention to be more
ancient, as when King Richard the first warred against the Turks, Saracens,
Cypres, and Acon, he girt the legs of certain choice Knights with a tache of
leather, which promised a future glory to the wearers. The most Princely
Chapel thereof is graced with the bodies of those two great Kings, Henry the
sixth, and Edward the fourth, whom the whole Kingdom was too little to
containo, the one of Lancaster, the other of York, where they rest now united
in one mould, with a branch of both those Houses, even King Henry the eight,
who there lies also interred, and rests in the Lord.

(9) Other places of note in this Shire are Sinodum in the North, and Watham in
the East, both of them places of the Romans residence, as by their monyes these
oftentimes found appears. Neither was Sunning the least in this Tract, that
had been the Seat of eight Bishops before the Sea was translated thence unto
Shirburne, or that to Salisbury* Wantage also is not wanting of honor, in
bringing to life that learned and most valiant King Ealfred, the scourge of the
Danes, and great Monarch of the English. And Finchhamsted for wonder inferior
to none, where (as our Writers do witness) that in the year, a thousand one
hundred, a Well boiled up with streams of blood, and fifteen days together
continued that Spring, whose waters made red all others where they came, to the
great amazement of the beholders.

(10) The riches and sweet seats that this Country affords, made many devout
persons to show their devotions unto true piety, in erecting places for Gods
divine service, and their exemptions from all worldly business: such were
Abington, Redding, Bysham, Bromehall, Hen^ey, Hamme, and Wallingford, whose
V^tarie abusing the intents of their Founders, overthrew both their own Orders
and places of professions; all which were dissolved by Act of Parliament, and
given the King to dispose at his will.

This Shires division is into twenty Hundreds, and has been strengthened
with six strong Castles, is yet graced with three of his Majesty's most
Princely Houses, and traded with twelve Market Towns, and is replenished with
one hundred and forty Parishes.

MIDDLESEX. CHAPTER XIIII.
MIDDLESEX, so called in regard of the situation, as seated betwixt the
West Saxons and East Angles, was sometimes, together with Essex and
Hartford-shire, that part and portion which the East Saxons enjoyed for their
Kingdom: it lies bordered upon the North with Hartford shire; upon the West
by Colne, is severed from Buckingham; the South, by Thamesis from Surrey and
Kent; and on the East from Essex, by the River Lea.

(2) The length thereof extended from (...) in the East, to Morehall upon Colne
in the West, is by measure nineteen English miles; and from South (...) in the
North, to his Majesty's Manor of Hampton Court in the South, are little above
sixteen miles, the whole Circumference extending to ninety miles

(3) In fo^^e it is almost square, for air passing temperate, for soil
abundantly fertile, and for pasturage and grain of all kinds yielding the
best, so that the Wheat of this County has served a long time for the manch^t
to our Princes Table.

(4) It lies seated in a vale most wholesome and rich having some hills also,
and them of good (...), from whose tops the prospect of the whole is seen like
unto Zoar in Egypt, or rather like a Paradise and Garden of God.

(5) The ancient Inhabitants known to Caesar, were the Trinobants, whom he
names to be the most puissant in the Island; whose chief City and State
yielding him subjection, made the whole, with less loss to the Romans, to
bear the yoke of their own bondage, and to come in under terms of truce. But
when their forces in these parts were spent, and the Empire shaken by intestine
wars, the Saxons setting their eyes upon so fair a soil, made their footing
as sure herein; which lastly with Hartford and Essex, was the portion of the
East Saxons Kingdom.

(6) Five Princely Houses, inheritable to the English Crown, are seated in
this Shire, which are, Enfield, Hanworth, White Hall, S. James, and
Hampton Court, a City rather in show then the Palace of a Prince, and for
stately Port and gorgeous building, not inferior to any in Europe. At
Thistleworth once stood the Palace of Richard King of the Romans, Earl of
Cornwall, which the Lond^ner in a tumultuous broile, burned to the ground:
many other stately Houses of our English Nobility, Knights, and Gentlemen, as
also of the worshipful Citizens of London, are in this Shire so sumptuously
built and pleasantly seated, as the like in the like circuit are no where else
to be found. Near unto Thamesis entrance into this County, is kept the
remembrance of Caesar's entrance over Thamesis, by the name of Coway-Stakes,
stuck fast in the bottom to impeach his designs; and further at Stanes a
Maire-stone once stood for a mark of Jurisdiction, that London had so far
upon Thamesis

(7) Which City is more ancient then any true record bears, fabuled from
Brute, Troynouant, from Lud, Ludstone: But by more credible Writers, Tacitus,
Ptolemy, and Antonine, Londinium, by Aminian^^ Mercellinus for her successiue
prosperity, Augusta, the greatest title that can be given to any: by
Britains, Londayn, by Strangers, Londra, and by us London. This City does
show as the Cedars among other trees, being the seat of the British Kings, the
chamber of the English, the model of the Land, and the Mart of the world: for
thither are brought the silk of Asia, the spices from Africa, the Balmes from
Grecia, and the riches of both the Indies East and West: no City standing so
long in same, nor any for divine and politic government may with her be
compared Her walls were first set by great Constantine the first Christian
Emperor, at the suit of his mother, Qu: Helen, reared with rough stone and
British Brick three English miles in compass: through which are now made
seven most fair gates, besides three other passages for entrance. Along the
Thamesis, this wall at first ranged and with two gates opened, the one
Doure-gate, now Dowgate, and the other Billinsgate, a receptacle for Ships. In
the midst of this wall was set a mile-marke (as the like was in Rome) from
whence were measured their stations, for carriage or otherwise; the same as yet
stands, and has been long known by the name of London Stone. Upon the East
of this City, the Church of S. Peter's is thought to be the Cathedral of
Restitus, the Christians Bishops See, who lived in the reign of Great
Constantine; but since S. Paul's in the West part, from the Temple of Diana,
assumed that dignity, whose greatness does exceed any other at this day, and
spires so high that twice it has been consumed by lightning from heaven.
Besides this Cathedral, God is honored in one hundred twenty one Churches
more in this City: that is, ninety six within the walls; sixteen without, but
within the Liberties; and nine more in her Suburbs; and in F^z. Stephens time,
thirteen Conuents of religious Orders. It is divided into 26 Wards, governed
by so many grave Aldermen, a Lord Mayor, and two Sherifs, the yearly choice
whereof was granted them by Patent from King John; in whose time also a Bridge
of stone was made over Thames, upon nineteen Arches, for length, breadth,
beauty, and building, the like again not found in the world.

(8) This London (as it were) disdaning bondage, has set her self on each
side, far without the walls, and has lefther West-gate in the midst, from
whence with continual buildings (still affecting greatness) she has
continued her streets unto a Kings Palace, and joined a second City to her
self, famous for the Seat and Sepulcher of our Kings; and for the Gates of
Justice, that termely there are opened, only once a Bishops See, whose title
died with the man. No walls are set about this City, and those of London are
left, to show rather what it was, then what it is: Whose Citizens, as the
Lacedaemonians did, do impute their strength in their men, and not in their
walls, how strong toeuer. Or else for their multitude, cannot be circulated, but
(as another Jerusalem) is inhabited without walls, as Zachary said. The wealth
of this City (as Isay once spoke of Nilus) grows from the Revenues and
harvest of her South-bounding Thames; whose traffic for merchandising, is
like that of Tyrus, whereof Ezekiel speaks, and stands in abundance of Silver,
Iron, Tin, and Lead, etc. And from London her channel is nauigable,
straightened along with medowing borders, until she takes her full liberty in
the German Seas. Upon this Thamesis the Ships of Tharsis seem to ride, and the
Navy, that rightly is termed the Lady of the Sea, spreads her sail. Whence
twice with luckie success has been accomplished, the compassing of the
universal Globe. This River, Canutus, laying siege against London, sought by
digging to divert, and before him the Danes had done great harms in this
City, yet was their State recovered by King Elfred, and the River kept her
old course, notwithstanding that cost. In the times of the Normans, some
civil broiles have been attempted in this City, as in the days of King
John, whereinto his Barons entered, and the Tower yielded unto Lewis. And
again, Wat Tyler herein committed outrageous cruelties, but was worthily
struck down by the Mayor and slain in Smithfield. This Cities graduation for
Latitude is the degree 51. 45. minutes, and in Longitude 20. degrees 39.
minutes.

(9) In this County at Barnet, upon Easter Day, a bloody battle was fought,
betwixt Henry the sixth and Edward the fourth, wherein were slain one Marquis,
one Earl, three Lords, and with them ten thousand Englishmen.

(10) The division of this Shire is into seven Hundreds, wherein are seated two
Cities, four Market-Townes, and seuenty-three Parish-Churches, besides them in
London; wherein the Church of Gray-Fryers, now called Christ-Church, three
Queens lie interred, which were, Queen Margaret, the D. of Phil. the hardy,
King of France, second wife to King Edward the first; the second was Queen
Isabel, wife to King Edward the second, and D. to Philip the fair King of
France; and the third was Queen Joan, their daughter, married to David King of
Scotland.

ESSEX. CHAPTER XV.
ESSEX, by the Normans exsessa, and by the vulgar Essex; is a County large in
compass, very populous, and nothing inferior to the best of the Land.

(2) The ^orme thereof is somewhat Circular, excepting the East part, which
shoots her self with many Promontories into the Sea; and from Horsey Island
to Haidon in the West, (the broadest part of the Shire) are by measure forty
miles; and the length from East-Ha^^ upon Thamesis in the South, to S^urmere
upon the River Stow in the North, are thirtie-fiue miles; the whole in
Circumference one hundred forty six miles.

(3) It lies bounded upon the North, with Suffolk and Cambridge-Shires, upon
the West with Hertford and Middlesex, upon the South by Thamesis is parted from
Kent, and the East Side thereof is altogether washed with the German Sea.

(4) The air is temperate and pleasant only toward the waters somewhat
aguish: the soil is rich and fruitful, though in some places sandy and
barren; yet so that it never frustrates the husbandmans hopes, or fills not the
hands of her haruest-labourers: but in some part so fertile, that after three
years glebe of Saffron, the Land for 18. more, will yield plenty of Barley,
without either dung or other fatning earth

(5) Her ancient Inhabitants known to the Romans, were by Caesar called the
Trinobants, of whom in the former Chapter we have spoken, and in our History
shall speak more at large. But this name perished with the age of the Empire,
the Saxons presently framed a new; and with Hertford and Middlesex made it
their East Saxons Kingdom, until that Egbert brought this and the whole into
an entire and absolute Monarchy: the Daues after them laid so sore for this
Province, that at ^eamfleet and Hauenet (now Shobery) they fortified most
strongly; and at Barklow, (besides the hills mounted for their burials) the
Danewort with her red beryes, so plentifully grow, that it is held and
accounted to spring from the blood of the Danes which in that place was spilt,
and the herb as yet is called from them the Danes-bloud; neither yet were they
quelled to surcease that quarrel; but at Ashdowne abode the Iron-side in
fight, wherein so much blood of the English was spilt, that Canutus their King
in remorse conscience, built a Church in the place, to pacify God for the
sins of his people: But when the Normans had got the garland of the whole,
many of their Nobles there seated themselves, whose posterities since, both
there and elsewhere, are spread further abroad in the Realm.

(6) The Commodities that this Shire yields, are many and great, as of Woods,
Corn, Cattle, Fish, Forests, and Saffron; which last grows with such gain
and increase upon her North parts, that from a split cloue much like unto
Garlic, a white bluish Flower shortly springs, from whence fillets of
Saffron are gathered before the Sun, and dried, are sold as spice with great
gain. From the Islands Canuey, Mersey, Horsey, Northly, Osey, Wallot, and
Foulness, great store of Fish and Foul are daily gotten: and so from their
Cattle have they continual increase, which men and boys milk; as well the
Ewe as the Kine; whereof they make great and thick Cheese, sold abroad in the
Land, and much thereof transported into other Countries. Their Oysters which we
call Walfleete, the best in esteem, and are thought from Pa^^^e to have been
served in the Romans Kitchins. But least we should exceed measure in
commending, or the people repose their trust in the soil; behold what God can
do, to frustrate both in a moment, and that by his meanest creatures: for in
our age and remembrance, the year of Christ 1581. an Army of Mice so over
ran the Marshes in Dengey Hundred, near unto South-minster in this County,
that they shore the grass to the very roots, and so tainted the same with
their venomous teeth, that a great Murraine fell upon the Cattle which grased
thereon, to the great loss of their owners.

(7) The chiefest City for account at this day, in this Shire, is Colchester,
built by Coilus the British Prince, one hundred twentie-foure years after the
birth of our Savior Christi (if he of Mo^mouth say true) wherein his son
Lucius, Helena, and Constantine, the first Christian King, Empress, and
Emperor in the world, were borne: which made Necham for Consiantine to sing as
he did.

From Colchester there rose a Star,
The Rays whereof gave glorious light
Throughout the world in climates far,
Great Constantine, Romes Emperor bright.
And the Romans to the great honor of Helena inscribed her, Pi^ssima
Venerabilis Augusta. But of these we shall be occasioned to speak more
hereafter. This City is situated upon the South of the River Coln; from whence
it has the name, and is walled about, raised upon a high Trench of earth,
though now much decayed, having six gates of entrance, and three posternes in
the West wall, besides nine Watch-Towers for defense, and contains in
compass 1980 paces; wherein stand eight fair Churches, and two other without
the walls, for Gods divine service: S Tenants and the Black Friars decayed in
the Suburbs; Mary Magdalins, the Nunnery, S John's, and the Cruched Friars, all
suppressed: within toward the East is mounted an old Castle, and elder ruins
upon a trench containing two Acres of ground, whereas yet may be seen the
provident care they had against all ensuing assaults.

The trade of this Town stands chiefly in making of Cloth and Baies, with
Says, and other like Stuffes daily invented; and is governed by two Bailiffes,
twelve Aldermen, all wearing Scarlet; a Recorder, a Towne-Clerke, and four
Sergeants at Mace. Whose position for Latitude is in the degree 52. 14.
minutes; and for Longitude, in the degree 21. and 50. minutes.

(8) Places of antiquity and memorable note in this County, I observe the
most famous to be Camalodumum, by us Maldon, which was the Royal Seat of
Cunobel^^ King of the Trino^antes, as by his money therein minted appears,
about the time of our Saviors birth: which City afterward Claudius won
from the Britains, and therein placed a Colony of Soldiers, which were called
Victricensis. This City Queen Boduo, in revenge of her wrongs, raced to the
ground, what time she stirred their people against Nero, with the slaughter of
seventy thousand of the Romans. Of some later and lesser account was
Ithanchester, now S. Peter's upon the wall, where the Forteuses with their
Captain kept, toward the declination of the Roman Empire. In the East
Promontory of this County, in the Reign of Richard the second, the teeth of a
Giant were found (if they were not of an Elephant) of a marvelous size (says
Raph Coggeshall) and not far thence, in the reign of Elizabeth, more bones
to the like wonder were dug up.

(9) I purposely omit the message of a Pilgrim from S. John Baptist, by whom he
sent a Ring to King Edward Confessor; for which cause his house took the name
Hauering: seeing the Monks of those times made no great dainty daily to forge
matter for their own advantage: who in this Shire so swarmed that they had
houses erected at Waltham, Pritlewell, Tiltey, Dun^ow, Leeye, Hatfeild
Peuerell, Chelmesford, Coggeshall, Maldon, Earls. coln, Col^hester, S Osths,
Saffron-Walden, Hatfield-Bradocke, and more, with great revenues thereto
belonging; all which felt the Axes and Hammers of destruction, when the rest of
such foundations fell under the ^^^ile of King Henry the eight, who with
Hezekiah brake down all these Brazen Serpents.

(10) This Shire is divided into 20. Hundreds, wherein are seated 21
Market-Townes, 5. Cattles, 5. Havens, 2 of his Majesty's Mannours, and 415.
Parish-Churches.

SVFFOLKE. CHAPTER XVI.
SVFFOLKE, in regard of them which were seated in Norfolk, is a Country most
plenteous and pleasant for habitation. It is separated from Norfolk, by the
Rivers of the lesser Ouse, and Waueney, whose heads meet almost in the midst of
her Verge, and that very near together: the one taking course East, and the
other full West, upon which part Cambridge-shire does wholly confront. The
South side is severed by Stoure from Essex, and the East together washed with
the Germane Seas.

(2) The Air is good, sweet, and delectable, and in some parts, of some of our
best Physicians, held to be the best in the Land: the Soil is rich, fruitful,
and with all things well replenished; in a word, nothing wanting for pleasure
of profit.

(3) The form thereof is some what Cressant, shooting up narrower into the
North, and spreading wider toward the South, whose broadest part is about
twenty miles: but from East to West much more; for from Easton point (the
furthest of this Shire, yea of all Britain into the Sea) unto great Ouse
River, her Western bounder, are forty five miles, and the whole in
circumference, about one hundred forty six miles.

(4) Anciently this part of the Island was possessed by the Iceni, who as it
seems by Tacitus, joined in Amity with the Romans, a mighty people (says
he) and never shaken with wars before the reign of Claudius, but then by
Ostorius were vanquished, though not without great slaughter of the Romans; and
in a Battle against them, M. Ostorius the son of the General, won great
honor in saving of a Roman Citizens life; so ready were they to give and
receive Honors to themselves, but slightly to pass over, and to smoother
far greater exployts of the Britains: which notwithstanding long in these
parts they could not do; for the wrongs of the Icenians growing intolerable,
who by the Roman Soldiers were put out of their rightful possessions, their
Princes accounted no better then Slaves, and their Queen whipped in most
ignominious manner; under Boduo they wrought their revenge, as in the History
(Christ assisting) shall be further related.

Next to these Icenians, were the Saxons that got their footing into these
parts, and of them, this with Norfolk, Cambridge shire, and the I Will of Ely,
was made their East Angles Kingdom; though as it seems ever in subjection
either to the Mercians, or to the Kings of Kent whose offspring ending in S
Edmund the Martyr, after the Danes had laid it most desolate, Edward the Elder
subdued it unto his West Saxons Monarchy: and that likewise ending in King
Edward the Confessor, many Noble Normans got their possessions in these parts,
whose offspring are plenteously replenished in this Shire to this day.

(5) The commodities of this Shire are many and great, whereof the chiefest
consists in Corn, in Cattle, Cloth, Pasturage, Woods, Seafish and Foul;
and as Abbo Floricensis has depainted, this County is of a green and passing
fresh hue, pleasantly replenished with Orchards, Gardens and Groues^ thus he
described it above six hundred years since, and now we find as he has said;
to which we may add their gain from the Pa^le, whose Cheeses are traded not
only thorowout England, but into Germany, France, and Spain, and are highly
commended by Pantaleon the Physician, both for color and taste.

(6) And had Ipswich (the only eye of this Shire) been as fortunate in her
Surname, as she is blessed with Commerce and buildings, she might (...) have
borne the title of a City: neither ranked in the (...) and seat, does equal
most places of the Land be^^^ (...) about, both by a Rampire of earth, mounted
along her North and West parts, and places of entrance where gates have stood;
which no doubt, by the Danes were cast down, in the year of Jesus Christ 991.
when they sacked with spoil all these Seacoasts: and again in the year one
thousand, laid the streets desolate, and the houses on heaps: yet afterward
recovering both breath and beauty, her buildings from St^ke-Church in the
South, to Saint Margarets in the North, now contain 19^0 paces, and from S
Helens in the East, to S. Matthewes Church in the West, are no less then 2120.
full of streets plenteously inhabited, wherein are twelve Parish-Churches
seated, besides them suppressed; such were Christ-Church, S Georges, S. James,
the White, the Black, and Gray Friars* The Site of this Town is removed from
the Equator, unto the degree 52. 25 minutes: and by Mercators observation, from
the first West points 22. degrees, 9 minutes: and is yearly governed by two
Bailiffes, and ten Port-men, all wearing Scarlet with twenty-foure of their
Common Council in purple: a Recorder, a Towne-Clerke, five Sergeants, whereof
one is for the Admiraltie, a Beadle, and Common Crier, all in blew, with the
Towns Arms on their Sleeue.

The other Eye of this shire is S. Edmund^bury. By Abbo the Royal Town,
wherein at the day-breake of the Saxons conversion, Sigebert King of the
East Angles founded a Christian Church: and upon the occasion of King Edmounds
burial (who at Hoxon was shot to death) has been ever since called S
Edmunds-bury, where was built to his honor one of the fairest Monasteries in
the world, begun by King Canute, much affrighted with the seeming appearance of
that Martyrs Ghost, who to expiate the Sacrilegious impiety of his Father
Suenus, enriched the place with many endowments, and offered up his own Crown
upon the (...) Martyrs Tomb. For the beauty and buildings of this Abbey and
Town, let Leyland for me declare: (...) finely seated, so delicately, upon the
easy ascent of an hill, (...) stately Abbey, either for revenues or
incomparable (...) then a Monastery, so many Gates for entrance, and some of
them brass, so many Towers, and a most glorious Church, upon which attend
three others, standing all in the same Churchyard, all of them passing fine,
and of a curious workmanship. Whose ruins lie in the dust, lamenting their
fall, moving the beholders to piety their case.

Near unto this Town a great Battle was fought by Robert Bossu, Earl of
Leicester, against his Sovereign King Henry the second: but was worthily
overcome by Richard Lucy, the Kings high Justice, himself and wife taken, with
many Flemings and Englishmen slain.

(7) Other places worthy of remembrance this County affords; such is Ex^ing in
the West, formerly famous for the birth of S. Andrey, daughter to King Anna,
one of the three names of the Shires division. Rendl^sham in the East, where
Redwald the first Christian in this Kingdom held his Court: and Hadley in her
South, where Guthrum the Dane whom Elfred baptized, was buried. And things of
stranger note are the limits of the East Angles Territories, running along
New Market heath, vulgarly called the Diuels-ditch: the like fable is formally
told by Nubrigensis, that at Wulpet in the heart of this Shire, two green
boys of Satyrs kind arose out of the ground, from the Antipodes; believe it
if you will: and Ralfe Coggeshall in the Monuments of C^l^hester, declares,
that a Fish in all parts like a man was taken near Orford, and for six
months was kept in the Castle, whence after he escaped again to the Sea.

As strange, but most true, was a crop of Pease, that without tillage or sowing
grew in the Rocks, betwixt this Orford and Aldebrough, in the year 1555 when
by unseasonable weather a great dearth was in the Land: there in August were
gathered above one hundred Quarters, and in blossoming remained as many more,
where never grass grew, or earth ever seen, but hard solid Rocks three
yards deep under their roots.

(8) Places separated from common use, and devoted to God and his service by
religious Princes, were at S. Edmunds, Ipswich, Ikleworth, Blithborow, Clare,
Iaeston, Burgh Castle, wherein Sigebert King of the East Angles entered the
profession of a Monk: but was thence forced by his people, to fight against
the Mercians: in which Battle he was slain. And Dunwich, where Foelix founded
his Episcopal See. These with many others in this County were suppressed in
the fall of the Monasteries, and their Revenues assumed by King Henry the
Eight.

(9) This Shire is principally divided into three parts, which are called the
Celdable, S. Edmunds, and S. Audreys Liberties, subdivided into twentie-two
Hundreds and them again into 575. Parish-Churches, wherein are seated seven
Castles, and twentie-eight Market-Townes.

NORTHFOLKE. CHAPTER XVII.
NORTHFOLKE is an Island inclining to an ouall form, closed on the South part
with the Rivers of Waueney and the l^sser Ouse, which diuides it from Suffolk.
On the East and North with the Germane Ocean; on the West toward
Cambridge-shire, with some branches of the greater Ouse; toward Lincolne-shire
with that part of the neue which passes from Wisbitch into the Washes.

It contains in length (from Yarmouth to Wisbitch) about fifty miles* In
breadth (from Thetford to Wels) about thirty. The whole Circuit is about two
hundred forty two miles.

The Name arises from the situation of the people, who being the Norther-most
of the Kingdom of East Angles, are therefore called the Northfolke, as the
Souther-most of the Southfolke*

The Air is sharp and piercing, especially in the Champion, and near the
Sea^ therefore it delaieth the Spring and Harvest, the situation of the Country
inclining thereto, as being under the 53. degree of Latitude.

The So^e diverse: about the Towns commonly good; as Clay; Chalk, or sa^
earth, well watered, and with some wood: upward to the Heaths naked, dry, and
barren: Marsland and Flegg exceeding rich; but Marsland properly for Pastere,
Flegg for Corn.

(2) The parts from Thetford to Buruham, and thence Westward, as also along the
Coast, be counted Champion: the rest (as better furnished with woods) Woodland.
The Champion abounds with Corn, Sheep, and Conies, and here in the barren
Heaths (as the providence of our Ancestors has of old disposed them) are very
profitable. For on them principally lie our Fould courses, called of the Saxons
(whose institution they therefore seem to be) Paldyoeun, that is, Liberty of
fold or fouldage. These Heaths by the Compasture of the sheep (which we call
Tath:) are made so rich with Corn, that when they fall to be sown, they
commonly match the fruitfullest grounds in other Countries and laid again, do
long after yield a sweeter and more plentiful feed for sheep: so that each of
them maintain other, and are the chiefest wealth of our Country. The Woodland
(fitter for grass) is maintained chiefly by feeding of Cattle, yet well
stored with Corn and Sheep.

The Coast is fortunate in Fish* and has many good Harbors, whereof Lenn and
Yarmouth be the mother-ports, and of great traffic: Wels and Blakeney next in
estimation.

The whole County abounds with Rivers and pleasant Springs, of which the
Ouse is chiefest, by whose plentiful branches, the Isle of Fly, the Towns and
Shires of Cambridge, Humington, and the County of Suffolk vent and receive
Commodities. The next is Hierus or Year, passing from Norwich to Yarmouth,
where it receives the Bure coming from Aylsham, both of them of great service
for water-carriages, but very notable for their plenty of (...) for some one
man out of an hold upon the Bure, has drawn up ordinarily once a year,
between two Nets, about five or six score busness of Fish at one draught. The
Waueney and the lesser Ouse are also Nauigable and of great use. The residue I
omit.

(3) I he people were anciently called ICENI, as they also of Suffolk,
Cambridge-shire, and Huntington-shire, and supposed to be of them whom Caesar
names Cenimagni; Ptolemie, Simeni; some T^gens. Their manners were likely to
be as the rest of the Britains, barbarous at those times, as appears by
Caesar and Tacitus, Neither can I otherwise commend their Successors the
Saxons: for so also their own Countryman Ethelwerd terms them. Since the
entry of the Normans, they have been accounted civil and ingenious, apt to
good Letters, adorning Religion with more Churches and Monasteries, then any
Shire of England, and the Laws and Seats of Justice (for many ages) with some
excellent men; from whom most of our chief Families, and some of the greatest
Nobility of the Kingdom, have taken advancement And herein is Northfolke
fortunate, that as Crete boasted of an hundred Cities, so may she of an hundred
Families of Gentlemen, never yet attainted of high Treason. How the government
of this Country was about Caesar's time, is uncertain, but (agreeable no doubt
to the rest of the Britains) under some peculiar Toparch or Regulus, as
Tacitus terms him. The latter Romans held it by two Garrisons, one at
Gariannum near Yarmouth; the other at Branedunum, now called Brancastre, both
of horse, and commanded by the Comes Maritims Tractus, as Marcellinus calls
him, termed after Comes Littoris Saexonici Upon the entry of the Saxons, this
County with Suffolk fell in the portion of the Angles, and about the year
five hundred sixty one, were together erected into a Kingdom by Vffa, of whom
the succeeding Kings were tituled Vffines. But having suffered many Tempests of
Fortune, it was in the year 870. utterly wasted and extinct by Hungar and
Hubba the Danes, who overthrew the virtuous King Edmund about Thetford, and
after martyred him at S. Edmundsbury. Yet they did not long enjoy it: for King
Edward shortly recovered it from them, and annexed it to his other Kingdoms.
The Danes notwithstanding inhabited abundantly in these parts, so that many of
our Towns were founded by them, and a great part of our people and Gentry are
risen out of their blood.

(4) This Kingdom of East Angles was after allotted to an Earldom of that
name by William the Conqueror, who made Radulph a Britain, marying his
kinswoman, Earl thereof; but gave the greatest parts of this County about
Wimondham, Keninghall, Lenn, Buruham, Fulmerstone, etc. to W. de Albany,
Pincernae, and W de Warranna Forrestario, who to strengthen themselves
(according to the use of that time) with the homage and service of many
tenants, divided large portions of the same amongst their friends and
followers; so that most of the Manours and Lands in the parts aforesaid, were
in those days either mediately or immediately holden of one of them. And as
Northfolke and Suffolk were first united in a Kingdom, then in an Earldom,
so they continued united in the Sheriffe-wicke till about the fifteenth year
of Queen Elizabeth.

(5) The Towns here are commonly well built, and populous; three of them being
of that worth and quality, as no one Shire of England has the like, Norwich,
Lenn, and Yarmouth: to which for ancient reputation (as having been a seat of
the Kings of East Angles) I may add Thetford, known to Antonius, Ptolemie,
and elder ages, by the name of Sitemagus, when the other three were yet in
their infancy, and of no esteem: for I accept not the Relations of the
Antiquity and State of Norwich in the time of the Britain and Saxons, though
Alexander Neuil has well graced them. Her very name abridgeth her Antiquity,
as having no other in Histories but Norwich, which is mere Saxon or Danish,
and signifies the North-Towne or Castle. It seems to have risen out of the
decay of her neighbor Vinta, now called Castor, and as M. Cambden notes, not
to have been of mar^^ before the entry of the Danes, who in the year 1004.
under Sweno their Captain, first sacked, and then burnt it, even in her
infancy* Yet in the days of Edward the Confessor it recovered 1320.
Burgesset. But maintaining the cause of Earl Radulph aforesaid against the
Conqueror, they were by famine and sword wasted to 560 at which time the Earl
escaping by ship, his wife upon composition yielded the Castle, and followed
(...) William Rusu^ time it was grown famous for Merchandise and concourse of
people; so that Herbert then translating the Bishopric from Thetford thither,
made each of them an ornament to other. In variety of times it felt much
variety of Fortune: By fire in Anno 1508. By extreme plagues, whereof one in
An. 1348. was so outrageous, as 17104. are reported to have died thereof
between the Calends of January and of July. By misery of war, as sacked and
spoiled by the Earl of Flaunders and Hugh Big^d, Anno 1174. In yielding to
Lewis the French, against their natural Lord King John, Anno 1216. By the
disinherited Barons, An. 1266. By tumult and insurrection between the Citizens
and Churchmen: once about the year 1265. which if Henry the third had not
come in person to appease, the City was in hazard to be ruined: The second
time in Anno 1446. for which the Major was deposed, and their Liberties for a
while selfed. In Edward the sixths time, by Ketts rebellion, whose fury chiefly
raged against this City. Since this it has flourished with the blessings of
Peace, Plenty, Wealth and Honor: so that Alxander Neu^ doubts not to
prefer it above all the Cities of England, except London. It is situate upon
the River Hierus, in a (...) valley, but on using ground, having on the East
the Hills and Heath called Mussold for Most-would, as I take it. In the 17
year of King Stephen it was new founded, and made a Corporation* In Edward the
firsts time, closed with a same Wall, ^auing on a part that the River
defends. First governed by four Bayliffes; then by Henry the fourth in An
1403. erected into a Majoraltie and County; the limits whereof now extend to
Eatonb^^ge* At this present it has about thirty Parishes, but in ancient time
had many more.

(6) Lenn having been an ancient Borrough under the Government of a Bayliffe
or Reave, called Praepositus, was by King John in the sixth year of his Reign
made Liber Burgus, and (besides the gift of his memorable Cup, which to this
day honors this Corporation) endowed with diverse fair Liberties. King Henry
the third in the 17 year of his Reign (in recompense of their service against
the outlawed Barons in the Isle of Ely) enlarged their Charter, and granted
them further, to choose a Major Loco Prapositi: unto whom King Henry the Eight,
in the sixteenth year of his Reign, added twelve Aldermen, a Recorder, and
other Officers, and the bearing of a sword before the Major. But the Town
coming after to the same King, he in the twentie-ninth of his Reign, changed
their name, from Mator and Burge^ses Lenn Episcopi, to Mator and Burge^ses Lenn
Regis.

(7) Yarmouth is the Key of the Coast, named and seated by the mouth of the
River Year. Begun in the time of the V^nes, and by small accessions growing
populous, made a Corporation under two Bayliffes by King Henry the third* and
by his Charter, about the fifteenth year of his Reign, walled It* It is an
ancient member of the Ci^que Ports, very well built and fortified, having only
one Church (but fair and large) founded by Bishope Herbert, in William Rufus
days. It maintains a Peer against the Sea, at the yearly charge of five
hundred pound, or thereabout: yet has it no possessions, as other
Corporations, but like the children of Aeol^^ and Thetis: Maria and 4. ventos,
as an Inquisitor finds An. 10. Hen 3. There is yearly in September the
worthiest. Herring-fishing in Europe, which draws great concourse of people,
and makes the Town much the richer all the year, but very unsavory for the
time. The Inhabitants are so courteous, as they have long held a custom to
feast all persons of worth, repairing to their Town.

(8) The Bishopric of Norwich had first hereseat at Dunwich in Suffolk, and
was there begun by Foelix, who converted this County, and the East Angles) to
the Faith. Being brought out of Burgundy by Sigeber^ (the first Christian King
of the East Angles) he landed at Babingley by Lenn, and there builded the first
Church of these Countries, which in his memory, is at this day called by his
Name. The second he built at Shar^^bourn then of wood, and therefore called
Stock-Chappell. After Foelix and three of his Successors, this Bishopric was
divided into two Sees: the one with eleven Bishops in succession, continuing at
Dunwich; the other with twelve at Elmham in Norfolk. Then united again in the
time of King Edwyn, the entire See for twelve other Bishops remained at Elmham,
and in the Conquerours time was by his Chaplain Arfastus (being the
thirteenth) translated to Thetford, from thence by Herbert (his next Successor
save one) bought of W. Rusus for 1900. pounds, and brought to Norwich. This
Herbert (surnamed Losinga a Norman) builded the Cathedral Church there, and
endowed it with large possessions. Not far from thence he also builded another
Church to S. Leonard, a third at Elmham, a fourth at Lenn, (S. Margarets, a
very fair one) and the fifth at Yarmouth before mentioned. By the Cathedral
Church he builded a Palace for the Bishops, and founded the Priory there (now
converted to Deane and Chapter) and another Priory at Thetford. Since his time
the Bishops See has immoueably remained at Norwich, but the ancient Possession
are severed from it, and in lieu thereof the Abbey and Lands of S Benedict of
Holme annexed to it. The Commodities of this County I have contained in these
four Verses.

Ingenio and populi cultu Norfolcia clari est;
Hinc fluvijs, illine Insula clausa mari;
Qua ratis, and vellus, frumenta, cuniculus, agnus.
Lac scatet, and pisces, pabula, mella, crocus.
This Description of Northfolke, I reciued from the Right Worshipful, Sir
HENRY SPELMAN Knight.

CAMBRIDGE-SHIRE. CHAPTER XVIII.
CAMBRIDGE-SHIRE, lies bounded upon the North with Lincolneshire and
Northfolke; upon the East with Norfolk and Suffolk; upon the South with
Hartford-shire and Essex; and upon the West with Bedford and Huntington shires.

(2) This Province is not large, nor for air greatly to be liked, having the
Fennes so spread upon her North, that they infect the air far into the rest:
From whose furthest point unto Royston in the South, are thirtie-fiue miles;
but in the broadest is not fully twenty: the whole in Circumference, traced by
the compass of her many indents, one hundred twenty and eight miles.

(3) The Soil does differ both in air and commodities; the Fenny surcharged
with waters: the South is Champion, and yields Corn in abundance, with
Meadowing. Pastures upon both the sides of the River Came, which diuides that
part of the Shire in the midst, upon whose East-bancks the Muses have built
their most sacred Seat, where with plenteous increase they have continued for
these many hundred years.

(4) For from ancient Grantcester, Camboritum by Antonine, now famous
Cambridge, the other breast and Nurse-mother of all pious literature, have
flowed full steames of the learned Sciences into all other parts of this Land,
and elsewhere: ancient indeed, if their Story be rightly writ, that will have
it built by Cantaber a Spaniard, three hundred seauenty five years before the
birth of our Savior, who thither first brought and planted the Muses. This
City Grantcester by the tyranny of time lost both her own beauty and her
professed Athenian Students, so that in Bedaes days, seven hundred years
after the Word became flesh, it is described to lie a little desolate City,
and as yet retains the name, without any memory of circuit by walls.

Of this City, in the year of Christ Jesus 141. as the Monk of Barton does
report, nine Scholars received their Baptism, and became Preachers of the
Gospel among the Britains; which (as he says) happened in the Reign of
Hadriant the Emperor. But when the (...), Stors, His^nes and Saxons had laid
all things waste, and with their savage swords cut out the leaves of all civil
learning, this as the rest yielded to destruction, and so lay forlorn till the
Saxons themselves became likewise civil; when S^gebert the first Christian
King of the East Angles, from the example of France, whither he had been
banished, built Schooies in his Kingdom, and here at Grancester the chief,
recalling thither the Professors of Arts and Sciences, as the Story records,
and Traditions do hold.

But afterward, as it seems, their increase being straightned, the Students
complained (as the Prophets did to Elisha) that the place was too little for
them to dwell in, therefore enlarging more Northward, seated themselves near
unto the Bridge, whereupon the place began to be called Grantbridge, though
others from the crooked River Came will have it named Cambridge. This place
(though sacred and exempted from Mars, as Sylla once spoke; when he spared
Athens,) the Danes in their destructions regarded no whit, wherein they often
wintered after their spoils, and left the scatres of their savage sores ever
behind them. And in the year 1010 when Suen in his fierceness bare down all
before him, this place was no place for Scholars to be in: Wars loud Alarums
ill consorting the Muses mild Harmonies. Yet when the Normans had got the
Garland on their heads, and these Danish storms turned into Sunshine days,
Gislebert the Monk, with Odo, Terricus, and William, all three of the like
Monastical Profession, in the Reign of King Henry the First, resorted unto
this place, and in a public Barn read the Lectures of Grammar, Logic, and
Rhetoric, and Gislebert Divinity upon the Sabbath and Festival days. From
this little fountain (says Peter Blessensis) grew a great River, which made
all England fruitful, by the many Masters and Teachers proceeding out of
Cambridge, as out of a holy Paradise of God. The first College therein endowed
with Possessions was Peterhouse, built by Hugh Balsham Bishop of Ely, in the
year of Grace, 1284. whose godly example many others followed, so that at this
day there are sixteen most stately Colleges and Hals, for building, beauty,
endowments, and store of Students so replenished, that unless it be in her
other Sister Oxford, the like are not found in all Europe.

But at what time it was made an University, let Robert de Remyngton tell you
for me. Do the Reign (says he) of King Edward the first, Grantbridge, of a
School, by the Court of Rome, was made an University, such as Oxford is.
Lastly, the Meridian Line cutting the Zenith over this City, is distant from
the furthest West-poynt, according to Mercator, 20 degrees, 50 scruples, and
the Arch of the same Meridian, lying between the Equator and Vertical point,
is 52. degrees, 20 scruples.

(5) Another City formerly in great fame is Elie, had in account for the
repute and holiness of Votary Nuns there residing; built first by Audrey
wife to one Tombret a Prince in this Province, who had this place as a part of
her Dowry: she having departed from her second Husband Egbert King of
Northumberland devoted her self to the service of God, and built here a
Monastery, whereof she became the first Abbess. This in the Danish desolations
was destroyed, but soon after reedified by Ethelwold Bishop of Winchester, who
stored it with Monks; unto whom King Edgar granted the jurisdiction over four
Hundreds and a half, within these Fennes and the East Angles limits, which to
this day are called The Liberties of S. Audrey, after whose example many Nobles
so enriched it with large Renexewes, that as Malmesbury says, the Abbat
thereof laid up yearly in his own Coffers a thousand and four hundred pounds
And of latter times the Monks thereof became so wealthy, that their old
decayed Church they renewed with new and most stately buildings, which is now
the Cathedral of the Diocese, and for beauty gives place to no other in the
Land Eight other foundations set apart from secular use in this Province, were
at Thorney, Charteres, Denny, Elsey, Beach, Barnwell, Swasey, and Shengey, all
which in the days of King Henry the eight came to the period of their
surpassing wealth, and left their Lands to the dispose of his Will.

(6) The general commodity of this Shire is Corn, which in the South, and
Champion-part does abundantly grow, as also Saffron, a very rich Spice. Some
Woods there are, and Pasture both pleasant and profitable. The North part
thereof is Fenny, but withal fruitful, whereof Henry of Huntington and
William of Malinesbury thus do write: This Fenny Country is passing rich and
plenteous, yea, and beautiful also to behold, whereiwis so great store of
fish, that strangers do wonder, and water-fowle so cheap, that five men may
therewith be satisfied with less then an halfe-penny.

(7) Places of ancient note in this Shire are these, the Erminstreet way, which
upon the lower West parts of this County, through Roisen, runs forthright
unto Huntingdon. And from Reach a Market-Towne standing near to the River
Came, a great Ditch and Trench is cast all along Newmarket-Heath, which for the
wonder received thereat, is of the vulgar called The Deu^^ Ditch, being in
truth made for a defense against the Mercians by the East Angles, whose
Kingdom it inuerged. The Gogmagog Hills near Cambridge retain the remembrance
of the Danish Siaetion, where as yet on their tops is seen a Rampior,
strengthened with a threefold Trench, whereof Goruase of Tillury tells us many
a pretio Tale.

(8) This Shire is divided into seventeen Hundreds, wherein are seated eight
Market-Townes, and has been strengthended with seven Castles, and God
divinely honored in one hundred sixty three Parish-Churches.

HERTFORD-SHIRE. CHAPTER XIX.
HERTFORD-SHIRE is bordered upon the North with Bedford and Cambridge-shires;
upon the East, is altogether bounded by Essex; upon the South, is confined with
Middlesex; and her West butteth upon Buckingham and Bedford-shires.

(2) The form thereof is somewhat circular, with many indents to fetch in those
Towns that are dispersedly stragled into her next Shire: whereof Roiston and
Totteridge are the two extremes from North to South, betwixt whom in a strait
drawn line are twenty seven English miles, and from Putnam Westward, to
Cheston Nunnery in the East, are twenty eight; the whole circumference, about
an hundred and thirty miles.

(3) The air is temperate, sweet, and healthful, as seated in a Climate
neither too hot, nor too cold: the soil is rich, plenteous, and delightful,
yielding abundance of Corn, Cattle, Wood, and Grass, destitute of nothing
that ministers profit or pleasures for life, which are more augmented by the
many Rivers that arise and run through this Shire, watering her own and others,
till they empty themselves into the Sea.

(4) Her ancient Inhabitants in the time of the Romans were the
Cattieuchlanians, or Cassijans, and the Trinobantes, as their Writers declare,
and in the Heptar^hy was possessed by the East Saxons, excepting some small
portion thereof, that the Mercian Kings enjoined. The Danes also in their
ouerrunnings, sought to stay themselves in this Shire, and at Ware (then Wear)
pitched down their rest and hope: for passing the Lea in their light Pinnaces
and Shallops, raised therein a Fort, which maugre the English they kept, until
that by the wise police of King Elfred, that River was parted into to more
running streams, whereby their Ships perished, and they intercepted both of
provision and farther supply.

(5) The Romans before them had made Verolaxium in this Shire their greatest
for account, which in Neroes time was a Municipiall, as Nimus in his Catalogue
of Cities does call it, or as Tacitus, a Free Town; sacked by Boduo that ever
eternized Queen of the Ictanians, when seventy thousand of the Romans and
Consecrates by her revenging sword perished: the site and circuit whereof, in
this Card we have set according to our view and measure there taken: whose
magnificence for Port and stately Architecture, were found by her large and
arched Vaults in the days of King Edgar, which were dug into and cast down
by (...) and (...), Abbots of S. Albanes, for that they were the receptacles
and lurking holes of (...) and (...): the ruins of which, have raised the
beauty of her suruiuing and fair S. Albanes, where (...) the great Mercian,
in great devotion, built a most stately (...) whose Church yet standing,
retains the ashes of many Nobles, there slain in the quarrel of York and
Lancaster; and a Font of solid brass brought out of Scotland by Sir Richara
Lea, from the siege of L^eth

(6) Many other Towns, both for Commerce, stately Buildings, and of ancient
Record, this Shire affords, whereof Hertford, though the Shire-Towne, is not
the richest; the passage through Ware has left her ways so untrodden: to
prevent which, in former times that River at Ware was chained up, and the
Bayliffe of Hertford had the custody of the Key: which howsoever they have
lost, yet has the Town gotten her Governor to be preferred from the name of
a Bilisse, unto a Mayor, assisted with nine Burg^sses, a Recorder, and two
Sergeants their Attendants. Herein a Castle, for situation pleasant, for
Trench, Walls, and River, sufficiently fenced, was lately seen; but marked to
destiny, as the Town to decay, has found the hand of Fortune to ouermatch
her strength, and to ruinate the Priory, S. Nicholas, and S. Mary's Churches,
besides a Cell of S. Albanes Monks, that therein were seated. The like fate
falls unto Hemsled, and her fair Castle, wherein Richard King of the Romans
left his life Yet Lingely is graced both in the birth of Prince Edmund the
fifth son to King Edward the third, and the burial of Richard the second
that unfortunate King, who in the Cell of Friars Preachers was there first
buried, but afterward removed and enshrined at Westminster. And in another
Langley, near the East from thence, was borne that Pontifical Break-speare,
Bishop of Rome, known by the name of Hadrian the fourth, (and famous for his
stirrup-holding by Frederick the Emperor) whose breath was lastly stopped by
a Fly that flew into his mouth.

(7) The civil Battles that in this Shire have been sought, in the Map it
self are inserted, and therefore here omitted, but the more ancient remembered
unto us by Osister-hill near S. Albans, whom the judicious Combden supposes
to have been the Camp of Ostorius the second Lieutenant, and Subdue^ of great
Caractatus; as also seven small round Hills betwixt Sieuennedge and Ku^^worth,
in which are supposed some Roman Soldiers to lie buried.

(8) Religious Houses built and suppressed, the chiefest for account in this
Shire, were S. Albans, Ro^ston, Ware, Sopwell, Langeley, besides them at
Hertford, whom Beda calls Horudford: which Cities graduation is distant and
removed from the Equator 52. degrees 5. minutes of Latitude, and set from the
first point of the West, according to Mercator, in the 20 degree 29. minutes of
Longitude. The ^^^domes whereof, were enjoyed only by tho^^ two honorable
(...) whose atchieuements we have also therein expressed.

(9) This Counties division is into eight Hundreds, wherein are seared
eighteen Market-Townes, and one hundred and twenty Parish-Churches.

BEDFORD-SHIRE. CHAPTER XX.
BEDFORD-SHIRE, seated in the South-East of this Island, is a plain and
champion Country, and lies bounded upon the North with Huntington-shire; upon
the East with Cambridge and Hartford-shires; upon the South with Hartford and
Buckingham-shires; and upon the West with Buckingham and Northampton-shires.

(2) The form thereof is somewhat ouall, and not very large: for from Tilbroke
in the North, unto Stu^^am in the South, are but twentie-foure English miles;
and from Turny in the West, unto Hatley Coking in the East, are not fully
fourteen; the whole in Circumference, about seauenty three miles.

(3) The Air is temperate, and the Soil bounteous, especially the North,
whose Borders the fruitful Ouse with her many windings waters. The South is
more lean, and with greater industry brings forth Barley, no better
elsewhere. Generally, this County is Champion, though some places be sprinkled
with Pasturage and Woods.

(4) The ancient Inhabitants known to the Romans, that held in this Shire,
were part of the Cattieuchlani, a stout and warre-strring people: and yet upon
the report of Caesar's proceeding, sent him their subjection for peace. But when
that conquering Nation had brought Britain into a Province under Rome, their
Legions lay at Selenae and Magintum, which are now Sandy and Dunstable, places
of memorable note in this Shire. After them the Saxons coveting for so fair a
Seat, first dispossessed the Britains, under the leading of Cuthwulfe the
West Saxon, about the year of Grace 572. who making it their own, was lastly
enjoyed by the Mercians, as a part of their Kingdom.

(5) In the year of Christ's Incarnation 1399 immediately before those Civil
Wars, that rent in pieces the peace of this Land, between the Princes of
Lancaster and York, the River Ouse near unto Harwood, stood suddenly still,
and refrained to pass any farther; so that forward, men passed three miles
together on foot in the very depth of her Channel; and backward, the waters
swelled unto a great height: which was observed by the judicious, to foretell
some unkind division that shortly should arise.

(6) This County, among the common calamities of the Land, when it lay
trampied under the fect of the Danes, sustained a part: and after that, in the
time of King Stephen, when the Civil Wars thundered betwixt Maud the Empress
and himself, the Shire-Towne was sore wasted, with great slaughter of men: So
when the Barons forsook their allegiance to King John, the Town and Castle
were rendered up unto their hands: and lastly, by King Henry the third, laid
level even with the ground, some ruinous walls appearing toward the Ouse,
but not a stone left upon the Mount where stood his foundation.

(7) This Town by the Britains was called Lettidur; and of us, Bedford: being
the chiefest in the County, from whom it takes the name, and is most
fruitful, and pleasantly seated, having the Ouse running through the Town in
the midst, and a fair Stone Bridge built over the same, whereon are two
Gates to lock and impeach the passage, as occasion shall serve. At the first
entrance stands S. Leonards Hospital for Lazars: and further inwards, S.
John's and S. Mary's Churches: within the Town, S. Paul's, a most beautiful
Church, S. Cuthberis, and S. Peter's: without the Town stands the Friars, S.
Loyes, Alhallowes, and Caudwell Abbey: not far whence sometimes stood a
Chapel upon the Bank of Ouse, wherein (as Florilegus affirms) the body of
Offa the great Mercian King was interred, but by the ouer-swelling of that
River, was borne down, and swallowed up; whose Tomb of Lead (as it were some
fantastical thing) appeared often to them that seek it not, but to them that
seek it (says Rosse) it is invisible. This Town is governed yearly by a
Mator, two Bailiffes, two Chamberlaines, a Recorder, a towne-Clerke, and three
Sergeants with Mases.

(8) A tale of vain credit is reported of Dunstable, that it was built to
bridle the outragiousnesse of a thief named Dun, by King Henry the first: but
certain it is the place was formerly held by the Romans, whose Legions there
lay, as appears by the Coins there usually found, which from Magmium are
corruptly called Madning-money.

(9) Castles in this Shire are Woodhill, Eaton, Temsford, and Amphill, an
honor now appertaining to the Crown. And places of Religion, built by devout
persons, but for Idolatrous Abuses again abolished, were at Bedford, Harwood,
Helenflow, Newenham, Chicksand, Wardon, Woborne, and Dunstable. All these, with
their like, felt the hand of Henry the Eight to lie so heavy upon them, that
they were not able to sustain the weight, but were crushed to pieces, and fell
to the ground.

(10) The Graduation of this County, taken for the Shire-Towne, is placed from
the Equator in the degree of 52. and 30. minutes for Latitude, and is removed
from the first West point of Longitude, 20. degrees and 16. minutes.

(11) Whose Princely Families that have borne the Titles both of Dukes and
Earls, are expressed; and whose Counties division are into nine Hundreds,
wherein are seated ten Market-Townes, and one hundred and sixteen
Parish-Churches.

BVCKINGHAM-SHIRE. CHAPTER XXI.
BVCKINGHAM, for the plenty of Beech-trees there growing, and those in the
elder times of the Saxons called Eucken, may well be supposed from them to have
the name, as afterward the whole Shire had hers from this Town Buckingham.

(2) In form it somewhat resembles a Lion Rampant, whose head or North-point
touches the Counties of Northampton and Bedford; whose back or East-part is
backed by Bedford and Hertford-shires: his loins or South-borders rest upon
Bark shire, and his breast the West side is butted upon wholly by Oxfordshire
The length thereof from Waisbury in the South, to Bradfeild in her North, are
thirty nine miles: the breadth at the broadest, from Ashridge in the East, to
(...)-wood Forest in the West, are eighteen; the whole in Circumference one
hundred thirty (...) miles.

(3) The air is passing good, temperate, and pleasant, yielding the body
health, and the mind content. The soil is rich, fat, and fruitful, giving
abundance of Corn, Grass and Meat. It is chiefly divided into two parts by
the Chiltren bills, which run through this Shire in the midst, and before
tim^ where so postered with Be^^h, that they were altogether impassable, and
became a receptacle and refuge for thieves, who daily endammaged the wayfaring
man; for which cause (...) Abbot of S. A^ba^s caused them to be cut down:
since when those parts are pa^^able, without any great encumbrances of trees;
from whose tops, a large and most pleasing prospect is (...)* The Vale beneath
is plain and champion, a clayie soil, stiff, and tough, but withal
marvelous (...) full naked of woods, but abounding in meadows, pastures, and
tillage, and maintaining an infinite number of sheep, whose soft and fine
fleeces are in great esteem with the Turks as far as, Asia.

(4) The ancient Inhabitants that were seated in this Shire, were the
Catlieuchlani, mentioned by Ptolemie, and them dispersed through the Tract of
Bedford, Hertford, and this. These yielded themselves with the first to Caesar
under the Romans subjection, whose ouer-worne Empire ending in Britain, the
Saxons by strong hand attained this Province, and made it a part of their
Mercian Kingdom: yet was it first subdued unto them by Cherdike the
West Saxon, whose memory is in part continued in the Town Chersey, upon the
West of this County, where in a sharp and bloody battle he was Victor over
the Britains. So also Cuthwulfe a West Saxon at Alesbury in the year of Grace
592. over came the Britains, and bare down all things before him: yet no
sooner was their Hep^archie wained, and their Monarchy able to stand alone,
but that the Danes, before their strength and growth was confirmed, waxed upon
them; and they not able in so weak a hand to hold fast that weight of
greatness they had so grasped, gave place to their conquerours, who did many
harms in this Province: for in the year 914. the Danes furiously raged as
far as Brenwood, where they destroyed the City Burgh, the ancient seat of the
Romans, afterward a royal house of King Edward the Confessor, which they
utterly destroyed.

(5) The Shire-Towne Buckingham, fruitfully seated upon the River Ouse, was
fortified with a Rampire, and Sconses on both banks, by King Edward the elder,
says Marianus the Scottish Writer; where in the heart of the Town has stood a
strong Castle, mounted upon a high hill, which long since was brought to the
period of her estate, now nothing remaining besides the signs, that there she
had stood. The River circulates this Town on every side, that only on the
North excepted, over which three fair stone-bridges lead, and into which the
springs of a Well run, called S. Rumalds, a child-saint borne at Kings-Sutton,
canonized, and in the Church of this Town enshrined, with many conceited
miracles and cures: such was the hap of those times, to produce Saints of all
ages and sexes. This Town is governed by a Bayliffe and twelve principal
Burgesses; and is in the degree removed from the first point of the West for
Longitude 19. 33. scruples, and the North Pole elenated in Latitude for the
degree of 52. 18. scruples.

(6) A Town of ancient note is Stony-Stratford, the Romans Lactorodum, being
built upon that ancient Causey-way which is called Watling-street, where
remain the marks thereof even unto this day At this place Edward the elder
stopped the passage of the Danes, whiles he strengthened Torcester against
them: and herein, King Edward the eldest since the Conquest, reared a
beautiful Cross in memory of Eleanor his dead Queen, as he did in every
place where her Corpse rested, from Herdby in Lincolne-shire, till it was
received and buried at Westminster.

(7) Places intended for Gods true worship, built by devout persons, and
sequestered from worldly employments, were at Launden, Luffeld, Bidlesden,
Bradwell, Nothey, Ankerne, Missenden, Tekeford, Partrendune, Ashridge, and
Alesburie: Ashridge in great repute for the blood (supposed out of Christ's
sides) brought out of Germany by Henry the eldest son of Richard King of the
Romans, and Earl of Cornwall, whereunto resorted great concourse of people
for devotion, and adoration thereof. But when the Sunshine of the Gospel
had pierced through such clouds of darkness, it was perceived apparently to be
only honey clarified and colored with Saffron, as was openly showed at Paul's
Cross by the Bishop of Rochester, the twentie-fourth of February, and year
of Christ 1538. And Alesbury for the holiness of S. Edith, was much
frequented, who having this Town allotted for her Dowry, bad the world and
her husband fa^ewell, in taking upon her the veil of devotion, and in that
fruitful age of Saints became greatly renowned, even as far as to the
working of miracles. These all in the storms and rage of the time, suffered
such shipwreck, that from those turmoiled Seas, their merchandise light in the
right of such Lords as made them their own for wreacks indeed.

(8) With four Castles this Shire has been strengthened, and through eleven
Market-Townes her Commodities traded; being divided, for service to the Crown
and State, into eight Hundreds, and in them are seated one hundred fourscore
and five Parish-Churches.

OXFORDSHIRE. CHAPTER XXI.
OXFORDSHIRE receives her name from that famous University and most
beautiful City Oxford, and this of the Foord of Oxen, say our English-Saxons;
though Leiland upon a ground of conjecture will have it Ousford, from the River
Ouse (by the Latins called Isis) which gives name likewise to the adjoining
Island Ousney. The North point of this Shire is bordered upon by the Counties of
Warwick and Northampton, the East with Buckingham, the West by
Gloucestershire, and the South altogether is parted from Bark-shire by
Thamisis, the Prince of British Rivers.

(2) The blessings both of the sweet-breathing heavens, and the fruitful site
of this Counties soil, are so happy and fortunate, that hardly can besaid
whether exceeds. The air mild, temperate and delicate; the Land fertile,
pleasant, and bounteous; in a word, both Heaven and Earth accorded to make the
Inhabitants healthful and happy: The hills laden with woods and Cattle, the
valleys burdened with Corn and Pasturage, by reason of many fresh springing
Rivers which sportingly there-thorow make their passage, whereof England,
Char^^ll, (...) and Isis are chief: which two last making their Bed of
Marriage (...) together in one channel and name.

(3) The length of this Shire is from Cleydon in the North-west, unto (...) in
her South-East, near unto Thamisis, and amounts almost to forty miles; the
broadest part is in her western Borders, which extending from the said Cleydon
in the North, unto Faring^^^ (...) the River Isis in the South, are scarcely
twenty six: and thence growing narrower (...) in Circumference about one
hundred and thirty miles.

(4) The ancient Inhabitants known to the Romans, were the Dobuni, part
whereof possessed further Westernly into Gloucestershire, and nearer Eastward,
betwixt the bowing of Thamises, were seated the Ancalites, who sent their
submission unto Julius Caesar, when report was made that the Trinobantes had
put themselves under his protection; whereof followed the Britains servitude
under the proud yoke of the all-coueting Romans: yet afterward this Counties
people, being very puissant (as Tacitus terms them) and unshaken by wars,
withstood Ostorius Scapula the Roman Lieutenant, choosing rather to yield their
lives in battle, then their persons to subjection. Of latter times it was
possessed by the Mercian Saxons, as part of their Kingdom, though sometimes
both the West Saxons and the Northumbrians had the dispose of some part
thereof: for Beda affirms that K. Oswold gave the then-flourishing City
D^rchester unto Berinus the West Saxons Apostle, to be his Episcopal See:
whence the good Bishop coming to Oxford, and preaching before Wulpherus the
Mercian King (in whose Court Athelwold the South Saxons heathenish King was
then present) he with all his Nobles were converted to the faith of Christ, and
there baptized, whereby Berinus became the Apostle also of the South Saxons.

(5) Otherplaces of memorable note either for actions therein happening, or for
their own famous esteem, are the R^ll-rich-stones, standing near unto
Enisham in the South of this Shire: a monument of huge stones, set round in
compass, in manner of the Stonch^nge: of which, fabulous tradition has
reported forsooth, that they were metamorphised from men, but in truth were
there erected upon some great victory obtained, either by, or against Rollo the
Dane, who in the year 876. entered England, and in this Shire fought two
Battles, one near unto Hoch-Norton, and a second at the Scier-Stane.

(6) Rod^os likewise remains as a monument of Oxfords high-stiled Barle, but
unfortunate Prince, Robert de Vere, who besides the Earldom, was created by
King Richard the second, Marquess of Dublin, and Duke of Ireland: but at that
Bridge, discomfited in fight by the Nobles, and forced to swim the River,
where began the downfall of his high mounted fortunes; forbeing driven forth
of his Country, lastly died in exile and distressed estate. But more happy is
this County in producing far more glorious Princes, as King Edward the
Confessor, who in Islip was borne; Edward the victorious black Prince, in
Woodstocke; and in Oxford that warlike Coeur de Lion, King Richard the first,
the son of King Henry the second, first took breath.

(7) Which City is, and long has been the glorious seat of the Muses, the
British Athens, and learnings wellspring, from whose buing fountain the
wholesome waters of all good literature streaming plenteously, have made
fruitful all other parts of this Realm, and gained glory amongst all Nations
abroad. Antiquity avouches, that this place was consecrated unto the sacred
Sciences in the time of the old Britains, and that from Greeke-lad, a Town in
Wilt-shire, the Academie was translated unto Oxford, as unto a Plant-plot, both
more pleasing and fruitful: whereto accords the ancient Burlaus and Necham,
this latter also alleging Merlin. But when the beauty of the Land lay under
the Saxons profane feet, it sustained a part of those common calamities,
having little reserved to uphold its former glory, save only the famous
monument of S. Frideswids Virgin Conquest, no other School then left standing
besides her Monastery: yet those great blasts, together with other Danish
storms, being well blown over, King Elfred, that learned and religious
Monarch, recalled the exiled Muses to their sacred place, and built there three
goodly Colleges for the studies of Divinity, Philosophy, and other Arts of
humanity, sending thither his own son Ethelward, and drew thither the young
Nobles from all parts of his Kingdom. The first reader thereof was his
supposed brother Neote, a man of great learning, by whose direction King Elfred
was altogether guided in this his goodly foundation. At which time also,
Asserius Meneuensis, a writer of those times affairs, read the Grammar and
Rhetoric, and affirms that long before them, G^^das, Melkin, Ninius,
Kentigern, S. German, and others, spent there their lives in learned studies.
From which time that it continued a Seed plot of learning till the Norman
Conquest, ^ugul^us records, who himself then lived. No marvel then if
Matthew Paris calls Oxford, the second School of Christendom, and the very
chief Pillar of the Catholic Church And in the Council holden at Vienna, it
was ordained, that in Paris, Oxford, Bononia, and Salamanca (the only
Universities then in Europe) should be erected Schools for the Hebrew, Greek,
Arabicke, and Chaldean tongues, and that Oxford should be the general
University for all England, Ireland, Scotland, and Wales: which point was
likewise of such weight with the Council of Constance, that from this
precedent of Oxford University, it was concluded, that the English Nation was
not only to have precedence of Spain in all General Councels, but was also
to be held equal with France it self. By which high prerogatives this of ours
has always so flourished, that in the days of King Henry the (...) thirty
thousand Students were therein resident, as Archbishop Armachanus (who then
lived) (...) writ, and ^ger (then also living) shows, that for all the civil
wars which hindered such (...) of quiet study, yet 15000. Students were
there remaining, whose names (says he) were (...) in matricula, in the
matriculation book. About which time. John Baltol (the father of Baltol King
of Scots) built a College, yet bearing his name, Anno 1269. and Walter Merton
Bishop of Rochester, that which is now called Merton College; both of them
beautified with buildings, and enriched with lands, and were the first endowed
Colleges for learning in all Christendom. And at this present (...) sixteen
Colleges (besides another newly builded) with eight Hals, and many most (...)
Churches, all adorned with most stately buildings, and enriched with great
endowments, noble Libraries, and most learned Graduates of all professions,
that unless it be her sister Cambridge, the other nursing breast of this Land,
the like is not sound again in the world. This City is also honored with an
Episcopal See. As for the site thereof, it is removed from the Equator in the
degree 52. and one minute, and from the West by Mercators measure, 19. degrees,
and ^0. minutes.

(8) As this County is happy in the possession of so famous an Academie, so
is it graced with most Princely Palaces appertaining to the English Crown,
whereof Woodstocke is the most ancient and magnificent, built to that glory by
King Henry the first, and enlarged with a Labyrinth of many windings by King
Henry the second, to hide from his jealous Juno, his entirely beloved Concubine
Rosamond Clifford, a Damsel of surpassing beauty; where notwithstanding,
followed by a clew of silk that fell from her lap, she was surprised and
poisoned by Queen Eleanor his wife, and was first buried at Godstow Nunnery,
in the midst of the Quire under a Hearse of silk, set about with lights, whom
Hugh Bishop of Lincoln (thinking it an unfit object for Virgins devotion)
caused to be removed into the Church yard: but those chaste sisters liked so
well the memory of that kind Lady, as that her bones they translated again
into their Chapel.

Bensington is another of his Majesty's Mannours, built by William de la Pole
Duke of Suffolk, but now in neglect through the anno^ance arising from the
waters or marshes adjoining Houses built for devotion, and for abuse
suppressed and again put down, the chief in account were Enisham, Osney,
Bru^rn, Godstow, Burchester, and Tame, besides S. Frideswides, and very many
other stately Houses of Religion in the City.

The Division of this Shire is into fourteen Hundreds, wherein are seated ten
Market-Townes, and two hundred and fourscore Parish-Churches.

GLOUCESTERSHIRE. CHAPTER XXIII.
GLOUCESTERSHIRE, lies bordered upon the North with Worcester and
Warwicke-shires, upon the East with Oxford and Wileshire; upon the South
altogether with Sommerset-shire: and upon the West with the River Wye and
Hereford-shire.

(2) The length thereof extended from Bristow upon the River Auon in her South,
unto Clifford upon another Auon in her North, are about forty eight miles; and
her broadest part from East to West, is from Lechlad unto Preston, containing
twenty eight: the whole circumference about one hundred thirty eight miles.

(3) The form whereof is somewhat long and narrow: the Air thereof is
pleasant, sweet and delectable: and for fruitfulness of Soil hear Malmesbury
and not me: The ground of this Shire throughout (says he) yields plenty of
Corn, and brings forth abundance of fruits; the one through the natural
goodness only of the ground, the other through the diligent manuring and
tillage, in such wise, that it would provoke the laziest person to take pains
Here you may see the Highways and Common Lanes clad with Apple trees and
Pear trees, not ingrafted by the industry of man's hand, but growing naturally
of their own accord: the ground of it self is so inclined to bear fruits,
and those both in taste and beauty far exceeding others, and will endure
until a new supply come. There is not any Country in England so thick set
with Vineyards as this Province is, so plentiful of increase, and so pleasant
in taste. The very wines made thereof carry no unpleasant tartness, as being
little inferior in sweet verdure to the French wines; the houses are
innumerable, the Churches passing fair, and the Towns standing very thick.
But that which adds unto all good gifts (a special glory) is the River
Seuerne, then which there is not any in all the Land, for Channel broader, for
Stream swifter, or for Fish better stored. There is in it a daily rage and
fury of waters, which I know not whether I may call a Gulf or Whirle-pole of
waves, raising up the sands from the bottom, winding and driving them upon
heaps: sometimes ouerflowing her banks, ro^eth a great way upon the face of
her bordering grounds, and again retyreth as a Conqueror into the usual
Channel. Unhappy is the Vessel which it takes full upon the side: but the
Watermen well ware thereof, when they see that Hydra coming, turn the
Vessel upon it, and cut through the midst of it, whereby they check and avoid
her violence and danger.

(4) The ancient people that possessed this Province, were the DOBVNI, who
spread themselves further into Oxford shire. But betwixt the Seuerne and Wye
were seated part of SILVRES, or Inhabitants of South Wales. And upon what
ground I know not, let Lawyers dispute it, the Inhabitants in some part of this
Shire enjoy a private custom to this day, that the Goods and Lands of
Condemned Persons fall unto the Crown but only for a year and a day, and
then return to the next heirs, contrary to the custom of all England besides*

(5) The general Commodities of this Shire, are Corn, Iron, and Wools, all
passing fine, besides Pasturage, Fruits, and Woods, which last are much
lessened by making of Iron, the only bane of Oak, Elm, and Beech.

(6) These, with all other provisions are traded through twenty five
Market-Townes in this County, whereof two are Cities of no small import: the
first is Gloucester, from whom the Shire takes name, seated upon Seuerne, near
the midst of this Shire, by Antonine the Emperor called Gleuum, built first
by the Romans, and set as it were upon the neck of the Silures, to yoke them,
where their Le^ion called Colonia Gleuum, lay. It has been walled about
(excepting that part that is defended by the River) the ruins whereof in many
places appear; and some part yet standing, does well witness their strength.
This City was first won from the Britains by Cheulin the first King of the
West Saxons, about the year of Christ, 570. and afterward under the Mercians
it flourished with great honor, where Of^^k King of Northumberland, by the
sufferance of Ethelred of Mercia, founded a most stately Monastery of Nuns,
whereof Kineburgh, Eadburgh, and Eve, Queens of the Mercians, were Prioresses
successively each after other.

(7) Edelsted a most renowned Lady, sister to King Edward the elder, in this
City built a fair Church, wherein her self was interred; which being
overthrown by the Danes, was afterward rebuilt, and made the Cathedral of
that See, dedicated unto the honor of S. Peter. In this Church the unfortunate
Prince, King Edward the second, under a Monument of Alablaster does lie; who
being murdered at Barkley Castle, by the cruelty of French Isabel his wife,
was there intombed And not far from him another Prince as unfortunate,
namely, Robert Curthole, the eldest son of William the Conqueror, lies in a
painted wooden Tomb in the midst of the Quire; whose eyes were plucked out
in Cardiffe Castle, wherein he was kept prisoner twenty six years, with all
contumelious indignities, until through extreme anguish he ended his life.
And before any of these, in this City say our British Historians, the body of
Lucius our first Christian King was interred: and before his days the
Britains Aruiragus.

The graduation of this County I observe from this City, whence the Pole is
elevated in the degree of Latitude 52 and 14. minutes, and in Longitude from
the West, 18. and 5. minutes.

(8) The other City is Pristow, fa^re, but not very ancient, built upon the
Rivers Auon and Froome, for trade of Merchandise a second London, and for
beauty and account next unto York. This City stands partly in this
County, and partly in Sommerset shire: but being a County of it self, will
acknowledge subjection to neither.

(9) A City more ancient has been Ci^cester, by Ptolomie called Corinium; by
Antonine, Duro^^^no^ium; by Giraldus, Passerum Vi^em, The Sparrowes City, upon
a flying report, that Gu^mund a Tyrant from Africks, besieging this City, tied
fire unto the wings of Sparrowes, who lighting in the Town upon light matter,
set flame upon all. The circuit of whose wal^ extended two miles about, wherein
the Consular Port or ways of the Romans met and crossed each other. This City
was won from the Britains by Cheulin first King of the West Saxons:
afterward it was possessed by the Mercians; and lastly, by the Danes under
Gurmund (the former no doubt mistaken for him) wherein a rabble of them kept the
space of a year, Anno 879. and never since inhabited, according to the circuit
of her walls.

(10) Places of memorable note are these: the Island Al^ey near unto Gloucester,
wherein Edmund Iron-side the English, and Canutus the Dane, after many battles
and blood, fought in single Combat hand to hand alone, until they compounded
for the Kingdoms partition: Barkley Castle, where King Edward the second was
through his fundament run into his bowels with a red burning Spit: Tewkesbury
the fatal period of King Henry the sixth his government, and the wound of the
Lancastrian Cause; for in a Battle there fought in Anno 1471. Prince Edward,
the only Son of King Henry, had his brains dashed out in a most shameful
manner, the Queen his mother taken prisoner, and most of their favorites
slain and beheaded. And at Alderley, a little Town standing eight miles from
the Seuerne, upon the hills to this day are found Cockles, Periwincles, and
Oysters of solid stone, which whether they have been Shel-fish and living
creatures, or else the sports of Nature in her works, let the Natural
Philosophers dispute of and judge.

(11) The places of piety, set apart from other worldly Services, and
dedicated to religious uses by the devotions of Princes, erected in this Shire,
were Tewkesbury, Deorhust, Gloucester, Minching, Barkley, Kinswood, Circester,
Winchcombe, and Hales; which last was built with great cost by Richard Earl of
Cornwall, King of the Romans, wherein himself, and his Duchess were
interred. Their son Earl Edmund brought out of Germany the blood of Hales,
supposed and said to be part of that which Christ shed upon his Cross. In this
place with great confluence and devotions of Pilgrimage it was sought to and
worshipped, till time proved it a mere counterfeit, when the glorious light of
the Gospel revealed to eyesight such gross Idolat^ies, and the skirts of
Superstition were turned up, to the show of her own shame.

(12) Dukes and Earls that have borne the title of Gloucester, the first of
every Family art by their Arms and Names expressed, ever fatal to her Dukes,
though the greatest in blood and birth. The first was Thomas Woodstocke, son
to King Edward the third, who in Ca^^is was smoothered in a Feather-bed to
death. The second was Humfrey brother to King Henry the fifth, by the fraudulent
practice of the malignant Cardinal and Queen, made away at S. Edmundsbury.
And the last was Richard, brother to King Edward the fourth, who by the just
hand of God was cut off in Battle by King Henry the seventh.

(13) This Shires division is principally into four parts, subdivided into
thirty Hundreds, and them again into two hundred and eight Parish-Churches.

HEREFORD-SHIRE. CHAPTER XXIIII.
HEREFORD-SHIRE, (formerly accounted within the limits of Wales) lies
circulated upon the North with Worcester and Shrop-shire; upon the East with
Maluerne Hills is parted from Gloucestershire; upon the South is kept in with
Monmouth-shire; and upon the West in part with the Hatterall Hills is divided
from Brecknok; and the rest confined with Radnorshire.

(2) This Counties Climate is most healthful and temperate, and Soil so
fertile for Corn and Cattle, that no place in England yields more or better
conditioned: sweet Rivers running as veins in the body, do make the Corn
bearing grounds in some of her parts rightly to be termed the Gilden Vale: and
for Waters, Wool, and Wheat, does contend with Nilus, Colchos, and Egypt:
such are Lemster, Irchenfeild, the banks of Wye, Luge, and From.

(3) The ancient people known to the Romans, (whose power they well felt
before they could subdue them) were the Silures, placed by Ptolemie in this
tract, and branched further into Radnor, Brecknok, Monmouth, and
Glamorgan-shires, at this day by us called South Wales, and by the Welsh
Debeubarth. Their Original, as Tacitus coniectureth by their site, colored
countenances and curled hair, was out of Spain, and as both he and Pliny
describes them, were fierce, valiant, and impatient of servitude, which well
they showed under Cara^^cus their Captain, and nine years scourge to the
Roman assaulters, for whose only Conquest (and that made by treachery) the
Victor in Rome triumphed with more then a usual Aspect; and with so equal an
hand bare the Scoale of Resistance, that their own Writers evermore term it a
dangerous War. For the Legion of Marius Valens they put to flight, and that
with such hauock of the Associates, that Osterius the Lieutenant of Britain
for very grief gave up his ghost: and Veranius under Nero assaulted them in
vain. But when Vespasian was Emperor, and expert Soldiers employed in every
Province, Julius Frontinus subdued these Silures unto the Romans, where
continually some of their Legions afterward kept, till all was abandoned in
Valentinians time.

(4) The Saxons then made themselves Lords of this Land, and this Province a
part of their Mercians Kingdom; yea, and Sutton the Court of great Offa their
King.

(5) But Hereford after, raised of the ruins of old Ariconium (now Kenchester,
shaken in pieces by a violent Earth quake) grew to great fame, through a
conceived sanctity by the burial of Ethelbert King of the East Angles, slain
at Sutton by Offa, at what time he came thither to have espoused to his
Daughter; whose grave was first made at Marden, but afterward canonized and
removed to this City, when in honor of him was built the Cathedral Church by
Milfrid, a petty King of that Country, which Gruffith Prince of South Wales,
and Algar an Englishman, rebelling against King Edward Confessor, consumed with
fire; but by Bishop Remesiu was restored at now it is, at what time the Town
was walled, and is so remaining in good repair, having six Gates for
entrance, and fifteen Watch-towers for defense, extending in compass to
fifteen hundred paces: and whence the North Pole is observed to be raised 52.
degrees, 17. minutes in Latitude, and is set from the first point of the West
in Longitude, 17. degrees and 30. minutes; being yearly governed by a Mayor,
chosen out of one and thirty Citizens, which are commonly called the Election,
and he ever after is known for an Alderman, and clothed in Scarlet, whereof
four of the eldest are Justices of Peace, graced with a Sword Bearer, a
Recorder, a Towne-Clerke, and four Sergeants with Mace.

The greatest glory that this City received, was in King Athelstans days;
where (as Malmesbury does report) he caused the Lords of Wales by way of
Tribute, to pay yearly (besides Hawks and Hounds) twenty pound of Gold, and
three hundred pound of Silver by weight; but how that was performed and
continued I find not.

(6) Things of rare note in this Shire are said to be, Bone well, a Spring not
far from Richards Castle, wherein are continually found little Fishes bones,
but not a sin seen; and being wholly cleansed thereof, will notwithstanding
have again the like, whether naturally produced, or in veins thither brought,
no man knows.

(7) But more admirable was the work of the Omnipotent, even in our own
remembrances, and year of Christ Jesus 1571. when the Mareley hill in the East
of this Shire, rouzed it self out of a dead sleep, with a roaring noise
removed from the placewhere it stood, and for three days together traveled
from her first site, to the great amazement and fear of the beholders. It
began to journey upon the seventh day of February, being Saturday, at six of
the Clock at night, and by seven in the next morning had gone forty paces,
carrying with it Sheep in their coats, hedgerowes, and trees; whereof some
were ouer-turned, and some that stood upon the plain, are firmly growing upon
the hill, those that were East, were turned West; and those in the West (...)
set in the East: in which remove it overthrew K^^nasten Chapel, and turned
two highways (...) hundred yards from their usual paths formerly trod. The
ground thus traveling, was abo^^ (...) six Acres, which opening it self with
Rocks and all, bare the earth before it for four hundred yards space without
any stay, leaving that which was Pasturage in place of the Tillage, and the
Tillage ouerspread with Pasturage. Lastly, ouerwhelming her lower parts,
mounted to an hill of twelve fadomes high, and there rested her self after
three days travel: remaining his mark, that so laid hand upon this Rock,
whose power has poysed the Hills in his Balance.

(8) Religious Houses built by the devotions of Princes, and stored with
Votaries and revenues for life, were in this Shire no less then thirteen,
most sweetly seated in the places as follows: at both the Herefords, Barron,
Ewayot, Clifford, Mone^^e, Acornebury, Lemster, Linbroke, Peterchurch, Kilpek,
Door, and Wiggemore: and suspected of hypocrisy, were called in question by
King Henry the eight, and so strictly pursued, that some faults were apparent,
whereby they were laid open to the general Deluge of the Time, whose stream
bare down the walls of all those foundations, carrying away the Shrines of
the dead, and defacing the Libraries of their ancient Records.

(9) This County before the Conquest being accounted in Wales, was then
strengthened with Forts against the English: and being once made a Prounce to
England, was fortified with Castles against the Welsh, wherein we find no
less then twenty eight, though many of them now are ruinated to nothing. Such
were Alban, at both the Ewyats, Godridg, Grosmond, Herdley, Hereford, Old
Castle, Dorston, Brampton, Bredwarden, Saint Biruels, Ledbury, Lenals, Snowdel,
Harlewais, Huntington, Wilton, Wigmore, Richards, Monemue, Corft, Kilbeck,
Clifford, Skensfred, Witeney, Radenwer, and Ke^euenleis; and is traded with
eight Market-Townes, being divided into eleven Hundreds, and in them seated one
hundred seauentie and six Parish-Churches, containing in compass an hundred
and two miles.

VVORCESTER-SHIRE. CHAPTER XXV.
VVORCESTER-SHIRE, is a County both rich and populour, and lies circulated
upon the North with Stafford (...) upon (...) East with Warwick and
Oxfordshires; upon the South with Glacester shire, and the West by Maluerne
Hills is parted from Hereford shire: the rest lies confronted upon and in part
divided from Sh^op-shire by the River Dowles.

(2) The form thereof is triangle, but not of equal proportion; for from
North to South are thirty two miles, from South to North-West twenty two, and
from thence to her North-East point are twenty eight: the whole in
Circumference is one hundred and twenty miles.

(3) The Air in this Shire is of a favorable temperature, that gives an
appetite for labor, diet, and rest: the Soil is fertile, and to me seemed
inferior to notice other in this Land: for besides the abundance of Corn in
every place spread, the Woods and Pasturage in her hills and plains, sweet
Rivers that water the valleys below, and Cattle that cover the tops of higher
ground; the Fields, Hedge-rowes, and Highways are beset with fruitful
Peare-trees, that yield great pleasure to sight, and commodious use: for with
their juice they make a bastard kind of Wine, called Perry, which is both
pleasant and good in taste. Many Salt Springs also this County affords; yea,
and more then are commonly in use: such with the Germans, our ancient
Predecessors, were esteemed most sacred and holy; so that (as Tacitus writes)
to such they wontedly resoted to supplicate their Gods with their devout
prayers, as to places nearest the heavens, and therefore the sooner to be
heard. And Poets in their faynings will have the Nymphs residence in shady
green groves, and banks of sweet Springs: if so, then (as Hellicon) this
County affords both: such are the Forests of Were and Feckenham, the great
woods of Norton, and most fair Chase of Maluerne. And for waters, to witness
what I say, is the Seuera^ that cuts this Shire in the midst, Teme, Salwarp,
and Auon, all of them making fruitful their passage, and stored with Fish of
most delicious taste.

(4) The ancient people, possessors of this Shire, were the CORNAVII,
inhabitants of Chesse-shire, Shrop-shire, Stafford, and Warwicke-shires,
subdued by the Romans in Claudius Caesar's time, and after their departure,
made a portion of the Mercian-Saxons Kingdom, and in Bedaes time were called
the Wicij, whereof it may be this Shire had the name: unless you will have it
from the Salt Pits, which in old English are named Wiches; or from the famous
Forest of Wyre. Howsoever, true it is that the County does hold the name from
her chief City Worcester.

(5) Which is most pleasantly seated, passing well frequented, and very richly
inhabited. This was the Branouium, mentioned by Antouine and Ptolemie, called
by the Britains, Caer-Wrangon; by Ninius, Caer-Cuorcon; and by the Latins,
Vigornia. This City is seated upon the East bank of Seuerne, and from the
same is walled in triangle-wise about, extending in circuit one thousand six
hundred and fifty paces: through which seven Gates enter, with five other
Watch Towers for defense. It is thought the Romans built this to restrain the
Bertaines that held (...) beyond Seutr^e. This City by Hardy Canute in the
year of Christ 1041. was sorely endangered, and set on fire, and the Citizens
slain almost every one, for that they had killed his Collector of the Danish
Tribute: yet it was presently repaired and peopled, with many Burgesses. and
for fifteen Hides discharged it self to the Conqueror; as in his Doomesdayes
is to be seen. But in the year 1113. a sudden fire happened, no man knew
how, which burnt the Castle and Cathedral Church. Likewise in the civil
hroyles of King Stephen it was twice lighted into a flame, and the later laid
it hopeless of recovery. Notwithstanding from those dead Ashes a new Phoenix
arose, and her building raised in a more stately proportion, especially the
Cathedral dedicated to S. Mary, first laid by Bishop Sexwolfe, in Anno 680
since when it has been augmented almost to the River: In the midst of whose
Quire, from his many turmoiles, rests the body of King John (the great
with-stander of the Popes proceedings) under a Monument of white Marble, in
Princely Vestures, with his portraiture thereon according to life. And in the
South Side of the same Quire lies intombed Prince Arthur the eldest Son to
King Henry the seventh, his Monument is all black Iette, without remembrance
of him by Picture.

This City is governed by two Bailiffes, two Aldermen, two Chamberlaines, and
two Constables, yearly elected out of twentie-foure Burgesses clothed in
Scarlet, assisted with fortie-eight other Citizens, whom they call their Common
Counselors, clad in Purple, a Recorder, Towne-Clerke, and five Sergeants with
Mace their Attendants Whose Geographichall Position is distant in Longitude
from the West-Meridian 18. degrees, 10. scruples, having the North Pole
cleuated in Latitude 52. degrees, and 32. scruples.

(6) Places of further note for memorable antiquity, is Vpton, of great
account in the Roman time, wheresome of their Legions kept, as witness their
Moneys there often found: the admirable Ditch upon Maluerne hills, drawn by
Gilbert Clare, Earl of Gloucester, to divide his Lands from the Church of
Worcester: the Saxons our Augustines Oak, where he the English Apostle met with
the British Bishops for the uniform celebration of Easter, from whence both
parts departed with discontented minds, after many hot word and thwarting
disputes.

(7) Neither is it without admiration to me, that many places of this Shire lie
far within the Precincts of other Provinces, as Aulston, Washbornes,
Cuttesden, Paxford, Hanging Easton, Northwick^, Blockley, Burlode in
Gloucestershire, and Goldcote, Aldermerston, Newbold, Treddenton, Armiscote,
Blackwell, Darlings-cote, Shi^^^, Tyd^^ton, Olbarrow in Warwickshire; Dudley
in Staffordshire, and Rochford in Hereford-shire, whither I must refer the
Reader to find out these and the like in these Western Tracts.

(8) Religious places erected in this Shire and devoted unto God by devout
persons, were Bredon, Brodlege, Euesholme, Alnecester, Cochell, Fladbury,
Maluerin, Pershore, Stodlege, Westwoods, and Worcester, plenteously provided
for, and further secured by many privileges, both which they abused, as were
the inditements of all such in the days of King Henry the eight, at whose
Bar (himself being Judge) they were found guilty, and received sentence of
their ends and destruction.

(9) Castles for defense built in this County, ruinate or in strength, were
Hartlebury, Holt, Handley, Norton, Elmeley, and Worcester, besides his
Majesty's Manor of Tichnell.

(10) This Shires division is into seven Hundreds, wherein are seated ten
Market-Townes, and one hundred fifty two Parish-Churches.

VVARWICKE-SHIRE. CHAPTER XXVI.
VVARVVICKE-SHIRE, (so called from her Shire-Towne) is bounded upon the North
with the County of Stafford; upon the East, with Watling-street-way is parted
from Leicester shire, and the rest bordered upon by Northampton shire: the
South part is butted by Oxford and Gloucester shires; and all her West with the
County of Worcester.

(2) The form thereof is not much unlike to a Scallop shell, growing from her
Western head, and spreading her body wider, with many indents. The length
thereof from Newton in the North, to L^ug Compton in the South, are miles
thirty and three: and the broadest part of this Shire, is from H^well grange
in the West, unto Hill morton in the East, distant asunder twenty five miles;
the whole in Circumference, about one hundred thirty and five miles.

(3) This Shire is sited near unto the heart of all England, and therefore
participates with her in the best both for air and soil, wanting nothing for
profit or pleasure for man. The South part from Auon (that runs through the
midst of this County) is called the Feldon, as more champion and tractable to
be stirred for Corn, which yearly yields such plentiful harvest, that the
husbandman sm^^th in beholding his pains, and the medowing pastures with their
green mantles so imbrodred with flowers, that from Edg-hill we may behold
another Eden, as Lot did the Plain of Iordon, before that Sodom fell. The
Woodland lies upon the North of Auon, so called in regard of the plenty of
Woods; which now are much thinner by the making of Iron, and the soil more
churlish to yield to the Plough.

(4) The ancient people that possessed this Province, are by Ptolemies
description called the Corna^^ij, wherein after were seated the Mercian-Saxons,
a part of whose Kingdom it was, and greatly sought after by the West Saxons,
whose King Cuthred, about the year of Christ Jesus 749 in Battle slew
Ethelbald at Seckington near unto Ta^worth. And not far from thence, King
Edward the 4. as unfortunately sought against that stout make-King, Richard
Neuil Earl of Warwick: near unto which, upon Blacklow-hill, Pierce Gaueston
(that proud and new-raised Earl of Cornwall) was beheaded by Guy Earl of
Warwick, assisted with the Earls of Lancaster and Hereford. And surely, by
the testimony of John Rosse, and others, this County has been better
replenished with people; who makes complaint of whole Towneships
depopulations, altogether laid waste by a puissant Army of feeding sheep.

(5) Notwithstanding, many fair Towns it has, and some of them matchable to
the most of England. The chief thereof is Couentree, a City both stately for
building, and walled for defense: whose Citizens having highly offended their
first Lord Leofricke, had their privileges infringed, and themselves oppressed
with many hauie Tributes; whose wife Lady Godina pitying their estates,
vnceslantly sued for their peace, and that with such importunacie, as hardly
could be said whether was greater, his hatred, or her love: at last overcome
with her continual intercessions, he granted her suir, upon an uncivil, and
(as he thought) an unacceptable condition which was, that she should ride naked
through the face of the City, and that openly at high noonday. This
notwithstanding she thankfully accepted, and performed the act accordingly
enjoined: for this Lady G^di^a stripping her self of all rich attire, let
loose the treffes of her fair hair, which on every side so covered her
nakedness, that no part of her body was uncivil to sight; whereby she
redeemed the former freedoms, and remission of such heavy Tributes. Whose
memory I wish may remain honorable in that City for ever, and her pity
followed by such possessing Ladies.

This City had grant to choose their yearly Magistrates, a Mayor and two
Bailiffes, and to build about and embattle a wall, by King Edward the 3. whom
Henry the 6. corporated a County of it self, and changed the names of their
Bailifs into Sherifs: and the walls then were built as they now stand; through
which open 13 gates for entrance, besides 18. other Towers thereon for defense.
At Gofford-gate in the East hangs the shield-bene of a wild Bore, far
bigger then the greatest Oxe-bone: with whose snout the great pit called
Swanswell was turned up, and was slain by the famous Guy, if we will believe
report.

Next unto this City, in account and commerce, is Warroicke, upon the
North-west bank of Auon, built by Gurgunstus, the son of Bel^^e, as John
Rosse, Monk of the place, says, 375. years before the birth of Christ: by
Ninius called Caer-Guaruic and Caer-Leon; and by learned Cambden judged to be
PRAESIDIVM, the Roman Garrisons Town. The situation of this place is most
pleasant, upon a hill rising from the River, over which is a strong and fair
Stone bridge, and her sharp stream upon the Town side checked with a most
sumptuous and stately Castle, the decays whereof, with great cost and curious
buildings, the right worthy Knight Sir Foulke Greuil (in whose person shines
all true virtue and high nobility) has repaired: whose merits to me ward I
do acknowledge, in setting this hand free from the daily employments of a
manual trade, and giving it full liberty thus to express the inclination of
my mind, himself being the Procurer of my present estate.

It seems this Town has been walled about, as appears by the Trench in
some places seen, and two very fair Gates, whose passages are hewed out of
the Rock, as all other into the Town are: over whom two beautiful Chapels
are built; that toward the East called S Peter's, and that on the South-west, S
James.

Two fair Churches are therein seated, called S. Mary's and S. Nicholas: but
these in, and about the Town suppressed, S. Laurence, S. Michaels, John
Baptist, and John of Jerusalem, beside the Nunnery in the North of the Town:
whose North Pole is elevated in Latitude 52. degrees, 45 minutes, and is seated
from the first point in the West of Longitude, 18 degrees and 45 minutes, being
yearly governed by a Bailiffe, twelve Brethren, twenty four Burgesses for
Common Counsel, a Recorder, a Towne-Clerke, and one Sergeant their Attendant.

(7) Places of most memorable note observed in this Shire, are Shugbury, where
the precious stone Astroites is found: Of-Church, which was the Palace of great
Offa the Mercian, and the buriall-place of S. Fremund his son: Chesterton,
where the famous Fosse-way is seen. At Leamington, so far from the Sea, a
Spring of Salt Water boileth up: and at Newenham Regis most sovereign water
against the Stone, Green wounds, Ulcers, and Impostumes; and drunk with Salt
loses, but with Sugar binds the body; and turns wood into stone as my
self saw by many sticks that therein were fallen* some part of them Ash, and
some part of them Stone: and Guy-Cliffe, where the famous Earl Guy, after many
painful exploits achieved, retired, and unknown, lead an Hermits life, and
was lastly there buried.

(8) The chiefest Commodities in this County growing, are Corn, whereof the
Red Horse Vale yields most abundantly; Woolls in great plenty; Woods and
Iron, though the producer of the one will be the destruction of the other. Such
honorable Families as have been dignified with the Earldom of this
Shire-Townes name since the Normans Conquest, in the great Map it self are
inserted, and by their several names expressed.

This County is strengthened with eight strong Castles, traded with fifteen
Market-Townes, enriched with many fair buildings, and by the devotion of many
Nobles, had many foundations of religious Monasteries therein laid. The
chiefest were at Stoneley, Warwick, Thellisford, Roxhall, Balshall,
K^^^^^gworth, Couentree, Comb, Nun-eaton, Asley, Atherston, and Pollesworth;
all which came to their period in the reign of King Henry the eight, when
their rich Revenues were alienated to his use, and those stately buildings
either ouer-turned or bestowed upon his Courtiers: but yet to Gods glory, and
his divine service, one hundred fifty eight Parish-Churches therein remain,
dispersedly seated in the nine Hundreds of this Shires Division.

NORTHAMPTONSHIRE. CHAPTER XXVII.
NORTHAMPTONSHIRE, situated near unto the midst of England, lies separtted
upon the North from Lincolnshire by the River W^land; from Hammington-shire on
the East is parted by the water Nene: her South is bounded with Buckingham and
Oxford shires, and the West from Warwick with Watling-street-way, Auon, and
Weland, is divided from Leichestershire.

(2) The form of this County is large and narrow, broadest in the South-west;
and thence shooting still lesser like unto a Horn, nor not much unlike to the
form of Cornwall: and from the entrance of Cherwell into this Shire, unto the
fall of Weland and Nene near unto Crowland, are by measure forty six miles;
and the broadest part is from Ouse unto Auon, which is not fully twenty miles:
the whole in circumference one hundred and nineteen miles*

(3) The air is good, temperate, and healthful: the soil is champion, rich,
and fruitful, and so plenteously peopled, that from some Ascents, thirty
Parish-Churches, and many more Wind-milles at one view may be seen:
notwithstanding the simple and gentle sheep, of all creatures the most
harmless, are now become so ravenous, that they begin to devour men, waste
fields, and depopulate houses, if not whole Towne-ships, as one merrily has
written.

(4) The ancient people known to the Romans, and recorded by Ptolemie, were
the Coritani, who possessed this Country, and were branched further through
Leicester, Lincoln, Nottingham, Rutland, and Darbie-shires: these joining with
the Irenians, with them were fettered with the chains of subjection, when for
Claudius, Publius Ostrius Scapula entered his Lieutenantship in Britain, and in
battle subdued all betwixt the Rivers Nene and Sabrina. But when the Romans
were content to let go that which so long was desired, and had cost so much in
the getting, the Saxons, a most warlike Nation put into these parts, and made
it a portion of their Mercian Kingdom: but their government also grown out of
date, the Normans seated themselves in these fair possessions, the branches of
whole Stemmes are spread abroad in these parts, most fruitful and fair.

(5) Commodities arising in this Shire, are chiefly gotten by tillage and
plough, whereby corn so plentifully abounds, that in no other County is
found more, or so much: the pastures and woods are filled with Cattle, and
every where sheep laden with their fleeces of wool.

(6) The chief Town in this Shire is Northampton, whereof the County takes
name, which for circuit, beauty, and building, may be ranked with the most of
the Cities of our Land. It is seated at the meeting and confluence of two
Rivers, the greater whereof bears to name Nen. This Town has been built
all of stone, as by many foundations remaining to this day is seen, and is
walled about both strong and high, excepting the West, which is defended by a
River parted into many streams. In the depredations of the Danes, Suen their
King set this Town on fire, and afterward it was sorely assulted by the
disobedient Barons of King John, who named themselves, The Ar^^ie of God: But
the loyalty of this Town stood nothing so sure unto King Henry his son,
whence the Barons with displayed Banners sounded the Battle against their
Sovereign. And yet after this a woeful Field of Englands civil division was
fought, whence Richard Neuil the stout Earl of Warwick, lead away prisoner
that unfortunate man King Henry the sixth. Upon the West part of this Town
stands a large Castle, mounted upon an hill, whose aged countenance well
shows the beauty that she has borne, and whose gaping chinkes do daily
threaten the downfall of her walls. To this upon the South the Towns wall
adioyneth, and in a round circuit meets the River in the North, extending in
compass two thousand one hundred and twenty pases: whose fire so pleased the
Students of Cambridge, that thither they removed themselves upon the Kings
Warrant, in mind to have made it on an University: from whence the North Pole
is elevated 52. degrees 36. scruples for Latitude, and in Longitude is removed
from the West 19 degrees and 40 scruples; being yearly governed by a Mayor,
two Bailiffes, twelve Magistrates, a Recorder, Towne-Clerke, a Common Counsel
of forty eight Burgesses, with five Sergeants to execute business.

(7) But the devotions of the Saxon-Kings made Peterborow more famous, formerly
called Meddeswell, where Wolphere King of Mercia began a most stately Monastery
to the honor of S. Peter, for satisfaction of the blood of his two sons,
whom he had murdered in case of Christianity: but himself being for the like
made away by his mother, his brother Penda continued the work, with the
assistance of his brother Ethelred, and two sisters, Kineburga and Kineswith.
This among the Danish Desobutions was cast down, yet was it again restored to
greater beauty by Ethelwold Bishop of Winchester, with the help of King
Edgar, and of Adulph his Chancellor, who upon prick of Conscience, that in
bed with his wife had ouerlaid and smoothered an Infant their only son, laid
all his wealth upon the reedifying of the place, and then became Abbot thereof
himself. The Cathedral is most beautiful and magnificall, where, in the
Quire lie interred two unfortunate Queens: on the North side Katharine Dewager
of Spain, the repudiate wife of King Henry the eight, under an Hearse covered
with black Say, having a white Cross in the midst: and on the South Side,
Mary Queen of Scotland, whose Heart is spread over with black Velvet* The
Cloister is large, and in the glasse-windowes very curiously portraied the
History of Wolphere the Founder, whose Royal Seat was at Wedon in the street,
converted into a Monastery by S Werburg his holy daughter, and had been the
Roman Station, by Antonine the Emperor called Bannauenna. So likewise
Norman-chester was the ancient City Durobriuae, where their Soldiers kept, as
by the moneys there daily found is most apparent.

(8) Houses of Religion devoted to Gods Service by the pious intents of their
well-meaning Founders were at Peterborow, Peakirk, Pipewell, Higham, Dauintree,
Sulby, Sausecombe, Sewardesug, Gare, S Dewy, S Michell, Luffeild, Catesby,
Brvth, Barkley, Finishead, Fotheringhay, Wedon, and With^^p, besides them in
Northampton, all which felt the storms of their own destruction, that raged
against them in the Reign of King Henry the eight, who dispersed their
Revenues to his own Coffers and Courtiers, and ulled the stones asunder or
their seeming euer-sure Foundations; and in the time of young Edward, his
son, whose mind was free from wronging the dead, the Tombs of his own
Predecessors were not spared, when as Edward slain at Agincourt, and Richard
at Wakefield, both of them Dukes of York, were after death assaulted with the
weapons of destruction, that cast down their most fair Monuments in the
Collegiate Church of Fotheringhay Castle.

(9) Eight Princely Families have enjoyed the Title of the Earldom of
Northampton, whereof the last, Henry Hawara, late Lord Privy Seal, a most
honourble Patron to all learned proceedings (that I may acknowledge my dutiful
and humble Service) has most honorably assisted and set forward these my
endeavors.

(10) This Shires division, for service to the Crown, and employment of
businesses, is into twenty Hundreds, has been strengthened with ten Castles,
and is still traded with ten Market-Townes, and God honored in three hundred
twentie-sixe Parish-Churches.

HVNTINGTON-SHIRE. CHAPTER XXVIII.
HVNTINGTON-SHIRE, (part of the leui under the Roman Monarch of Mertia in the
Saxon Heptarchy) is severed with Nene, the North-bounder from Northamptonshire,
to which it in part adioyneth West; from Bedford and Cambridge, by mearing
Towns on the South; and from Ely, by a sense of water East, theworke of
Nature, Benwicke Stream, or of Art, Canutus Delph: severed when Alfred, or
before him, Offa shared the open circuit of their Empery into Principalities:
that by residency of subordinate rule, Peace at home might be maintained;
Fortaine offense (by apt assembly of the Inhabitants) resisted; Tax and
Reuenew of the Crown laid more euenly, and easierly leuyed; Justice at men's
doors with less charge and journey administered: all causes Civil having a
right and speedy dispatch, in the County or Earls monthly Court, as Criminal
in his Lieutenant the Sheriffs Turn, twice a year. In form of a Lozeng this
Shire lies, of positure temperate, and is 52. degrees, 4. scruples removed
from the Equator: the Hilly Soil to the Plough-man grateful: the Vale,
contiguous to the Fennes, best for Pasture, in which to no part of England it
gives place: Woods are not much wanted, the Rivers serving Coal, as the
Moors Turffe, for fuel.

(2) This Content was (as the whole Continent) Forest, until Canutus gave
this Law of grace, Vt quisque tam in agris, quam in siluis excitet agitetque
feras. Long were were the hands of Kings to pull (of old) the Subjects right
into Regal pleasure, when Perambulation and Proclamation only might make any
man's land Forest. It is in the first Williams time a Phrase in Record not
rare, Silua bu^^^ Maner^^ FORIS EST missa in Siluam Reg^s, from which word of
power, Forest may seem not unaptly to be derived. Cum videbat Henricus primus
tres Bissas, fitting his Forest of Lyfield, he caused Husculphus his Raunger
to keep them for his Game, as the Record does testify. Thus did the second of
his name, and the first Richard, in many parts: well therefore may the
Exchequer-Booke call the Forest Justice for Vert and Venison, not Iustum
absolute, but Iustum secundum Legem Forresta. That Foresta is defined, Tuta
serarum s^ain, may seem to confine the Forresters office only to his Games
care, which of ancient was as well over Mineral and Maritimall reuenew. The
office of Baldwme the great Forrester of Flanders, Non agrum tantum spectabat,
sed et Maris custodiam, says Tullius, out of the old Charters of the French
Kings. And see how just this squares to our Legal practice, for of Assarts,
Purprestures, E^^prousment, Greenebugh, Herbage, Paunage, Fowls, Mils, Honey,
Mine^, Quarries, and Wreacks at Sea, did the ^^inerall Justice of the Forest
here enquire. His Subjects of this Shire, Henry the 2. from servitude of his
beasts, (whose Grandfather pro ^eris homines incarc^rauit, exhareditauit,
mutilauit, (...)) did pretend by Charter to enfranchise, except Wabridge,
Saple, Herthy, his own Demaines. But such was the success by encrochments,
under his two succeeding Sons, that it drew on the oppressed people to
importune a new the Sovereigns redress, which was by the great Charter of the
third Henry fruitlesly effected His son in the 7. of his Reign, by a
Perambulation, resuming back the fruit of his fathers goodness, and so
retaining, until in his 29. year by Petition, and purchase of his people (for
they gave him a full Fifteen) he confirmed the former Charter, and by Jury,
View and Perambulation settled that Boundary of Forest, which contented the
people, became the square of universal Justice in this kind, and left in this
Shire no more then the three former (his own grounds) Forest.

(3) This Shire has four Centuriatae or Hundreds, and had of old time five,
these so called, Quia prima institutione ex Hederum aliquet centenarijs
compositae. These are subdivided into 79. Parishes, whereof five besides the
Shire-Towne have Markets. These Parishes are measured by Hides, and Carucks, or
Plough-lands, more or less, as either richnes of Soil, or strength of the
Lord strengthened or extended their limits, the Mass in whole containing of the
first sort, 818. and of the other, 1136. These Hides the ancient and general
measure of land (except in Kent) where the account was by Solms; or
Lincolnshire, Vbinon sunt Hida, sed pro Hidis sunt Carucatae) were esteemed one
hundred Acres, Non Normanico sed Anglico numero, vna Hida pro sexies viginti
Acris, ^uo produ^dec^es (...), as in the Book of Domesday Caruca the
Teame-land (not Ca^ucata for they be different) was in quantity of Acres,
proportioned to the quality of Soil, but usually in this Shire reputed 60.
The ^^rgata, or Yard-land, was a more or less part of the Hide, as the Acres
in number varied, which I find in this County from 18. to 42 but for the most
part 30 which was the half Ploughland And the Bouata or Oxgang (presumed in
Law for Land in Granary) was suited in number of Acres to that Yard-land, of
which it was a Moitie. Thus (except in the Fennes, laid out per Leucas and
quarentenas, miles and furlongs) stands all a measurement of Land in this
Shire, which contains in Knights Fees, 53 one half, 2 fifts, and a twentieth
part. And in full estimation of rent and worth, rose in the time of the
Conqueror, to 912. l. 4. s. and now pays in Fifteen to the King, 371. l. 9.
s. 7. (...) and in tenth from the Clergy, 142. l. 6. s. q.

(4) This County in discition of Titles, and administration of Justice, did at
the first, as the Germans our Ancestors, Iurape^ Pagos and vicos reddere; Every
Towneship by their Friburgi, or Tenmentall, as Triers, and the Baron, Thain, or
Head-lord there, or the Decanus (a good Freholder) his Deputy, as Judge,
determining all civil causes; a representation of this remains still in our
Court-Lecte. Above this, and held 12. times a year, was our Hundred or
Wapentake. Quae super december Decan^s and centum Friburgosiudicabat. Here the
Judges were the Aldermen, and Barons or Freeholders of that Hundred;
Aegelwinus Aldermannus tenuit placitum cum toto Hundredo, says the Book of
Ely. This Court had Cognoscence of Causes Ecclesiastical, as Temporal,
therefore the Judge or Alderman ought to be such as Dei leges and hominum iura
studebat promouere: thus it went although the Conqueror commanded, Ne Aliquis
de legibus Episcopalibus amplius in Hundredo placita teneret. The next and
highest in this Shire, was Generale pla^^u^ Comitatus, (the County or Sheriffs
Count) to which were proper Placita Ciuilia vbi curia Deminorum probantur
defecisse. Et sit placitum exurga^ inter Vauafores duorum Dominorum tractetur
in Comitatis. The Judge was the Earl or Sheriff. The Tryers Barons Comitatus
(Freholders) Quiliberat in eo terr^ habent, not Civil only, but Probats of
Wills, Questions of Tithes, Et debita verae Christianitatis Iura, were heard,
and first heard in this Court. Therefore Episcopus, Presbyter Ecclesia, and
Quatuor de melioribus villae, were a diuncts to the Sheriff, Qui dei lege^ and
secul^ negotia iusta consideratione difinirent. The Lay part of this lives in
a sort in the County, and Sheriff Turn; the Spiritual, about the reign of
King Stephen, by Sovereign conniuence, suffered for the most into the
quarterly Synod of the Clergy, from whence in imitation of the Hundred Court,
part was remitted to the Rural Deaneries, of which this Shire had four: And
these again have been since swallowed up by a more frequent and superior
Jurisdiction, as some of our Civil Courts have been. There being now left in
use for the most in this Shire for Causes Criminal, View of Frankpl^g, by
grant or prescription, A Session of the Peace quarterly, and two Goal
deliueries by the Sovereigns commission: and for Civil Causes, Courts of
Manours, or of the County mon^^bly, and twice by the Judges of Assise yearly

The Office of Execution and custody of this County is the Sheralfey, of old
inheritable, until Eustachius, who by force and favor of the Conqueror
disseised Aluric and his heirs, forfeited it to the Crown; but since it has
passed by annual election, and has united to it the County of Cambridge.

(5) Having thus far spoken of the Shire in general, next in observation
falls the Shire-Towne Huntingdon, Hundandun, or the Hunters Downs, North,
seated upon a rising bank, over the rich meadowing river Owse, interpreted by
some Authors, the Down of Hunters, to which their now common Seal (a Hunter)
seems to allude. Great and populous was this in the foregoing age, the
following having here buried of fifteen all but three, besides the
Mother Church S. Mary's, in their own graves. At the reign of the Conqueror,
it was ranged into four Ferlings or Wards, and in them 256. Burgenses or
Households: It answered at all assessments for 50. Hides, the fourth part of
Hurstingston Hundred in which it stands. The annual rent was then 30. l of
which, as of three Minters there kept, the King had two parts, the Earl the
third; the power of Coynage then and before, not being so priuatiuely in the
King, but Borowes, Bishops, and Earls enjoyed it; on the one side stamping the
face and style of their Sovereign, in acknowledgement of subordinacie in that
part of absolute power, and on the reuerse their own name, to warrant their
integrity in that infinite trust.

(6) The Castle supposed by some the work of the Elder Edward, but seeming by
the Book of Domesday, to be built by the Conqueror, is now known but by the
ruins: It was the seat of Waltheof the great Saxon Earl, as of his
succeeding heirs, until to end the question of right between Se^^^ice and
the King of Scots, Henry the second, laid it as you see; yet does it remain
the head of that honor, on which in other Shires many Knights Fees, and
sixteen in this attended Here David Earl of this and Arguise, father of
Isabel de Brus, founded the Hospital of S. John Baptist: And Lo^^tote here
upon the Fee of Eustace the Vicount, built to the honor of the blessed Virgin,
the Priory of Black Channons, valued at the Suppression, 232 l. 7. s. ob. Here
at the North end was a house of Friars, and without the Town at
Hinchingbrooke, a Cloister of Nuns, valued at 19. l. 9. s. 2. d. founded by
the first William, in place of S. Pandonia, at Eltesley (by him suppressed)
where near the end of the last Henry the Family of the Cromwels began their
Seat. To this Shire-Towne, and benefit of the neighbor Countries, this River
was nauigable, until the power of Gray, a mynion of the time, stopped that
passage, and with it all redress either by Law or Parliament. By Charter of
King John this Town has a peculiar Coroner, profit by Toll and Custom,
Recorder, Towne-Clerks, and two Bayliffes, (elected annually for government) as
at Parliament two Burgesses, for advise and assent: and is Lord of it self in
Fee-Farme.

The rest of the Hundred (wherein this Shire-Towne lies) is the East part of
the County, and of Hurst a Parish in the center of it, named HVRSTINGSTON, it
was the Fee-farme of Ramsey Abbey, which on a point of fertile land, thrust out
into the Fennes, is therein situate, founded in the year 969 to God, our Lady,
and S. Benedicte, by Farle Aylwin of the Royal blood, replenished with Monks
from Westbury, by Oswold of York, and dedicated by D^nstan of Canterbury,
Archbishops. By Abbat Reg^ald 1114 this Church was redified, by Magna^^ll Earl
of Essex, not long after spoiled and by Henry the Third, first of all the
Norman Princes, visited; when wasted with the (...) wars, Regalis mensae
Hospitalitas it abbreuiata fuit, vt cum Abbatibus, Clericis and viris satis
humilibus, hospitia quaesunt and prandia This Monastery (the shrine of two
martyred Kings, Ethelbright and Ethelred, and of Saint (...) the Persian
Bishop) by humble piety at first, and pious charity, ascended such a pitch of
worldly fortune, that it transformed their Founder (religious poverty) into
their ruin, the attribute of Ra^^y the rich: for having made themselves Lords
of 387. Hides of land (whereof (...) in this Shire, so much as at an easy and
under rent, was at the Suppression valued at 1983 l 15 s 3. d q. but by account
of this time annually amounts to 7000 (...)) they then began to affect popular
command, and first enclosing that large circuit of land and water (for in it
lies the Mile-square Mere of Ramsey) as a peculiar Seignory to them, called
the Balent or Bandy (bounded as the Shire, from E^y, and from Norman-Crosse
with the Hundred Mere) by Sovereign Grant they enjoyed regal liberty. And
then aspiring a step further, (to place in Parliament) made Broughton the head
of their Baro^e, annexing to it in this Shire four Knights Fees. Thus in great
glory it stood above 400. years, until Henry the Eight (amongst many other
once bright Lamps of Learning and Religion in this State, though then obscured
with those blemishes to wealth and ease concomitant) dissolved the house,
although John Warboys then Abbot, and his 60 black Monks there maintained,
were of the first that under their hands and conuentuall Seal protested, Quod
Romanus Pontifex non habet maiorem aliquam Iurisdictionem collatam sibi a Deo
in Regno Angliae quam quivis alius externus Episcopus. A Cell to this rich
Monastery was S. Iuces Priory, built in that place of Slep, by Earl Adelmus,
in the reign of the last Edmund, where the incorrupted body of S. Ius there
once an Hermit, in a vision revealed, was by Ednothus taken up in his Robes
Episcopal, and dedicated in the presence of Siward Earl of this County, and
that Lady of renowned piety Ethelfleda, to the sacred memory of this Persian
Bishop. Not far from this is Somersham, the gift of the Saxon Earl
Brithnothus to the Church of Ely, before his own fatal expedition against the
Danes: It is the head of those five Towns, of which the Soke is composed, and
was an house to the Sea of Ely, well beautified by John Stanley their Bishop:
but now by exchange is annexed to the Crown As these, so all the rest of this
Hundred, was the Churches land, except Rippon Regis ancient Demaine. To which
Saple (reserved Forest) adjoined, and the greater Stiuecly, given by the last
David Earl of Huntingdon, in Fee to his three Servants, Sentlice, Lakerutle,
and Camoys.

(8) NORMANS CROSS the next Hundred, takes name of a Cross above Stilton, the
place where in former ages this Division mustered their people, whence
Wapentake is derived: it had in it two religious houses, the eldest in the
confines of Newton and Chesterton, near the River of Auon, now Nene, founded
(by the first Abbess Kineburga the Daughter of Penda, and Wife of Aelfred,
King of Northumberland) West side a Trench, where Ermin-street-way crossed over
the River by a Stone Bridge, whose ruins are now drowned, whence the Roman
Town there sea^ed on both sides took the name Durobriua, as Traiectus
Fluminis. But this Nunnery as raised, was also ruined by the Danes before the
Conquest The other a Monastery of Cistertian black Monks, erected in honor of
the Virgin Mary, by the second Simon Earl of Huntington, at Saltry Iudeth, the
Land of a Lady of that name, wife of Earl Waltheof, daughter to Lambert Earl
of Le^us, Niece to the Conqueror by his Sister, (her Mother) and Grandmother
to this Founder Malcome, and William, Kings of Scots, Earls of Hamingdon, and
Heirs of this Lady, strengthened by several Charters this pious work. Many
chief of that Line, as the last Earl David, brother to King William, as
Isabel, the wife of Robert d^ Brus his Daughter heir; and most of the second
branch, her Progeny making here their Burials. This house now level with the
ground, maintained besides the Abbot, six Monks, and 22 Hindes, and was at
the Suppression valued at 199. l. 11. c. 8. d The Founders and Patrons of this
Monastery were the Lords of the next place Connington, first the seat of
Turkillus Earl of the East Angles, that invited Swayn from Denmark to invade
this Land: and who first squared out the unbounded marshes of this part, to
the bordering Towns; his rule of proportion allowing to every Parish tantum de
Ma^isco, quantum de sicca terra in breadth, in which none, sine licentia Domini
might vel federe, vel salcare, but leaving most to inter-common by vicinage.
This Dane exiled (when the rest of his Countrymen were by Edward Confessor)
his land here was given to Earl (...) by whose eldest heir Matilda married to
David King of Scots, it went along in that Male line, until by death
issuelesse of John Earl of Chester and Huntingdon, it fell in partage, to his
sister I^abel de Brus, one of his heirs, from whose second Son Bernard, the
Family of Cotton by lineall succession holds this Land, whereto Glarton the
adjoining Parish is now by bounty of a second branch annexed. It was in this
Shire the head of the honor of Belleine, on which (...), Sibson, (...), and
Ves^yes Manor in Chesterton attended: part of it is the fre^^ Sea (...), four
mile (...) breadth; over which when Emma, and her Children, the issue of
Canuti^, sailed with some peril, her Husband in prevention of the like, from
Bottsey in a strait course to the opposite firm land, lined with his Attendant
Swords that passage, which since has borne the name of Swords Delph, Kings or
Canutus dyke. This Seignory was granted by the Conqueror to Eustace Earl of
Bollein, Brother to Lambert Earl of Leins, and Father to Godfrey King of
Jerusalem; reuerting it was given to Richard Earl of Cornwall, who granted out
of it the two Meeres, Vbbe Mere and Brich Mere, in Fee-Farme to the Church of
Ramsey Then after sundry changes it came to John of Gaunt, in exchange of the
Earldom of Richmond, and so by descent fell again into the Crown
Washingley, (not far off) from the ancient Lord of that name, by D^we, and
Otter came to the Prices that now posseth it. In Chesterton from Wadsheafe by
Dennyes there is to the Beuils (an ancient name in this Shire) a Manor
descended. The rest from Aegidius de Merke (who gave there much to Royston
Priory) passed by Amundeuill to Gloucester, and so to Vesey by exchange. In
Elton, the house rich in a beauteous Chapel, from Denham to Sapcotes, and
Saultre Beaumes, from that surname (near the time of the Conquest) by Louth to
Cornwallis descended; as Bottlebridge by Gimels, Drayton, Louet, unto Sherley
the now Lord.

(9) LETTVNESTAN HUNDRED has that name from Leighton, a Town in the midst
of it, given by Earl Waltheof to the Church of Lincoln, which after shared it
into two Prebendaries. One, the Parsonage impropriate, which still remains:
the other (the Lordships) was resumed by Henry the eight, and now by the Heir
of Darcy matched to the Lord Clifton, is become the seat of his Barony. This
Hundred had in it no house of Religion, but Stonley a Priorie of seven black
Channons, of the order of S. Augustine, founded by the Bigrames, and at the
Suppression valued at 62. l. 12. s 3. d ob. It stood within the reach of the
great Manor Kimbolton (once an Hundred) which was the land of Earl Harold the
Usurper: after by Grant it came with the Chase of Swinesheued to Fitz-Peter,
from whom by Magnauil to Bohum (who in time of the (...) Barons built there a
Forcelet) and so to Stafford, by whose attainturre forsaited, it was given by
Henry the eight to the Family of Wingfield that now possesses it. At Bugden
the Sea of Lincoln has a seat, and was Lord of Spaldwick, and the Soke
(given in compensation from the Church of Ely, when rent from them, it was by
the first Henry made a Bishopric) until of late that Church gave up their
interest in Spaldwicke to the Crown. Brampton was given by King John at
Mirabel, to Earl David, and by Ada his youngest Daughter fell to Hastings
Earl of Pembroke, and now is reuerted to the King To the same Earl David by
gift of the former King came Alcumesbury, and by the bounty of John Scot his
son to Segraue, and so to the Lord Barkley the late possessor. To Serlo de
Quincy ^arle of Winthester, was Keston by Henry the second given, by whose
Heir general Ferrars, it came to the late Earl of Essex, and by exchange to
the Crown.

(10) TOVLESLAND HUNDRED, takes name likewise of a Town therein situate. In
the out Angle of this, to the memory of S. Neotus a Monk of Glasterbury, but
the supposed son to (...) King of the West Saxons (whose body from (...) in
Cornwall was transferred to Arnalphesbury, then of Arnulphus a holy man, now
Eynesbury named) Earl Alrick and Ethelfleda turned the Palace of Earl Elfred
into a Monastery of black Monks, which was razed by the Danes; but out of the
ashes of this, Roisia (wife to Richard the son of Earl Gilbert) to God, our
Lady de Becco, and S. Neot (as a Cell to the Abbey of Becco in Normandy)
erected up of black Monks in the year 1113. the late Priorie of S. Needs,
suppressed by Henry the eight, and valued at 256. l. 15. d q. At Southo (the
Land of Eustachius the Sheriff) Louetote made the seat of that Seignory: on
which in this Shire 13. Knights Fees and a half depended: But from his line by
gift of Verdon and Vesey drowned were these in the honor of Gloucester. Near
to this at Cretingsbury dwelt Sir Adam de Cretings, famous in Edward the thirds
wars of France, whose Heir General Wanton does now possess it. Staunton
given by the first William to Gilbert de Gaunt, after the death issuelesse of
De Rupes, escheated to the King, who gave it to Joan his sister Queen of
Scots. She on the Abbey of Tarent bestowed part, the rest reuerting being given
to Segraue descended to the Barons of Berkly, Godmanchester, or Gormonchester,
(so named of that Dane to whom Aelfred at his conversion granted some regiment
in these parts) was the old land of the Crown, now the Inhabitants in fee
farm, by grant of King John, pro Sexies viginti libris pondere and numero. It
is flat seated by as fruitful and flowery Meadows as any this Kingdom
yields, and is the most spacious of any one Parish in fertile tillage, often
having waited on their Sovereign Lords with ninescore Ploughes in a rural
pomp: Some from the name Gunicester (which this often bears in record,)
suppose it the City where Machutus placed his Bishops Chair. But for certain
it was that Roman Town Durosipont, of the Bridges named, so many hundred
years (until the light of our Britain^ Story ouershone it) forgotten. Thus as
this City so the old Families have been here with time outworne, few only
(of the many former) now remaining, whose Surnames before the reign of the
last Henry were in this Shire of any eminency. But, Non indignemur mortalia
Nomina solui,
Cernimus exemplis Oppida posse mort.
Let Us not repine that Men and names do dye,
Since stone-built Cities dead and ruined lie.


This Description I received from a right worthy and learned Friend.

RVTLAND-SHIRE. CHAPTER XXIX.
RVTLAND-SHIRE, the least of any County in this Realm, is circulated upon the
North with Lincolne-shire; upon the East and South, by the River Weland is
parted from Northampton shire; and the West is altogether held in with
Leichestershire.

(2) The form thereof is round, and no larger in compass then a light
horseman can easily ride about in a day* upon which occasion some will have
the Shire named of one Rut, that so rode. But others from the redness of the
Soil, will have it called Rutland, and so the old English-Saxons called it,
for that Roet and Rut is in their tongue Red with us, and may very well give
the name to this Province, seeing the earth does stain the wool of her sheep
into a reddish color. Neither is it strange, that the stain of the soil
gives names unto places, and that very many: for have we not in Chesse-shire
the Red Rock, in Lancashire the Red Bank, and in Wales, Rutland Castle? To
speak nothing of that famous Red Sea which shoots into the Land betwixt
Egypt and Arabia, which gave back her waters for the Israelites to pass on
foot: all of them named from the color of the Soil.

(3) The longest part of this Shire is from Caldecot in the South upon the
River Ey, (...) to Thistleton a small Village seated in the North, not fully
twelve miles: and from Timwell Eastward, to Wissenden in the West, her
broadest extant, is hardly nine: the whole circumference about forty miles.

(4) The air is good both for health and delight, subject to neither extremity
of heat nor cold, nor is greatly troubled with foggy mists.

The Soil is rich, and for Corn and tillage gives place unto none. Woods
there are plenty, and many of them imparked, hills feeding herds of Neat,
and flocks of sheep; Valleys besprinkled with many sweet Springs; Grain in
abundance, and Pastures not wanting: in a word, all things ministered to the
content of life, with a liberal heart and open hand Only this is objected,
that the Circuit is not great.

(5) The draught whereof, that I may acknowledge my duty and his right, I
received at the hands of the right Honorable John Lord Harrington, Baron of
Exton, done by himself in his younger years.

Near unto his house Burley, stands Okham a fair Market-Towne, which
Lordship the said Baron enjoys, with a Royalty somewhat extraordinary, which
is this: If any Noble by birth come within the precinct of the same Lordship,
he shall forfeit as an homage a shoe from the horse whereon he rides, unless
he redeem it at a price with money In witness whereof, there are many
Horse-shooes nailed upon the Shire-Hall door, some of large size and ancient
fashion, others new, and of our present Nobility; whose names are thereupon
stamped as follows: Henry Hastings. Roger Rutland. Edward L. Russell, Earl
of Bedford. Raphe L. Euwer of Parram. Henry L. Bertley. Henry L. Mordant.
William L. Compton. Edward L. Dudley. Henry L. Winsor. George, Earl of
Cumberland. Philip, Earl of Montgomery. L. Willoughby. P. L. Wharton. The Lord
Shandois.


Besides many others without names.

That such homage was his due, the said Lord himself told me; and at that
instant a suit depended in Law against the Eirle of Lincoln, who refused to
forfeit the penalty, or to pay his sine.

(6) Her ancient Inhabitants known to the Romones, and mentioned in Ptolemit,
were the Coritan^, and by him branched through Leicester, Lincoln, Nottingham,
Darby-shire and this; who with the Icemans were subdued by P. Ostorius under
the yoke of Claudius the Roman Emperor: and at their departure, by conquest
the Saxons made it a Prounce unto their Mercian Kingdom, whose fortunes
likewise coming to a full period, the Normans annexed it under their Crown.

(7) This County King Edward Confessor bequeathed by his Testament unto Queen
Eadgith his wife, and after her decease unto his Monastery at Westminster,
which William the Conqueror cancelled and made void, bestowing the Lands upon
others, the Tithes and the Church unto those Monks*

That the Ferrers here first seated, besides the credit of Writers, the
Horse-shooe whose badge then it was, does witness; where in the Castle, and
now the Shire-hall, right over the Seat of the Judge, a Horse-shooe of iron
curiously wrought, containing five foot and a half in length, and the breadth
thereto proportionably is fixed. The Castle has been strong, but now is
decayed, the Church fair, and the Town spacious; whose degree of Longitude is
19. 46. scruples, and the North poles elevation in Latitude 53. degrees and 7.
minutes.

(8) Let it not seem offen sieve, that I (to fill up this little Shire,) have
inserted the seat of a Town not sited in this County: for besides the
conueniency of place, the circuit and beauty, but especially it being for a
time an University, did move much; yea, and the first in this Island, if John
Hardings Author fail him not, that will have Bladud to bring from Athens
certain Philosophers, whom here he seated, and made public profession of the
Liberal Sciences, where (as he says) a great number of Scholars studied the
Arts, and so continued an University unto the coming of Augustine, at which
time the Bishop of Rome interdicted it; for certain Heresies sprung up among
the Britains and Saxons. But most true it is, that in the Reign of King
Edward the third, upon debate falling betwixt the Southern and Northern
Students at Oxford, many Schoolmen withdrew themselves hither, and a while
professed, and named a College, according to one in Oxford, Brasen-nose, which
retains that name unto this day. This was so great a skarre unto the other,
that when they were recalled by Proclamation to Oxford, it was provided by
Oath, that no Student in Oxford should publicly professeor read the Arts at
Stanford, to the prejudice of Oxford.

(9) As this Shire is the least in circuit, so is it with the fewest
Market-Townes replenished having only two. And from Societies that seed upon
the labors of others, was this Land the freest: for besides Rihall, where
Tibba the F^lconers Goddess was worshipped for a Saint, when Superstition had
well-neere put Gods true honor out of place, I find very few; neither with
more Castles strengthened then that at Okham, whose ruins show that a Castle
has been there.

Divided it is into five Hundreds, and therein are planted forty eight
Parish-Churches.

LEICHESTERSHIRE. CHAPTER XXX.
LEICHESTERSHIRE, lying bordered upon the North with Nottingham-shire; upon the
East, with Lincoln and Rutland; upon the South with Northampton shire; and
upon the West with Watling-street-way is parted from Warwickshire; the rest
being bounded with the consines of Darby, is a Country Champion, abounding in
corn, but spary of woods, especially in the South and East parts, which are
supplied with pit-coales plenteously gotten in the North of this Province, and
with abundance of Cattle bred in the hills beyond the River Wreak, which is
nothing so well inhabited as the rest.

(2) The Air is gentle, mild, and temperate, and gives appetite both to
labor and rest: wholesome it is, and draws man's life to a long age, and that
much without sickness; at Carleton only some defect of pronunciation
appears in their speech.

(3) The soil thus consisting, the commodities are raised accordingly of
Corn, Cattle, and Coals; and in the Rocks near Beuer are sometimes found
the Astroites, the Starre-like precious Stone.

(4) The ancient people that inhabited this County, were the Coritani, who
were spread further into other Shires, but after that the Romans had left the
Land to it self, this with many more fell to be under the possession and
government of the Mercians, and their Kings, from whom the English enjoys it
at this day.

(5) In Circular-wise (almost) the compass of this Shire is drawn
indifferently spacious, but not very thick of Enclosures, being from East to
West in the broadest part not fully 30. miles, and from North to South but 24.
the whole circumference about 196. miles; whose principal City is set, as the
Center, almost in the midst; from whom the Pole is elevated 53. degrees and 4
minutes in Latitude, and for Longitude, 19. degrees, 22. minutes.

(6) From this Town the Shire has the name, though the name of her self is
diversely written, as Legecestria, Legora, Legeo-cester: by Ninius, Caer-Lerion;
by Matthew of Westminister (if we do not mistake him) Wirall; and now lastly,
Leicester: ancient enough if King Leir was her builder, eight hundred forty
and four years before the birth of our Savior, wherein he placed a Flamine
to serve in the Temple of Ianus, by himself there erected, and where he was
buried, if Ieffery ap Arthur say true: but now certain it is, that Ethelred
the Mercian Monarch made it an Episcopal See, in the year of Christ Jesus
680. wherein Sexwulph of his election became the first Bishop: which shortly
after was thence translated, and therewith the beauty of the Town began to
decay; upon whose desolations that erectifying Lady Edelsted cast her eyes of
compassion, and both reedified the buildings, and compassed it about with a
strong wall, where, in short time the Cities trade so increased, that Matthew
Paris in his lesser Story reports as follows; Lege-cester (says he) is a
right wealthy City, and notably defended; and had the wall a sure foundation,
were inferior to no City whatsoever. But this pride of prosperity long
lasted not under the Normans, for it was sore oppressed with a world of
calamities, when Robert Bossu the Crouch-backe Earl of that Province, rebelled
against his Sovereign Lord King Henry the second: whereof hear the same
Author Paris speak: Through the obstinate stubbornness of Earl Robert (says
he) the noble City Leicester was besieged and thrown down by King Henry, and
the wall that seemed indissoluble, was utterly raced, even to the ground. The
pieces of whose fragments so fallen down, remained in his days like to hard
rocks, through the strength of the Mortar cementing whole lumpes together: and
at the Kings command the City was set on fire and burnt, the Castle raced, and
a heauit imposition laid upon the Citizens, who with great sums of money
bought their own Banishments: but were so used in their departure, that for
extreme fear many of them took Sanctuary, both at S. Edmunds and S. Albanes.
In repentance of these mischiefs, the Author thereof, Earl Robert, built the
Monastery of S. Mary de Praetis, wherein himself became a Canon regular, and
for fifteen years continuance in sad laments served God in continual
prayers. With the like devotion, Henry the first Duke of Lancaster built an
Hospital for an hundred and ten poor people, with a Collegiate Church, a
Deane, twelve Canons Prebendaries, as many Vicars, sufficiently provided for
with revenues; wherein himself lies buried: and it was the greatest ornament
of that City, until the hand of King Henry the 8. lay ouer-heaiue upon all the
like foundations, and laid their aspired tops at his own feet.

The fortunes of another Crouch-backe (King Richard the V^^^per) were no less
remarkable in this City then the former Robert was, both of them in like
degree of dishonorable course of life, though of disterent issue at their
deaths, the one dying penitent and of devout esteem; the other leaving the
stench of Tyranny to all following ages; who from this City setting forth in
one day with great pomp, and in Battle array, to keep the Crown sure upon his
own Helmet, in a sore (...) field, yielded both it and his life, unto the head
and hands of Henry of Richmond his Conqueror: and the next day was brought
back, like a Hog, naked and (...) and with contempt, without tears (...)
buried in the G^^y-Fryers of this City; whose suppression has suppressed the
plot place of his grave, and only the stone-chest wherein he was laid (a
drinking trough now for horses in a common In^e) retains the memory of that
great Monarchs Funeral: and so did a stone in the Church and Chapel of S.
Mary's, enclose the corpse of the proud and pontifical Cardinal Wolsey, who
had prepared for himself, as was said, a far more richer Monument.

(7) Otherplaces worthy of remembrance in this Shire were these: In the West,
where a high Cross was erected, in former times stood the fair City
Cleycester, the Romans BENONNES, where their Legions lay, and where their two
principal ways crossed each other, as the Inhabitants report; Loughborrow in
the North-verge, was (as Marianus affirms) taken from the Britains by
Cuthwolfe their King, about the year of Christ 572.

At Redmore, near Bosworth, Westward in this County, the Kingdom of England
lay in hazard of one Battle, when King Richards Field was fought, where the
Land at once was freed from a Tyrant and a wicked Usurper. Neither may we pass
Lutterworth, as the least in account, where the famous John Wickliffe, Englands
Morning-starre, dispersed the clouds of all Papisticall darkness, by preaching
the Gospel in that his charge; and style of his pen, so piercing in power,
that the man of Sin ever since has been better known to the world.

(8) Religious houses by Princes erected, and by them devoted to God and his
service, the chiefest in this Shire were at Leicester, Grace-Dieu, Kerby
Bellers, and at Burton a Spittle for Lazers, a disease then newly approached in
this Land; for the erection whereof a common contribution was gathered through
the Realm: the Patients in this place were not so much deformed in skin, as
the other were in the defects for the soul; whose skirts being turned up to
the sight of the world, their s^^mes were discovered, and those houses
dissolved, that had long maintained such Idolatrous sins.

(9) This Shires division is into six Hundreds, and in them are seated twelve
Market-Townes for commerce, and contains in her circuit two hundred
Parish-Churches.

LINCOLNSHIRE. CHAPTER XXXI.
THe County of Lincoln, by the Normans called Nicolshire, is consined on the
North with Humber, on the East with the German Ocean, upon the South is parted
from Cambridge and Northamptonshire by the River Nine; and on the West from
Nottingham and York-shires by Dun and Trent.

(2) The length of this Province extended from Barton upon Humber in the North,
unto Stanford upon the River Nine in the South, are miles by our English
measure fifty five, and the breadth thereof from Newton in the West, stretched
unto Wintbory upon her East Sea contains thirty five. The whole in
circumference about one hundred and eighty miles.

(3) The Air upon the East and South part is both thick and foggy, by reason
of the Fennes and vnsolute grounds, but therewithal very moderate and
pleasing. Her graduation being removed from the Equator to the degree of 53.
and the winds that are sent of her still working Seas, do disperse those
vapors from all power of hurt.

(4) The form of this County does somewhat resemble the body of a Lute, whose
East coasts lie bowe-like into the German Ocean, all along pestered with inlets
of salt waters and sands, which are neither firm nor safe for travelers, as
those in the South proved unto King John who matching Northward from
Northfolke, against his disloyal Barons, upon those washes (...) and carriage
by the sudden return of the Sea, and sofenesse of the sands.

(5) Her Soil upon the West and North is abundantly (...), pleasant, (...)
pasturage, areable and meadowing grounds: the East and South fenny and (...)
barren; but for foul and fish exceeding any other in the Realm; wherein, at
some times and season of the year, has been taken in nets, in August, at one
draught, above three thousand Mallards, and other Fowls of the like kind.

(6) The Shires commodities consist chiefly in Corn, Cattle, Fish, Foul, Flax
and Alablaster; as also in a Plaster much esteemed of by the Romans for their
works of Imagery; and whereof Pliny in his Natural History makes mention.
And the Astroites, a precious stone, Star-like, pointed with five beams or
rays, anciently esteemed for their virtue in victories, upon the South-west of
this County near Beuer are found: not far thence in our Fathers memory, at
Harlaxton was ploughed up a brazen vessel, wherein was enclosed a golden
Helmet of an ancient fashion, set with precious stones, which was presented to
Kathren of Spain, Wife and Dowager to King Henry the eight*

(7) This Shire triumphs in the births of Beauclerke, King Henry the first,
whom Selby brought forth, and of King Henry the fourth, at Bullingbrooke borne:
but may as justly lament for the death of King John, herein poisoned by S^non a
Monk of Swynsted Abbey; and of Queen Eleanor, wife to King Edward the first,
the mirror of wedlock, and love to the Commons, who at Hardby, near
Bullingbrooke, his birth place, ended her life.

(8) Trade and commerce for provision of life is vented through thirty one
Market-Townes in this Shire, whereof Lincoln the Counties namer is chief, by
Ptolemie and Antonine called Lindum, by Beda Linde-collma, and by the Normans,
Nichol. Very ancient it is, and has been more magnificall, as by her many
ouerturned ruins does appear, and far more populous, as by Demesdayes Book
is seen, where it is recorded that this City contained a thousand and seven
Mansions, and nine hundred Burgesses, with twelve Lage-men, having Sac and Soc.
And in the Normans time, says Malmesbury, it was one of the best peopled
Cities of England, being a place for traffic of Merchandise for all commerce
by Land or Sea. Herein King Edward the third ordained his Staple for the Mart
of Wools, Leather, and Lead; and no less then fifty Parish. Churches did
beautify the same: but now contains only fifteen besides the Cathedral.
Some ruins yet remains both of Frieries and Nunneries, who lie now buried in
their own ashes, and the City conquered not by war, but by time and very
age: and yet has she not escaped the calamity of sword, as in the time of the
Saxons; whence Arthur enforced their Host: the like also did Edmund to the
destroying Danes; and by the Normans it suffered some damage, where King
Stephen was vanquished and taken prisoner; and again, by the third Henry, that
assaulted and wan it from his rebellious Barons. By fire likewise it was fore
defaced, wherein not only the buildings were consumed, but withal many men
and women in the violence thereof perished: as also by an Earthquake her
foundation was much weakened and shaken, wherein the fair Cathedral Church,
dedicated to the Virgin of Virgins, was rent in pieces. The government of this
City is committed yearly to a Mayor, tow Sheriffs, twelve Aldermen in
Scarlet, a Sword, a Hat of Estate, a Recorder, Sword Bearer, and four
Sergeants with Maces: whose situation on a sleep hill stands, for Longitude
in the degree 20. 10. scruples, the Pole elevated for Latitude from the degree
53. and 50. scruples.

(9) Much has been the devotion of Princes in building religious houses in
this County, as at Crowland, Lincoln, Markeby, Leyborne, Grenfeld, Aluingham,
Newnersby, Grymmysby, Newsted, Elsham, Stay^feld, Syxhyll, Torkesey, Bryggerd,
Thorneholme, Nuncotton, Fosse, Heyings, Axholme I Will, Goykewell, S. Michaels
near Stamford, Swyn^shead, Spalding, Kirkested, etc.

(10) Commotions in this Shire were raised the eight and twentieth of King
Henry the Eight, where twenty thousand making insurrection, violently swear
certain Lords and Gentlemen to their Articles. But no sooner they heard of the
Kings power coming, but that they dispersed themselves, and sued for pardon.
And again in the third year of King Edward the Sixth, in case of Inclosu^es,
Lincoln, rose in seditious manner, as did they of Cornwall, Deuon-shire,
Yorkshire, and Norfolk: but after some flaughters of their chiefest men, were
reduced to former obedience.

The Shires division is into three principal par^^, viz. Lindsey, Kesteuen,
and Holland, Lindsey is subdivided into seauenteene Hundreds, (...) into
eleven, and Holland into three, containing in all thirty one, wherein are
situated thirty Market-Townes, and six hundred thirty Parish-Churches.

NOTTINGHAM-SHIRE. CHAPTER XXXII.
NOTTINGHAM-SHIRE (from Nottingham her chiefest Town has the name; and that,
somewhat softened from the Saxons Snoddenzaham, for the many Dens or Caves
wrought in her Rocks and under ground) lies bordered upon the North and North
west with Yorkshire; upon the East a good distance by Trent is parted froM,
and with Lincolnshire altogether confined: the South with Leichestershire; and
the West by the River Erwash is separated from Darby-shire.

(2) For form long and Ouall-wise, doubling in length twice her breadth, whose
extremes are thus extended and distance observed: From Finingley North to
Sleanford in the South, are thirty eight English miles; her West part from
Teuersall to Besthorp in the East, are little more then nineteen; whose
circumference draws much upon one hundred and ten miles.

(3) The Air is good, wholesome and delectable: the Soil is rich, sandy and
clayie, as by the names of that Counties divisions may appear: and surely for
Corn and Grass so fruitful, that it secondeth any other in the Realm: and
for Water, Woods, and Canell Coals abundantly stored.

(4) Therein grows a Stone softer then Alablaster, but being burnt makes a
plaster harder then that of Paris: wherewith they flower their upper rooms;
for betwixt the Ioysts they lay only long Bulrushes, and thereon spread this
Plaster, which being thoroughly dry becomes most solid and hard, so that it
seems rather to be firm stone then mortar, and is trod upon without all
danger.

In the West near Worksop grows plenty of Liquorice, very delicious and
good.

(5) More South in this Shire, at Stoke, in the Reign of King Henry the
seventh, a great battle was fought by John De-la-Pole Earl of Lincoln, which
Richard the Usurper had declared his heir apparent; but Richard losing his
life, and De-la Pole his hopes, in seeking here to set up a Lambert, fell down
himself: and at Newarke after many troubles King John got his peace with the
end of his life.

(6) Trade and commerce for the Counties provision is frequented in eight
Market-Townes in this Shire, whereof Nottingham is both the greatest and best:
a Town seated most pleasant and delicate upon a high hill, for buildings
stately, and number of fair streets, surpassing and surmounting many other
Cities, and for a spacious and most fair Marketplace, does compare with the
best Many strange Vaults hewed out of the Rocks, in this Town are seen; and
those under the Castle of an especial note, one for the story of Christ's
Passion engraven in the Walls, and cut by the hand of David the second King of
Scots, whilst he was therein detained prisoner. Another wherein Lord Mortimer
was surprised in the nonage of King Edward the Third, ever since beating the
name of Mortimers Hole; these have their stairs and several rooms made
artifically even out of the Rocks: as also in that hill are dwelling houses,
with winding stairs, windows, chimneys, and room above room, wrought all
out of the solid Rock. The Castle is strong, and was kept by the Danes
against Burthred, Ethelred, and Elfred, the Mercian, and West Saxon Kings, who
together laid their siege against it: and for the further strength of the
Town, King Edward, surnamed the Elder, walled it about, whereof some part as
yet remains, from the Castle to the West-gate, and thence the foundation may
be perceived to the North; where in the midst of the way ranging with this
bank, stands a gate of Stone, and the same tract passing along the North part
may well be perceived: the rest to the River, and thence to the Castle are
built upon, and thereby buried from sight: whose circuit, as I took it,
extends two thousand one hundred and twenty pases.

(7) In the Wars betwixt Stephen and Maud the Empress, by Robert Earl of
Gloucester these Wells were east down, when also the Town it self suffered
the calamity of fire: but recovered to her former estate, has since increased
in beauty and wealth, and at this day is governed by a Mayor and six
Aldermen, clad in Scarlet, two Sheriffs, two Chamberlaines, a Towne-clerke,
and six Sergeants with Maces, their Attenders: whose position has the Pole
elevated fifty three degrees. 25. minutes in Latitude, and has the Meridian
nine degrees and 25. minutes. This Town has been honored by these Princes
titles, and these Princes dignified with the Earldom of Nottingham, whose
several Arms and Names are in the great Map expressed.

Religious houses that have been erected and now suppressed in the compass of
this County, chiefly were Newsted, Lenton, Shelford, Southwell, Thurgarton,
Blithe, Welbeck and Radford; in Nottingham the White and Gray Friars, besides a
little Chapel dedicated to Saint John. All which show the devotions of those
former times: which their remembrance may move, if not condemn us, that have
more knowledge, but far less piety.

The Shires division is principally into two: which the Inhabitants term the
Sand and the Clay; but for Tax^ to the Crown, or service for State, is parted
into eight Wapentakes or Hundreds, wherein are seated 168. Parish Churches.

DARBY-SHIRE. CHAPTER XXXIII.
DARBY-SHIRE, lies enclosed upon her North parts with Yorke-shire; upon the
East with Nottingham-shire; upon the South with Leichestershire; and upon the
West is parted with the Rivers Dove and Goyt from Stafford and Chesse-shires.

(2) It is in form somewhat triangle, though not of any equal distance,
growing from her narrow South-point still wider, and in the North is at the
broadest: for from Stretton near the head of Mese, to New-Chapell seated near
the head of Derwent, the two extremes from North to South are thirty eight
miles: but from the Shire-Oakes unto the meeting of Mersey and Goyt, the
broadest part of all this Shire, is not fully twenty nine; the whole in
circumference extends to an hundred and thirty miles.

(3) The air is good and very healthful: the sile is rich, especially in her
South and East parts: but in the North and West is hilly, with a black and
mossie ground, both of them fast handed, to the Ploughers pains, though very
liberal in her other gifts: whose natures thus dissenting, the River Derwent
does divide asunder, that takes course through the heart or midst of this
County.

The ancient people that possessed these parts in the times of the Romans
assaults, were the Coritani, whom Ptolemie disperseth through Northamptonshire,
Leicester, Rutland, Lincoln, Nottingham, and this Shire, who were all of them
subdued by P. Ostorius Scapula, Lieutenant in this Province for Claudius the
Emperor. But Romes Empire failing in Britain, by the intestine Wars among
themselves, the Saxons (a more savage and fearful Nation) soon brought it
under their subjection, and made this a Province unto their Mercians Kingdom,
whom the West Saxons first wanne and again lost to the Normans.

(5) It is stored with many Commodities, and them of much worth; for besides
Woods and Cattle, Sheep and Corn, every where ouer-spreading the face of this
County, the Millstone, Crystal, and Allablas^er, the Mines of Pit-coale,
Iron, and Lead, are of great price: whereof the last is mentioned in Flinie,
who writes that in Britain, in the very crust of the ground, without any
deep digging, is gotten so great store of Lead, that there is a Law expressly
made of purpose, forbidding men to make more then to a certain stint. Whose
stones are plenteously gotten in those Mountains, and melted into Sowes, to no
small profit of the Country. There is found also in certain veins of the
earth, Subium which the Apothecarits call Antimonium, and the Al^thmists hold
in great esteem.

(6) Places for commerce, or memorable note, the first is Darby, the
Shire-Towne, called by the Danes De^aby, seated upon the West bank of Derwent,
where also a small Brook rising Westward, runs through the Town under nine
Bridges, before it meets with her far greater River Derwent, which presently
it does, after she has passed Tenant Bridge in the South-East of the Town.
But a Bridge of more beauty, built all of Freestone, is passed over Derwent
in the North-East of the Town, whereon stands a fair stone Chapel, and
both of them bearing the names of S. Mary's: five other Churches are in this
Town, the chiefest whereof is called A^hallowes, whose Steeple or Bell-Tower
being both beautiful and high, was built only at the charges of young men and
maids, as is witnessed by the inscription cut in the same upon every square of
the Steeple. Among the miserable desolations of the Danes, this Town bare a
part, but by Lady Ethelfleda was again repaired, and is at this day
in^orporated with the yearly gournment of two Bailiffes, elect out of
twentie-foure brethren, besides as many Burgesses of Common Counsel, a
Recorder, Towne-Clerke, and two Sergeants with Mace: whose Graduation is
observed from the Equator to be 53. degrees 25. scruples, and from the first
point in the West, 19. degrees 2. scruples.

(7) Little-Chester (by the Romish Money there daily found) seems to have
been ancient, and that a Colonie of the Roman Soldiers there lay. Yet of
far greater fame was Repandunum, now Repton, where Ethelbald the ninth King
of the Mercians, and fifteenth Monarch of the Englishmen, slain at Seggeswald
by the treason of his Subjects, was interred: and whence Burthred, the last
King of that people, was expulsed with his Queen Ethelswith, by the rage of
the Danes, after twenty two years reign. But with a more pleasing eye we may
behold Melborne, the memorial of Englishmens great valor, where in that
Castle was kept Prisoner John Duke of Burbon, taken captive in the Battle of
Agincourt, and therein detained the space of nineteen years.

(8) Things of stranger note are the hot Water-springs, bursting forth of the
ground at Buxton, where out of the Rock within the compass of eight yards,
nine springs arise, eight of them warm, but the ninth very cold. These run
from under a fair square building of free-stones, and about threescore paces
off, receive another hot spring from a Well, enclosed with four flat stones,
called Saint Annes; near unto which, another very cold spring bubled up. The
report goes among the bydwellers, that great cures by these waters have been
done: but daily experience shows, that they are good for the stomach and
sinews, and very pleasant to bathe the body in. Not far thence is Elden
hole, whereof strange things have been told, and this is confidently affirmed,
the waters that trickle from the top of that Cave (which indeed is very
spacious, but of a low and narrow entrance) do congeale into stone, and hang
as ickles in the roof. Some of them were showed at my being there, which like
unto such as the frost congealeth, were hollow within, and grew Taper-wise
toward their points, very white, and somewhat Crystall-like. And seven miles
thence, upon a mounted hill, stands a Castle, under which there is a hole or
Cave in the ground of a marvelous capacity, which is commonly called The
Devils Arse in the Peake, whereof Geruase of Tilbury has told many pretty
tales, and others do make it one of the wonders of our Land.

(9) As in other Counties the devotions of the religious have been made
apparent in the erection of places for Gods peculiar service; so in this have
been founded eight of that nature, which were Dale, Detelege, Darby, Rep^on,
Bechif, Grai^sley, Fauerwell, and Pollewerke: whose peace and plenty stood
secure from all danger, till the blustering winds arising in the Reign of
King Henry the eight, blew off the pinacles of their beauteous buildings, and
shook asunder the revenues of those Foundations which never are like again
to be laid.

(10) This Shire is divided into six Hundreds, wherein have been seated
seven Castles, and is still traded with eight Market-Townes, and replenished
with one Hundred and six Parish-Churches.

STAFFORDSHIRE. CHAPTER XXXIIII.
STAFFORDSHIRE, whose situation is much about the middle of England, meets
upon the North with Chesse-shire and Darby, and that in a Triangle point, where
three stones are pitched for the bounds of these Shires; it is parted from
Darby shire on the East with Dowe and with Trent; the South is confined with
Warwick and Worcester-shires, and the West butteth against the County of
Shrop-shire.

The form thereof is somewhat Lozeng-like, that is, sharp at both ends, and
broadest in the midst. The length extending from North to South, is by measure
forty four miles; and the breadth from East to West, twenty seven miles; the
whole in circumference one hundred and forty miles.

(3) The air is good and very healthful, though ouer-sharpe in her North and
Moreland, where the snow lies long, and the wind blows cold.

(4) The Soil in that part is barren of Corn, because her hills and Mores
are no friends unto Tillage: the middle is more level, but therewithal
wooddie, as well witnesses that great one, called the Cank. But the South is
most plenteous in Corn and Pasturage.

(5) Her ancient Inhabitants were the CORNAVII, whom Ptolemie places in the
Tract that contains Shrop-shire, Worcestershire, Chesse-shire, and this: all
which were possessed by the Mercian-Saxons when their Heptarchy flourished. And
Tameworth in this Shire was then held their Kings Court. The Danes after them
often aflayed herein to have seated, as witnesses Ternall, then Th^^tenhall,
by interpretation, The habitation of Pagans, ^^brued with their blood by King
Edward the elder. But the Inhabitants of this Province Beda terms The midland
Englishmen, because to his seeming it lay in the heart of the Land, which when
the Normans had made Conquest of all, many of them set down their rest here,
whose posterity at this day are fairly and further branched into other parts.

(6) The Commodities of this County consist chiefly in Corn, Cattle,
Alablaster, Woods, and Iron, (if the one prove not the destruction of the
other) Pit-coale, Flesh and Fish, whereof the River Trent is said to swarm:
and others arising and running through this Shire, do so batten the ground,
that the Meadows even in the midst of Winter grow green; such are Dowe,
Manifold, Churnot, Hunsye, Yenden, Tean, Elith, Trent. Tyne, and Sow; whereof
Trent is not only the principal, but in esteem accounted the third of this
Land.

(7) Stafford the Snire-Towne, anciently Betheney, from Bertelin, a reputed
holy man that therein lead an Hermits life, was built by King Edward the elder,
incorporated by King John, and upon the East and South parts was walled and
trenched by the Barons of the place; the rest from East to North was secured by
a large Poole of water, which now is become fair Meadow grounds. The tract and
circuit of these wells extended to twelve hundred and forty pases, through
which four Gates into the four winds have passage, the River Sow running on
the South and West of the Town. King Edward the sixth did incorporate the
Burgesses, and gave them a perpetual succession, whose government is under two
Bailiffes yearly elected out of one and twenty Assistants, called the Common
Counsel, a Recorder, whereof the Dukes of Buckingham have borne the Office,
and as yet is kept a Court of Record, wherein they hold Plea without limitation
of sum; a Towne-Clerke also, (from whose Pen I received these Instructions)
and to attend them two Sergeants at Mace. This Town is sited in the degree of
Latitude 53. 20. scruples, and of Longitude 18. and 40. scruples.

(8) But Leichfield, more large, and of far greater same, is much her
ancient, known unto Beda by the name of Licidfeld, which Rosse does interpret
to be The field of deadbodies, for the number of Saints under the rage of
Dioclesia^ there slain: upon which cause the City bears for her Arms an
Eschocheon of Landscape, with diverse Martyrs in diverse manner massacred. Here
Oswin King of Northumberland ouer-comming the Pagan-Mercians, built a Church
and made it the Sea of Duina the Bishop; whose successors grown rich, with
golden reasons so overcame King Offa, and the Adrian the Pope, that an
Archiepiscopall Pale was granted Bishop Eadulph, to the great disgrace of
Lambert Archbishop of Canterbury. In this Church were interred the bodies of
Wulshere and Celred, both of them Kings of the Mercians. But when the minds of
men were set altogether upon gorgeous building, this old foundation was new
reared by Roger Clinton, Bishop of this See, and dedicated to the Virgin Mary
and Saint Chad, and the Close inwalled by Bishop Langton. The government of
this City is by two Bailiffes and one Sheriff, yearly chosen out of
twentie-foure Burgesses, a Recorder, a Towne-Clerke, and two Sergeants their
Attendants.

(9) Houses of Religion erected in this Shire, were at Leichfield, Stafford, De
la Cross, Cru^den, Trentham, Burton, Tamworth, and Woluer-hampt^n. These
Votaries abusing their Founders true pieties, and heaping up riches with
disdain of the Laity, laid themselves open as marks to be shot at; whom the
hand of the skillful soon hit and quite pierced, under the aim of King Henry
the eight, who with such Revenues in most places relieved the poor and the
Orphane, with Schools and maintenance for the training up of youth: a work no
doubt more acceptable to God, and of more charitable use to the Land.

(10) With 13. Castles this County has been strengthened, and (...)
Market-Townes her Commodities traded, being divided into five Hundreds, and
(...) one hundred and thirty Parish-Churches.

SHROP-SHIRE. CHAPTER XXXV.
SHROP-SHIRE, is both large incircuit, well peopled, and very fruitful for
life. It lies circulated upon the North with the County Palatine of Chester;
upon the East altogether with Staffordshire; upon the South with Worcester,
Hereford, and Raduor-shires; and upon the West with Mountgomery and Denbigh.

(2) The form thereof is almost ciruclar or round, whose length from Weo^erto^
below ^odlane South, to Over near unto the River Trent in the North, is
thirty four miles: the broadest part is from Tongue in the East, to Oswestre
sited at the head of Morda in the West, twenty and five miles; the whole in
circuit about, extending to one hundred thirty and four miles.

(3) Wholesome is the Air, delectable and good, yielding the Spring and the
Autmne Seed time and Harvest, in a temperate condition, and affoordeth health
to the Inhabitants in all seasons of the year.

(4) The soil is rich, and stands most upon a reddish Clay, abounding in
Wheat and Barley, Pit-coales, Iron, and Woods; which two last continue not long
in league together. It has Rivers that make fruitful the Land, and in their
waters contain great store of fresh-fish, whereof Seuer^e is the chief, and
second in the Realm, whose stream cutteth this County in the midst, and
with many windings sporteth her self forward, leaving both pastures and
meadows be^^^^ed with flowers and green colors, which every where she
bestows upon such her attendants.

(5) This River was once the bounds of the North-Britaines, and divided their
possession from the Land of the Saxons, until of latter times theirs began to
decay, and the Welsh to increase, who enlarged their lists to the River Dee. So
formerly had it separated the Ordouices from the Cornauji, those ancient
Inhabitants mentioned by Ptolemie. The Ordouices under Caractachus purchased
great honor, whilst he a Prince of the Silures removed his wars thence
among them, where a while he maintained the Britains liberty with valor and
courage, in despite of the Romans. His Fort is yet witness of his unfortunate
fight, seated near Clune Castle, at the confluence of that River with Temd,
where (in remembrance of him) the place is yet called Caer-Caradoc, a Fort of
his, won by P. Ostorius Lieutenant of the Romans, about the year of grace
53. The Cornauji were feared upon the North of Scuerne, and branched into other
Counties, of whom we have said.

(6) But when the strength of the Romans was too weak to support their own
Empire, and Britain emptied of her Soldiers to resist, the Saxons set foot in
this most fair soil, and made it a part of their Mercian Kingdom: their line
likewise issued to the last period, and the Normans beginning where these
Saxons left, the Welshmen took advantage of all present occasions, and brake
over Seuerne unto the River Dee; to recover which, the Normans first Kings
often affayed, and Henry the second with such danger of life, that at the siege
of Bridge-north he had been slain, had not Sir H^bert Syncler received the
arrow aimed at him, in stepping betwixt that Shaft and his Sovereign, and
therewith was shot through unto death. In the like danger stood Henry Prince of
Scotland, who in the strait siege of Ludlow, begirt by King Stephen, had been
plucked from his saddle with an iron hook from the wall, had not Stephen
presently rescued him, Anno 1139.

(7) This then being the Marches of England and Wales, was sore afflicted by
bloody broiles, which caused many of their Towns to be strongly walled, and
thirty two Castles to be strongly built: lastly, into this County the most
wise King Henry the seventh sent his eldest son Prince Arthur, to be
resident at Ludlow, where that fair Castle became a most famous Princes Court.
And here King Henry the eight ordained the Counsel of the Marches, consisting
of a Lord President, as many Counselors as the Prince shall please, a
Secretary, an Attorney, a Soliciter, and four Justices of the Counties in
Wales, in whose Court were pleaded the causes depending and tearmely tried for
the most part in presence of that honorable President.

(8) But the Shire-Towne Shrewesburie, for circuit, trade, and wealth, does
far exceed this, and is inferior to few of our Cities; her buildings fair,
her streets many and large, her Citizens rich, her trade for the most part in
the staple commodities of Cloth and Freeses; her walls strong, and of a large
compass, extending to seauenteene hundred pases about, besides another
Bulwark ranging from the Castle, down unto, and in part along the side of
Seuerne: through which there are three entrances into the Town, East and West
over by two fair stone-bridges with Towers, Gates, and Bars, and the third
into the North, no less strong then them, over which is mounted a large
Castle, whose gaping chinkes do doubtless threaten her fall. This Town is
governed by two Bailiffes, yearly elected out of twentie-foure Burgesses, a
Recorder, Towne-Clerke, and Chamberlain, with three Sergeants at Mace: the
Pole being raised hence from the degrees of Latitude 53. 16. minutes, and from
West in Longitude 17. degrees 27. minutes.

(9) Yea, and ancienter Cities have been set in this Shire: such was Roxalter,
or Wroxcester, lower upon Seuerne, that had been Vricomum the chiefest City
of the Cornauij; Vsoconia, now Okenyate, near unto the Wrekin: and under
Red-Castle the ruins of a City, whom the vulgar report to have been famous
in Arthurs days: but the pieces of Romish Coins in these three do well
assure us that therein their Legions lodged; as many other Trenches are signs
of war and of blood. But as swords have been stirring in most parts of this
Province, so Beads have been bid for the preservation of the whole, and places
erected for the maintenance of Votaries, in whom at that time was imputed great
holiness: in Shrewesbury many, at Cou^^ere, Stowe, Dudley, Bromefeld, Wigmore,
Hamond, Lyleshill, Bildas, Bishops-castle, and Wenloke, (where in the Reign of
Richard the second; was likewise a rich Mine of Copper.) But the same blasts
that blew down the buds of such plants, scattered also the fruits from these
fair trees, which never since bare the like, nor is likely any more to do.

That only which is rare in this Province, is a Well at Pichford in a private
man's yard, whereupon floteth a thick skum of liquid Bitumen, which being
clear off to day, will gather the like again on the morrw: not much unlike to
the Lake in the Land of Iewry.

This Shire is divided into fifteen Hundreds, wherein are seated fourteen
Market-Townes; and has in it one hundred and seauentie Churches for Gods
sacred and divine Service.

The County Palatine of CHESTER. CHAPTER XXXVI.
CHESSE-SHIRE; the County Palatine of Chester, is parted upon the North from
Lanca-shire with the River Mercy; upon the East by Mercey, Goit, and the Dane,
is separated from Darby and Stafford-shires; upon the South touches the
Counties of Shrop-shire and Flint; and upon the West with Dee is parted from
Denbigh shire.

(2) The form of this County does much resemble the right wing of an Eagle,
spreading it self from Wirall, and as it were with her pinion, or first
feather, touches York shire, betwixt which extremes, in following the
windings of the Shires diuder from East to West, are 47. miles: and from North
to South twentie-sixe miles. The whole circumference about one hundred forty
two miles.

(3) If the affection to my natural producer blind not the judgment of this
my survey, for air and soil it equale the best, and far exceeds her
neighbors the next Counties: for although the Climate be cold, and touches
the degree of Latitude 54. yet the warmth from the Irish Seas melts the Snow,
and dissolueth the Ice sooner there then in those parts that are further off;
and so wholesome for life, that the Inhabitants generally attain to many
years.

(4) The Soil is fat, fruitful, and rich, yielding abundantly both profit and
pleasures for man. The Champion grounds make glad the hearts of their Tillers:
the Meadows imbrodered with diverse sweet smelling flowers; and the Pasture
makes the Kines vdders to strout to the paile, from whom and wherein the best
Cheese of all Europe is made.

(5) The ancient Inhabitants were the CORNAVII, who with Warwicke-shire,
Worcestershire, Staffordshire, and Shrop-shire, spread themselves further
into this County, as in Ptolemie is placed; and the Cangi likewise if they be
the Ceangi, whose remembrance was found upon the shore of this Shire, on the
surface of certain pieces of Lead, in this manner inscribed; IMP. DOMIT. AVO.
GER. DE CEANG. These Cangi were subdued by P. Ostorius Seapula, immediately
before his great victory against Caractacus, where, in the mouth of Deua he
built a Fortress at the back of the Ordouices, to restrain their power,
which was great in those parts, in the reign of Vespasian the Emperor. But
after the departure of the Romans, this Province became a portion of the Saxon
Mercians Kingdom: notwithstanding (says Ran Higden) the City it self was
hold by the Britains until all fell into the Monarchy of Egbert.

Of the dispositions of the since Inhabitants hear Lucian the Monk (who lived
presently after the Conquest) spoke; They are found (says he) to differ from
the rest of the English, partly better, and partly equal. In feasting they are
friendly, at meat cheerful, in entertainment liberal, soon angry, and
soon pacified, lavish in words, impatient of servitude, merciful to the
afflicted, compassionate to the poor, kind to their kindred, spary of labor,
void of disimulation, not greedy meating, and far from dangerous practices.

And let me add thus much, which Lucian could not; namely, that this Shire
has never been stained with the blot of rebellion, but ever stood true to
their King and his Crown: whose loyalty Richard the second so far found and
esteemed, that he held his person most safe among them, and by authority of
Parliament made the County to be a Principality, and styled himself Prince
of Chester.

King Henry the third gave it to his eldest son Prince Edward, against whom
Lewlyn Prince of Wales gathered a mighty Band, and with them did the Conntie
much harm, even unto the Cities gates. With the like scarre-fires it had often
times been affrighted, which they lastly defenced with a Wall made of the
Welsh-mens heads, on the South side of Dee in Hanbridge.

The Shire may well be said to be a Seed-plot of Gentilitie, and the producer
of many most ancient and worthy Families: neither has any brought more men of
valor into the Field, then Chesse-shire has done, who by a general speech,
are to this day called The Chief of men: and for Natures endowments (besides
their nobleness of minds) may compare with any other Nation in the world:
their limbs straight and well-composed, their complexions fair, with a
cheerful countenance; and the Women for grace, feature, and beauty,
inferior unto none.

(6) The Commodities of this Province (by the report of Ranulphus the Monk of
Chester) are chiefly Corn, Cattle, Fish, Foul, Salt, Mines, Metals, Meares,
and Rivers, whereof the banks of Dee in her West, and the Vale Royal in her
midst, for fruitfulness of pasturage equals any other in the Land, either in
grain from the Cow.

(7) These, with all other provision for life, are traded through thirteen
Market-Townes in this Shire, whereof Chester is the fairest, from whom the
Shire has the name. A City raised from the Fort of Ostorius, Lieutenant of
Britain for Claudius the Emperor, whither the twentieth Legion (named
Victrix) were sent by Galba to restrain the Britains: but grown themselves
out of order, Julius Agricola was appointed their General by Vespafian, as
appears by Moneys then minted, and there found; and from them (no doubt) by
the Britains the place was called Caer Legion, by Ptolemie, Deunana; by
Antonine, Dena; and now by us West-Chester: but Henry Bradshawe will have it
built before Brute, by the Giant Leon Gaue^, a man beyond the Moon, and called
by Marius the vanquisher of the Picts.

Over Deua or Dee a fair stone bridge leads, built upon eight Arches, at
either end whereof is a Gate, from whence in a long Quadren-wise the walls do
incompasse the City, high and strongly built, with four fair Gates, opening
into the four winds, besides three Posternes, and seven Watch-Towers,
extending in compass one thousand nine hundred and forty paces.

On the South of this City is mounted a strong and stately Castle, round in
form, and the base Court likewise enclosed with a circular wall. In the North
is the Minister, first built by Earl Leofrike to the honor of S. Werburga the
Virgin, and after most sumptuously repaired by Hugh the first Earl of Chester
of the Normans, now the Cathedral of the Bishops See. Therein lies interred
(as report does relate) the body of Henry the fourth, Emperor of Almane, who
leaving his Imperial Estate, lead lastly therein an Hermites life.

This City has formerly been sore defaced; first by Egfrid King of
Northumberland, where he slew twelve hundred Christian Monks, resorted thither
from Bangor to pray. Again by the Danes it was sore defaced, when their
destroying feet had trampled down the beauty of the Land. But was again
rebuilt by Edelfleada the Mercian Lady, who in this County, and Forest of
Delamer, built two fine Cities, nothing of them now remaining, besides the
Chamber in the Forest.

Chester in the days of King Edgar was in most flourishing estate, wherein he
had the homage of eight other Kings, who rowed his Barge from S. John's to his
Palace, himself holding the Helm, as their supreme.

This City was made a County incorporate of it self by King Henry the
seventh, and is yearly governed by a Mator, with Sword and Mace borne before
him in State, two Sheriffs, twentiefoure Aldermen, a Recorder, a Towne-Clerke,
and a Sergeant of Peace, four Sergeants, and six Yeomen.

It has been accounted the Key into Ireland, and great pity it is that the
Port should decay as it daily does, the Sea being stopped to scour the River
by a Causey that thwarteth Dee at her bridge. Within the walls of this City are
eight Parish-Churches, S. John's the greater and lesser: in the Suburbs are the
White Friars, Blacke-Fryers, and Nunnery now suppressed, From which City the
Pole is elevated unto the degree 53. 58. minutes of Latitude, and from the
first point of the West in Longitude unto the 17. degree and 18. minutes.

(8) The Earldom whereof was possessed from the Conqueror, till it fell
lastly to the Crown, the last of whom (though not with the least hopes) is
Prince Henry, who to the Titles of Prince of Wales, and Duke of Cornwall, has
by Succession and right of Inheritance, the Earldom of Chester annexed to his
other most happy Styles: Upon whose person I pray that the Angels of Jacobs God
may ever attend; to his great glory, and Great Britains happiness.

(9) If I should urge credit unto the report of certain Trees, floating in
Bagmere, only against the deaths of the Heirs of the Breretons thereby
seated, and after to sink until the next like occasion: or enforce for truth
the Prophecy which Leyland in a Poetical fury forespake of Beeston Castle,
highly mounted upon a steep hill: I should forget my self and wonted opinion,
that can hardly believe any such vain predictions, though they be told from
the mouths of credit, as Bagmere Trees are, or learned Leyland for Beeston,
who thus writes: The day will come when it again shall mount his head aloft,
If ^ a Prophet may be heard from Seers that say so often.


With eight other Castles this Shire has been strengthened, which were
Ould-Castle, Shoclath, Shotwitch, Chester, Poulefourd, Dunham, Fr^desham, and
Haulten: and by the Prayers (as then was taught) of eight religious houses
therein seated, preserved; which by King Henry the eight were suppressed:
namely, Stanlowe, I^^ree, Maxf^ld, Norton, Bunbery, Combermere, Rud-heath, and
Vale-Royall, besides the White and Black Friars, and the Nunnery in Chester.

This Counties division is into seven Hundreds, wherein are seated thirteen
Market-Townes, eightie-sixe Parish-Churches, and thirty eight Chapels of
ease.

LANCA-SHIRE. CHAPTER XXXVII.
THE County Palatine of Lancaster (famous for the four Henry's, the fourth,
fifth, sixth, and seventh, Kings of England, derived from John of Gaunt Duke of
Lancaster) is upon the South confined and parted by the River Merscy, from the
County Palatine of Chester; the fair County of Darby-shire bordering upon
the East; the large Country of Yorkshire, together with Westmerland and
Cumberland, being her kind neighbors upon the North, and the Sea called Ma^^
Hebernicum embracing her upon the West.

(2) The form thereof is long, for it is so enclosed between York shire on
the East side, and the Irish Sea on the West, that where it boundeth upon
Cheshire on the South Side, it is broader, and by little and little more
Northward it goes (confining upon Westmerland) the more narrow it grows It
contains in length from Brathey Northward, to Halwood Southward, fifty
seven miles; from Denton in the East, to F^rmby by Altmouth in the West,
thirty one; and the whole circumference in compass, one hundred threescore
and ten miles.

(3) The Air is (...), not troubled with gross vapors or foggy mists, by
reason whereof the (...) long and healthfully, and are not subject to strange
and unknown deseases.

(4) The Soil for the generality is not very fruitful, yet it produces such
numbers of Cattle, of such large proportion, and such goodly heads, and horns,
as the whole Kingdom of Spain does scarce the like* It is a Country
replenished with all necessaries for the use of man, yielding without any great
labor, the commodity of Corn, Flax, Grass, Coals, and such like. The Sea
also adding her blessing to the Land, that the people of that Province want
nothing that serves either for the sustenance of nature, or the safety of
appetite* They are plentifully furnished with all sorts of Fish, Flesh, and
Fowls. Their principal fuel is Coal and Turffe, which they have in great
abundance, the Gentlemen reserving their woods very carefully, as a beauty and
principal ornament to their Manors and houses. And though it be far from
London (the capital City of this Kingdom) yet does it every year furnish
her and many other parts of the Land besides, with many thousands of Cattle
(bred in this Country) giving thereby and otherwise a firm testimony to the
world, of the blessed abundance that it has pleased God to enrich this noble
Dukedom withal.

(5) This Counties ancient Inhabitants were the Brigantes, of whom there is
more mention in the description of Yorkshire, who by Claudius the Emperor
were brought under the Roman subjection, that so held and made it their Seat,
secured by their Garrisons, as has been gathered as well by many inscriptions
found in walls and ancient monuments fixed in stones, as by certain Altars
erected in favor of their Emperors. After the Romans, the Saxons brought it
under their protection, and held it for a part of their Northumbrian Kingdom,
till it was first made subiugate to the invasion of the Danes, and then
conquered by the victorious Normans, whose posterities from thence are branched
further into England.

(6) Places of antiquity or memorable note are these: the Town of Manchester
(so famous, as well for the Marketplace, Church, and College, as for the
resort unto it for clothing) was called Mancunium by Antonine the Emperor, and
was made a Fort and Station of the Romans.

Riblechester (which takes the name from Rhibell, a little River near
Clithero) though it be a small Town, yet by tradition has been called the
richest Town in Christendom, and reported to have been the Seat of the
Romans, which the many Monuments of their Antiquities, Statues, pieces of
Coin, and other several inscription, digd up from time to time by the
Inhabitants, may give us sufficient persuasion to believe.

But the Shire-Towne is Lancaster, more pleasant in situation, then rich of
Inhabitants, built on the South of the River Lon, and is the same Longouicum,
where (as we find in the Notice Provinces) a company of the Longo^icarians
under the Lieutenant General of Britain lay. The beauty of this Town is in
the Church, Castle, and Bridge: her streets many, and stretched far in
length. Unto this Town King Edward the third granted a Mayor and two
Bailiffes, which to this day are elected out of twelve Brethren, assisted by
twentie-foure Burgesses, by whom it is yearly governed, with the supply of two
Chamberlaines, a Recorder, Towne-Clerke, and two Sergeants at Mace. The
elevation of who^^ Pole is in the degree of Latitude 54 and 58. scruples, and
her Longitude removed from the first West (...) unto the degree 17 and 4^.
scruples.

(7) This Country in diverse places suffers the force of many flowing Tides of
the Sea, by which (after a sort) it does violently rent asunder one part of the
Shire from the other: as in Fournesse, where the (...) displeased that the
short should from thence shoot a maine way into the West, has not obstinately
ceased from time to time to flash and mangle it, and with his fell irruptions
and boisterous Tides to de^oure it.

Another thing there is, not unworthy to be recommended to memory, that in this
Shire, not far from Fournesse Fell^s, the greatest standing water in all
England (called Winander-Mere) lies, stretched out for the space of ten miles,
of wonderful depth, and all paued with stone in the bottom: and along the
Seaside in many places may be seen heaps of sand, upon which the people
power water, until it recover a (...) humor, which they afterward boil with
Turffes, till it become white salt.

(8) This Country, as it is thus on the one side freed by the natural
resistance of the Sea from the force of Invasions, so is it strengthened on the
other by many Castles and fortified places, that take away the opportunity of
making Roades and Incursions in the Country. And as it was with the first that
felt the fury of the Saxons cruelty, so was it the last and longest that was
subdued under the West Saxons Monarchy.

(9) In this Province our noble Arthur (who died laden with many trophics of
honor) is reported by Ninius to have put the Saxons to flight in a memorable
battle near Duglasse, a little Brook not far from the Town of Wiggin. But
the attempts of war, as they are several, so they are uncertain: for they
made not Duke Wade happy in his success, but returned him an unfortunate
vnterpriser in the Battle which he gave to Arduiph King of Northumberland, at
Billangho, in the year 798 So were the events uncertain in the Civil Wars
of York and Lancaster: for by them was bred and brought forth that bloody
division and fatal strife of the Noble Houses, that with variable success to
both parties (for many years together) molested the peace and quiet of the
Land, and defiled the earth with blood, in such violent manner, that it
exceeded the horror of those Civil Wars in Rome, that were betwixt Mariu^
and Scylla, Pompey and Caesar, Octauius and Antony; or that of the two renowned
Houses Valoys and Eurbon, that a long time troubled the State of France: for in
the division of these two Princely Families there were thirteen Fields sought,
and three Kings of England, one Prince of Wales, twelve Dukes, one Marquis,
eighteen Earls, one Vicount, and three and twenty Barons, besides Knights
and Gentlemen, lost their lives in the same. Yet at last, by the happy marriage
of Henry the seventh, King of England, next heir to the House of Lancaster,
with Elizabeth daughter and heir to Edward the Fourth, of the House of York,
the white and red Roses were conjoined, in the happy uniting of those two
divided Families, from whence our thrice renowned Sovereign Lord King James,
by fair sequence and succession, does worthily enjoy the Di^deme: by the
benefit of whose happy government, this County Palatine of Lancaster is
prosperous in her Name and Greatness.

(10) I find the remembrance of four religious houses that have been founded
within this County (and since suppressed) both fair for structure and
building, and rich for seat and situation^ namely, Burstogh, Whalleia, Holland,
and Penwortham* It is divided into six Hundreds, besides Fournesse Felles and
Lancasters Liberties, that lie in the North part. It is beautified with 15
Market-Townes, both fair for situation and building, and famous for the
concourse of people for buying and selling. It has twentie-sixe Parishes,
besides Chapels, (in which they duly frequent to divine Service) and those
populous, as in no part of the Land more.

YORKE-SHIRE. CHAPTER XXXVIII.
AS the courses and confluents of great Rivers are for the most part fresh in
memory, though their heads and fountains lie commonly unknown: so the latter
knowledge of great Regions, are not traduced to oblivion, though perhaps their
first originals be obscure, by reason of Antiquity, and the many reuolutions
of times and ages* In the delineation therefore of this great Province of
Yorkshire, I will not insist upon the narration of matters near unto us; but
succinctly run over such as are more remote; yet neither so sparingly, as I may
seem to diminish from the dignity of so worthy a Country; nor so prodigally,
as to spend time in the superfluous praising of that which never any (as yet)
dispraised. And although perhaps it may seem a labor unnecessary, to make
relation of ancient remembrances, either of the Name or Nature of this Nation,
especially looking into the difference of Time it self (which in every age
brings forth diverse effects) and the dispositions of men, that for the most
part take less pleasure in them, then in divulging the occurrents of their
own times: yet I hold it not unfit to begin there, from whence the first
certain direction is given to proceed; for (even of these ancient things)
there may be good use made, eitherby imitation, or way of comparison, as
neither the repetition, nor the repetition thereof shall be accounted
impertinent.

(2) You shall therefore understand: That the County of York was in the Saxon
tongue called Ebona-yeyne, and now commonly Yorkshire, far greater and more
numerous in the Circuit of her miles, then any Shire of England. She is much
bound to the singular love and motherly ca^^ of Nature, in placing her under so
temperate a clime, that in every measure she is (...). If one part of her be
stony, and a sandy barren ground: another is fertile and richly adorned with
Corne-fields. If you here find it naked, and destitute of Woods, you shall see
it there shadowed with Forests full of trees, that have very thick (...),
sending forth many fruitful and profitable branches. If one place of it be
Moorish, Mirie, and unpleasant; another makes a free tender of delight, and
presents it self to the eye, full of beauty and contentiue variety.

(3) The Bishopric of Durham fronts her on the North-side, and is separated
by a continued course of the River Tees The German Sea lies sore upon her
Bast side, beating the shores with her boisterous waves and billows. The West
part is bounded with Lancashire, and Westmerland. The South Side has Cheshire
and Darbishire (friendly Neighbors unto her) with the which she is first
enclosed: then with Nottingham and with Lincolne-shires: after divided with
that famous Arm of the Sea Humber: Into which all the Rivers that water this
Country, empty themselves, and pay their ordinary Tributes, as into the common
receptacle and storehouse of Neptune, for all the watery Pensions of this
Province.

(4) This whole Shire (being of it self so spacious) for the more easy and
better ordering of her civil government, is divided into three parts: which
according to three quarters of the world, are called The West Riding, The
East Riding, and The North Riding. West Riding is for a good space compassed
with the River Ouse, with the bounds of Lancashire, and with the South limits
of the Shire, and bears toward the West and South. East Riding bends it
self to the Ocean, with the which, and with the River Derment she is enclosed,
and looks into that part where the Sun rising, and showing forth his beams,
makes the world both glad and glorious in his brightness North Riding extends
it self Northward, (...) in as it were, with the River Tees and Derwent, and a
long race of the River Ouse The length of this Shire, extended from Ha^thill in
the South, to the mouth of Tees in the North, are near unto seauentie miles,
the breadth from Flambrough-head to Horn-castle upon the River (...), is
fourscore miles; the whole Circumference is three hundred and eight miles.

(5) The Soil of this County for the generality is reasonable fertile, and
yields sufficiency of Corn and Cattle within it self. One part whereof is
particularly made famous by a (...) of Stone, out of which the stones newly
hewn be very soft, but seasoned with wind and (...) of themselves do
naturally become exceeding hard and solid. Another, by a kind of (...) whereof
it consists, which being burnt, and conveyed into the other parts of the
Country, which are hilly and some what cold, serve to manure and enrich their
Corne-fields.

(6) That the Romans flourishing in military prowess, made their several
stations in this Country, is made manifest by their Monuments, by many
Inscriptions fastened in the Walls of Churches, by many Columns engraven with
Roman work^ found lying in Churchyards, by many (...) Altars digd up that were
erected (as it should seem) to their Tutelar Gods (for they had local and
peculiar Topicke Gods, whom they honored as Keepers and Guardians of some
particular places of the Country) as also by a kind of Brickes which they
used: for the Romans in time of peace, to avoid and withstand idleness, (as an
enemy to virtuous and valorous enterprises) still exercised their Legions and
Cohorts in casting of ditches, making of Highways, building of Bridges, and
making of Brickes, which having sithence bin found, and from time to time digd
out of the ground, prove the Antiquity of the place by the Roman Inscriptions
upon them.

(7) No less argument of the piety hereof, are the many Monasteries, Abbyes
and Religious houses that have been placed in this Country; which whilst they
retained their own state and magnificence, were great ornaments unto it: but
since their dissolution, and that the teeth of Time (which deuours all things)
have eaten into them, they are become like dead carcasses, leaving only some
poor ruins and remains alive, as relics to posterity, to show of what
beauty and magnitude they have been. Such was the Abbey of Whi^^y, founded by
Lady Hilda, daughter of the grandchild unto King Edwine. Such was the Abbey
built by Bolcon, which is now so razed and laid Ieuell with the earth, as that
at this time it affords no appearance of the former dignity. Such was
Kirkstall Abbey, of no small account in time past, founded in the year of
Christ 1147. Such was the renowned Abbey called S. Mary's in York, built and
endowed with rich livings by Alan the third Earl of little Britain in
America; but since converted into the Princes house, and is called The Manor.
Such the wealthy Abbey of Fountains, built by T^urstin Arch bishop of York
Such was the famous Monastery founded in the Primitive Church of the
East Saxons, by Wilfrid Archbishop of York, and enlarged (being fallen down
and decayed) by Odo Archbishop of Canterbury. Such was Drax, a religious house
of Chanons. Such that fair Abbey built by King William the Conqueror at Silby
(where his Son Henry the first was borne) in memory of Saint German, who
happily confuted that contagious Pelagian Heresy, which oftentimes grew to
Serpentine head in Britain.

These places for Religion erected, with many more within this Provincial
Circuit, and consecrated unto holy purposes, show the antiquity, and how they
have been sought unto by confluences of Pilgrims in their manner of
devotions: The midst of which superstitious obscurities, are since cleared by
the pure light of the Gospel revealed, and the skirts of Idolatry unfolded to
her own shame and ignominy: And they made subject to the dissolution of
Times, serving only as antique Monuments and remembrances to the memory of
succeeding Ages.

(8) Many places of this Province are famoused as well by Name, being naturally
fortunate in their situation, as for some other accidental happiness befallen
unto them. Hallifax, famous, as well for that Johannes defacro Besco, Author of
the Sphere, was borne there, and for the Law it has against stealing, and for
the greatness of the Parish, which reckons in it eleven Chapels, whereof
two be Parish-Chappels, and in them to the number of twelve thousand people.

In former times it was called Horton, and touching the alteration of the name,
this pretty story is related of it: namely, That a Clerk (for so they call him)
being far in love with a maid, and by no means either of long praises or
large promises, able to gain like affection at her hands, when he saw his
hopes frustrate, and that he was not like to have his purpose of her, turned
his love into rage, and cut off the maids head, which being afterward hung
upon an Ewe tree, common people counted it as an hallowed relic till it was
rotten: And afterward (such was the credulity of that time) it maintained the
opinion of reverence and Religion still: for the people resorted thither on
pilgrimage, and persuaded themselves, that the little veins that spread out
between the Bark and Body of the Ewe tree like fine threads, were the very
hairs of the maids head. Hereupon it was called by this name Haligfax, or
Haly-fax, that is, Holy-Hayre.

Pomfret is famous for the Site, as being seated in a place so pleasant, that
it brings forth Liquori^e and great plenty of Skiriworts, but it is infamous
for the murder and bloodshed of Princes: The Castle whereof was built by
Hildebert Lacy, a Norman, to whom William the Conqueror gave this Town, after
Alrick the Saxon was thrust out of it.

(9) But I will forbear to be prolixe or tedious in the particular memoration
of places in a Province so spacious, and only make a compendious relation of
York, the second City of England, in Latin called Eboracum and Eburacum, by
Ptolemy, Brigantium (the chief City of the Brigants) by Ninius, Caer Ebrauc,
by the Britains, Caer Effro^. The British History reports that it took the
name of Ebrauc that founded it; but some others are of opinion, that Eburacum
has no other deriuation then from the River Ouse running through it: It
ouer-masters all the other places of this Country for fairness, and is a
singular ornament and safeguard to all the North parts. A pleasant place, large,
and full of magnificence, rich, populous, and not only strengthened with
fortifications, but adorned with beautiful buildings, as well private as
public. For the greater dignity thereof it was made an Episcopal See by
Constantius, and a Metropolitan City by a Pall sent unto it from Homorius.
Egbert Archbishop of York, who flourished about the year seven hundred
forty, erected in it a most famous Library. Richard the third repaired the
Castle thereof being ruinous, and King Henry the eight appointed a Counsel in
the same, to decide and determine all the causes and Controversies of the North
parts, according to equity and conscience: which Counsel consists of a Lord
President, certain Counselors at the Princes pleasure, a Secretary, and
other Under-officers.

The original of this City cannot be fetched out but from the romans, seeing
the Britains before the Romans came, had no other Towns then Woods fenced
with Trenches and Rampires, as Caesar and Strabo do testify. And that it was
a Colony of the Romans, appears both by the authority of Ptolemy and
Antonine, and by many ancient Inscriptions that have been found there. In this
City the Emperor Seuerus had his Palace, and here gave up his last breath;
which ministers occasion to show the ancient custom of the Romans, in the
military manner of their burials.

His body was carried forth here by the Soldiers to the Funeral fire, and
committed to the flames, honored with the Iusts and Tournaments both of the
Soldiers and of his own sons: His ashes bestowed in a little golden pot or
vessel of the Prophyrat stone, were carried to Rome, and shrined there in the
monument of the Antoni^s. In this City (as Spartian^^s makes mention) was the
Temple of the Goddess Bellona; to which Seuerus (being come thither purposing
to offer sacrifice) was erroneously led by a rusticall Augur.

Here Fl Velerius Constantinus, surnamed Chlorus (an Emperor of excellent
virtue and Christian piety) ended his life, and was Defied as appears by
ancient Coins: and his son Constantine being present at his Fathers death,
forthwith proclaimed Emperor; from whence it may be gathered of what great
estimation York was in those days, when the Roman Emperors Court was held
in it. This City flourished a long time under the English-Saxons Dominion,
till the Danes like a mighty storm, thundering from out the North-East,
destroyed it, and distained it with the blood of many slaughtered persons, and
wan it from Osbright and Flla Kings of Northumberland, who were both slain in
their pursuit of the Danes: which Alcuine in his Epistle to Egelred King of
Northumberland, seemed to pre^age before, when he said; What signifies that
raining down of blood in S. Peter's Church of York, even in a fair day, and
descending in so violent and threatening a manner from the top of the roof? may
it not be thought that blood is coming upon the Land from the North parts?

Howbeit, At^e^stane recovered it from the Danish subjection, and quite
overthrew the Castle, with the which they had fortified it; yet was it not (for
all this) so freed from wars, but that it was subject to the Times fatally
next following. Nevertheless, in the Conquerours time when (after many woeful
overthrows and troublesome storms) it had a pleasant calm of ensuing peace,
it rose again of it self, and flourished afresh, having still the helping
hand both of Nobility and Gentry, to recover the former dignity, and bring it
to the perfection it has: The Citizens fenced it round with new walls, and many
towers and bulwarks, and ordaining good and wholesome laws for the government
of the same. Which at this day are executed at the command of a Lord Mayor, who
has the assistance of twelve Aldermen, many Chamberlaines, a Recorder, a
Towne-Clerke, six Sergeants at Mace, and two Esquires, which are, a
Sword Bearer, and the Common Sergeant, who with a great Mace goes on the left
hand of the Sword. The Longitude of this City, according to Mercators account,
is 19. degrees, and 35. scruples: the Latitude 54. degrees and forty scruples.

(10) Many occurrents present themselves with sufficient matter of enlargement
to this discourse, yet none of more worthy consequence then were those several
Battles, fought within the compass of this County; wherein Fortune had her
pleasure as well as in the proof of her love, as in the pursuit of her
tyranny; sometime sending the fruits of sweet peace unto her, and otherwhiles
suffering her to taste the sowrenesse of war.

At Conishorough (in the Britain tongue C^aer Conan) was a great battle fought
by Hengist, Captain of the English-Saxons, after he had retired himself
thither for his safety, his men being fled and scattered, and himself
discomsited by A^relius Ambrosius; yet within few days after he brought forth
his men to battle against the Britains that pursued him, where the field was
bloody both to him and his; for many of his men were cut in pieces, and he
himself had his head chopped off, as the British History says; which the
Chronicles of the English-Saxons deny, reporting that he dyed in peace, being
surcharged and ouer-worne with the troublesome toils and travels of war.

Near unto Kirkstall, Oswie King of Northumberland put Penda the Mercian to
flight: the place wherein the Battle was joined, the Writers call Winwid Field,
giving it the name by the victory. And the little Region about it (in times
past called by an old name Elmet) was conquered by Eadwin King of
Northumberland, the son of Aela, after he had expelled Cereticus a British
King, in the year of Christ, 620.

At Casterford (called by Antonine Legeolium and Legetium) the Citizens of
York slew many of King Ethelreds Army, and had a great hand against him, in so
much as he that before state in his throne of Majesty, was on a sudden
daunted, and ready to offer submission.

But the most worthy of memory, was that Field fought on Pal^-Sunday, 1461. in
the quarrel of Lancaster and York, where England never saw more puissant
Forces both of Gentry and Nobility: for there were in the field at one time
(partakers on both sides) to the number of one hundred thousand fighting men.
When the fight had continued doubtful a great part of the day, the
Lancastrians not able longer to abide the violence of their enemies, turned
back and fled amain, and such as took part with York, followed them so hotly
in chase, and killed such a number of Noble and Gentlemen, that thirty thousand
Englishmen were that day left dead in the field.

(11) Let us now loose the point of this compass, and sail into some other
parts of this Province, to find out matter of other memorable moment* Under
Knansbrough there is a Well called D^^ping-well, in which the waters spring not
out of the veins of the earth, but distill and trickle down from the rocks
that hang over it: It is of this virtue and efficacy, that it turns wood into
stone: for what wood soever is put into it, will be shortly covered over with a
stony bark, and be turned into stone, as has been often observed.

At Giggleswicke also about a mile from Settle (a Market-Towne) there are
certain small springs not distant a quaits cast from one another: the
middlemost of which does at every quarter of an hour ebb and flow about the
height of a quarter of a yard when it is highest, and at the ebb falls so
low, that it is not an inch deep with water. Of no less worthiness to be
remembered is S. Wilfrids Needle, a place very famous in times past for the
narrow hole in the close vaulted room under the ground, by which women's
honesties were wont to be tried: for such as were chaste pass through with
much facility; but as many as had played false, were miraculously held fast,
and could not creep through. Believe if you list.

The credible report of a Lamp found burning (even in our Fathers remembrance,
when Abbeyes were pulled down and suppressed) in the Sepulcher of constantius,
within a certain vault or little Chapel under the ground, wherein he was
supposed to have been buried, might beget much wonder and admiration, but that
L. Zius confirms that in ancient times they had a custom to preserve light
in Sepulchers, by an artificial resolving of gold into a liquid and farry
substance, which should continue bruning a long time, and for many ages
together.

(12) This Yorkshire picture I will draw to no more length, least I be
condemned with the Sophister, for insisting in the praise of Hercules, when no
man opposed himself in his discommendation. This Country of it self is so
beautiful in her own natural colors, that (without much help) she presents
delightful varieties both to the fight and other senses.

THE BISHOPRIC OF DURHAM. CHAPTER XXXIX.
THe Bishopric of Durham, contains those parts and Towne-ships that (...)
the Reuer Tees and Derwent, and all along the German-Sea (...) on the North
wit^ Northumberland, and their Jurisdictions parted by the (...) touched by
Cumberland, Westmorland, and from (...) River Tees, and by the same water on
her South, from Yorke-shire (...) By the German-Sea.

(2) The form thereof is triangle, (...) for from her South (...) unto the
West-point, are about thirty miles, from thence to the North-east and (...)
are likewise as many, and her base along the Seashore are twenty-(...)
Circumference, about one hundred and three miles.

(3) The air is sharp and very piercing, and would be more, (...) not that
the (...) from the German-Seas did help much to dissolve (...) and snow: and
the store of coals therein growing and gotten, do warm the body, and keep
back the cold; which (...) besides their own use, does yield great
commodities unto this Province, by trade thereof (...) other parts.

(4) For Soil, it consists much alike of Pastures, (...), and (...) grounds:
the East is the richest and most champion, the South more moorish, but (...)
without either grass or grain, notwithstanding (...) with as great gain,
both in rearing up Cattle, and (...) grows so near to the upper (...)
wheels do turn up the same. Some hold their substance to be a clammie kind
of clay hardened with heat abounding in the earth, and so becoming concocted,
is nothing else but Bitumen: for proof whereof, these Coals have both the
like smell and operation of Bitumen: for being sprinkled with water, they burn
more vehemently, but with oil are quite extinguished and put out.

(5) The ancient Inhabitants known unto Ptolemie, were the Brigantes, of whom
we have spoken in the General of Yorkshire, they being subdued by the romans;
after whom the Saxons made it a part of their Northumberlands Kingdom; at first
a Province belonging to the Deirians, and enjoyed by Ella their first King;
afterward invaded by the Danes, and lastly possessed by the Normans: whose
site being so near unto Scotland, has many times felt their fury, and has
been as a Buckler betwixt them and the English; for which cause, the
Inhabitants have certain freedoms, and are not charged with service as other
Counties are, so that this with Westmorland, Cumberland, and Northumberland,
are not divided into hundreds in those Parliament Rolls whence I had the rest:
which want I must leave for others to supply.

(6) Over this County, the Bishops thereof have had the Royalties of Princes,
and the Inhabitants have pleaded privilege not to pass in service of war
over the River of Tees or Tyne; whose charge (as they have alleged) was to
keep and defend the corpse of S Cuthbert their great adored Saint, and
therefore they termed themselves, The holy-werk-folkes. And the repute of this
Cuthbert and his supposed defense against the Scots was such, that our English
Kings in great devotion have gone in pilgrimage to visit his Tomb, and have
given many large possessions to his Church: such were King Egfred, Aelfred, and
Guthrun the Dane, Edward and Athelstan Monarch of England, and zealous Cannte,
the greatest of all, who came thither barefooted, and at Cuthberts Tomb both
augmented and confirmed their Liberties. This Saint then, of nothing made
Durham become great, and William the Conqueror, of a Bishopric made it a
County Palatine: at that time William Careleph, Bishop of the Diocese, pulled
down the old Church which Aldwin had built, and with sumptuous cost laid the
foundations of a new, wherein S. Cuthberts Shrine in the vacancy of the
Bishops, was the Keeper of the Castle-keyes.

In the West of this Church, and place called Gallile, the Marble Tomb of
venerable Beda remains, who was borne at Iaerro in this County, and became a
Monk at Weremouth, whose painful indust^es and light of learning in those
times of darkness are wonderful, as the volumes which he wrote do well
declare. And had the idle Monks of England employed their times after his
example, their Founders expectations had not been frustrate, nor those
foundations so easily ouerturned. But the revenge of sin ever following the
actions of sins, dissolved first the largeness of this Counties liberties,
under the reign of King Edward the First, and since has shaken to pieces
those places herein erected, under the reign of King Henry the eight: such
were Durham, Sherborne, Stayndr^p, Iarro, ^eremouth, and Egleton; all which
felt the reward of their idleness, and wrath of him that is jealous of his
own honor.

(7) Things of rare note observed in this Shire are three pits of a wonderful
depth, commonly called the Hell-Kettles, which are adjoining near unto
Darlington, whose waters are some what warm. These are thought to come of an
Earthquake, which happened in the year of Grace 1179. whereof the Chrenicle
of Tin-mouth makes mention, whose record is this: On Christmas day, at
Oxe^hall in the Territory of Darlington, within the Bishopric of Durham, the
ground heaued up aloft, like unto an high Tower (...) all that day, as it were
immovable, until the evening; (...) then fell with so horrible a noise, that
it made all the neighbor dwellers sore afraid: and the earth swallowed it up,
and made in the same place a deep pit, which is there to be seen for a
testimony unto this day.

(8) Of no less admiration are certain stones lying within the River Weere,
at Butterbre near Durham; from whose sides at the Ebb and low water in the
Summer, issues a certain salt reddish water, which with the Sun waxes
white, and growing into a thick substance, becomes a necessary sal^ to the
use of the by-dwellers.

(9) And places of elder times had in a^rount by the Romans, were Benonium, now
Binchester, and C^ndereum, Chester in the street, where their moneys have been
dug up, and at Codercu^^ so much, that Egelrik Bishop of Durham was
therewith made exceeding rich.

This County has been strengthened with seven strong Castles, is yet traded
with six Market-Townes, and Gods divine honor in one hundred and eighteen
Parish-Churches celebrated.

WESTMORLAND: CHAPTER XL.
WESTMORLAND, by some late Latin Writers is c^lled Westmaria, and
Westmorlandia, by some later Westmoria, and in our English Tongue Westmorland
It came to be thus named in our language by the situation, which in every part
is so plenteously full of Moors and high hills, teaching one to another, that
Westmorland (with us) is nothing else but a Western moorish Country. Having on
the West and North-side Cumberland, on the South-part Lanca-shire, on the
East Side Yorkshire, and the Bishopric of Durham.

(2) The length thereof extended from Burton in her South, to Kirkland in her
North-part is 30. miles: the broadest part from East to West, is from the River
Eden to Dunbal rase-stones, containing 24. miles, the whole circumference about
112. miles.

(3) The form thereof is somewhat long and narrow: the Air sharp and
piercing, purging it self from the trouble of gross foggy mists and vapors,
by reason of which the people of this Province are not acquainted with strange
diseases or imperfections of body, but live long, and are healthful, and
attain to the number of many years.

(4) The Soil for the most part of it, is but barren, and can hardly be
brought to any fruitfulness by the industry and painful labor of the
husbandman, being so full of infertile places, which the Northern Englishmen
call Moors: yet the more Southerly part is not reported to be so sterile, but
more fruitful in the valleys, though contained in a narrow room, between the
River Lone, and W^^ander mear, and it is all termed by one name. The Barony of
Kendale or Candale, that is, the dale by Can, taking the name of the River Can
that runs through it.

(5) The ancient Inhabitants of this Country were the Brigantes, mentioned in
the several Counties of York, Lancaster, and Cumberland.

(6) It is not commended either for plenty of Corn or Cattle, being neither
stored with arable grounds to bring forth the one, nor pasturage to breed up
the other: the principal profit that the people of this Province raise unto
themselves, is by clothing.

(7) The chiefest place of which is Kandale or Kendale, called also Kirkeby
Kendale, standing on the bank of the River Can. This Town is of great trade
and resort, and for the diligent and industrious practice of making cloth so
excels the rest, that in regard thereof it carries a supereminent name above
them, and has great vent and trashque for her woollen clothes through all the
parts of England. It challenges not much glory for Antiquity; only this it
accounts a great credit, that it has dignified three Earls with the title
thereof, as John Duke of Bedford, whom Henry the Fifth (being his brother)
advanced to that honor, John Duke of Sommerset, and John de Foix, whom King
Henry the sixth preferred to that dignity for his honorable and trusty
services done in the French wars. It is a place of very civil and orderly
government, the which is managed by an Alderman, chosen every year out of his
twelve Brethren, who are all distinguished and notified from the rest by the
wearing of purple garments The Alderman and his Senior Brother are always
Justices of Peace and Quorum. There are in it a Towne-Clerke, a Recorder, two
Sergeants at Mace, and two Chamberlaines. By Mathematical observation the site
of this Town is in the degree of Longitude 17. 30. scruples, from the first
West point, and the Pole elevated in Latitude to the degree 55. and 15. minutes

(8) Places of memorable note for Antiquity are Vertera, mentioned by Antonine
the Emperor; and Aballaba, which we contractly call Apelby. In the one, the
Northern English conspired against William the Conqueror in the beginning of
the Norman government. In the other, the A^rel^an Maures kept a station in the
time of the Romans, and their high street is yet apparently to be seen by
the ridges thereof which lead by Apelby to a place called Brouonacum, mentioned
in the Book of Provincial notices. The antique pieces of Roman Coin other
whiles digd up hereabouts, and some Inscriptions not long since found, show of
what continuance they have been: although Time, which deuouteth all things,
has so fed upon their carcasses many ages together, as it has almost consumed
both houses and Inhabitants. For Apelby now is bare both of people and
building; and were it not for the antiquity that makes it the more esteemable,
in whose Castle the Assizes are commonly kept, it would be little better in
account then a village Verterae is long since decayed, and the name of it
changed into Burgh: for it is commonly named Burgh under Sta^emore. In which,
it is said, a Roman Captain made his abode with a band of Directores, in the
declining age of the Roman Empire. These two places William of Newborough
calls Princely Holds, and writes that William King of Scots a little before
he himself was taken prisoner at Alnewicke, surprised them on a sudden, but
King John recovered them after, and liberally bestowed them upon Robert V^pont,
for his many worthy services.

(9) There is mention made but of one religious house that has been in all
this Country, and that was a little Monastery seated near unto the River
Lod^^, built by Tho^as the son of Gospatricke, the son of Orms: where there
is a fountain or spring that ebbes and flows many times a day, and it is
thought that some notable Act of Atchieuement has been performed there, for
that there be huge stones in form of Pyramides, some nine foot high, and
fourteen foot thick, ranged for a mile in length directly in a row, and
equally distant, which might seem to have been there purposely pitc^ed in
memory thereof: but what that Act was is not now known, but quite worn out of
remembrance by times injury.

(10) Other matters worthy observation are only these: That at Amboglana, now
called Amble-side, near the upper corner of Winander mear, there appears at
this day the ruins of an ancient City, which by the British-Brickes, by
Romane-money oftentimes found there, by Highways paued leading unto it, and
other likelihoods, seems to have been a work of the Romans: The Fortress
thereof so long fenced with a ditch and rampire, that it took up in length one
hundred thirty two Else, and in breadth eight. There are also near Kendale in
the River Can, two Catadupae or Waterfals, where the waters descend with such a
forcible downfall, that it compels a mighty noise to be heard, which the
neighbor Inhabitants make such use of, as they stand them in as good stead as
Prognostications: for when that which stands North from them sounds more
clear, and with a louder echo in their ears, they certainly look for fair
weather to follow: But when that on the South does the like, they expect foggy
mists and showers of rain.

(11) This Province is traded with four Market-Townes, fortified with the
strength of seven Castles, and has 26. Parishes in it for the celebration of
Divine Service.

CVMBERLAND. CHAPTER XLI.
CVMBERLAND, the furthest North-west Province in this Realm of England,
confronteth upon the South of Scotland, and is divided from that Kingdom
partly by the River ^irso^, then crossing Eske, by a tract through Solome-Mosse,
until it come to the Solwaye Frith, by Ptolemie called the (...) Baye. The
North-west part is neighboured by Northumberland, more Eastward with
Westmerland, the South with Lancashire, and the West is wholly washed with the
Irish Seas.

(2) The form whereof is long and narrow, pointing wedge-like into the South,
which part is altogether pestred with copped-hilles, and therefore has the
name of Cop-land. The middle is more level, and better inhabited, yielding
sufficient for the sustenance of man: but the North is wild and solitary,
combred with hills, as Copland is.

(3) The air is piercing, and of a sharp temperature, and would be more
biting, were it not that those high hills break off the Northern storms,
and cold falling snowes.

(4) Notwithstanding, rich is this Province, and with great varieties thereof
is replenished: the hills, though rough, yet smile upon their beholders,
spread with sheep and cattle, the valleys stored with grass and corn
sufficient: the Sea affords great store of fish, the land ouer-spread with
variety of fowls, and the Rivers feed a kind of Muskle that brings forth
Pearl, where in the mouth of the Irt, as they lie gaping and sucking in dew,
the Country people gather and sell to the Lapidaries, to their own little, and
the buyers great gain. But the Mines Royal of Copper, whereof this Country
yields much, is for use the richest of all: the place is at Keswick and
Newland, where likewise the Black Lead is gotten, whose plenty makes it of
no great esteem; otherwise a commodity that could hardly be missed.

(5) The ancient Inhabitants known to the Romans, were the Brigantes, whom
Ptolemie disperseth into Westmorland, Richmond, Durham, Yorkshire, and
Lanca-shire. But when the Saxons had over borne the Britains, and forced them
out of the best, to seek their resting among the vast Mountains, these by
them were entered into, where they held play with those enemies maugre their
force, and from them, as Mariama does witness, the Land was called Cumber, of
those Kumbri the Britains. But when the State of the Saxons was fore shaken by
the Danes, this Cumberland was accounted a Kingdom it self; for so the
Flower-gatherer of Westminster records: King Edmund (says he) with the help
of Leoline Prince of South Wales, wasted all Cumberland, and having put out the
eyes of the two sons of Dunmail King of that Province, granted that Kingdom
unto Molcolm King of Scots, whereof their eldest sons became Prefects. This
Province, King Stephen, to purchase favor with the Scots, what time he stood
in most need of aid, confirmed by gift under their Crown; which Henry the
second notwithstanding made claim unto and got, as Newbrigensis writes, and
laid it again in the Marches of England: since when, many bickerings betwixt
these Nations herein have happened, but none so sore against the Scottish side, as
was that at Sallome-Mosse, where their Nobility disdaining their General
Oliver Sinclere, gave over the Battle, and yielded themselves to the English;
which dishonor pier^ed so deeply into the heart of King James the fifth, that
for grief thereof he shortly after died.

(6) Many memorable Antiquities remain and have been found in this County:
for it being the Confines of the Romans Possessions, was continually secured by
their Garrisons, where remain a^ this day parts of that admirable wall built
by Seuer^s: also another Fortification from W^rkinton to Elus Mouth, upon the
Sea-shoare toward Ireland, by Stilico raised, when under Theodosius he
suppressed the rage of the Picts and Irish, and freed the Seas of the Saxons
Pirates. Upon Hard-knot hill, Moresby, Old Carleil, Pap-castle along the Wall,
and in many other places, their ruins remain, with altars, and Inscriptions
of their Captains and Colonies, whereof many have been found, and more as yet
lie hid.

(7) The chiefest City in this Shire is Carlisle, pleasantly seated betwixt the
Rivers Eden, Petterell, and Caud, by the Romans called Luguvallum; by Beda,
Luell; by Ptolemy, Leucopibia; by Nu^tu^ Caer-Lu^lid; and by us Carlisle. This
City flourishing under the Romans, at their departure, by the furious outrages
of the Scots and Picts was dejected, yet in the days of Egfrid King of
Northumberland was walled about: but again defaced by the ouer-running Danes,
lay buried in her own ashes the space of two hundred years; upon whose ruins
at length Rufus set his compassionate eye, and built there the Castle, planting
a Colony of Flemings to secure the Coasts from the Scots, but upon better
aduisement removed them into Wales. After him, Henry his brother and successor
ordained this City for an Episcopal See: whose site is placed in the degree
of Longitude from the first West part 17. and 2. scruples, and the Pole thence
elevated from the degree of Latitude 55. and 56. scruples.

(8) West from hence, at Burgh upon the sand, was the fatal end of our famous
Monarch King Edward the first, who there leaving his wars unfinished against
Scotland, left his troubles, and soon missed life, to his untimely and soon
lamented death.

(9) And at Salkelds upon the River Eden, a Monument of seventy seven stones,
each of them ten foot high above ground, and one of them at the entrance
fifteen, as a Trophie of Victory was erected. These are by the By-dwellers
called Long Megge and her daughters.

(10) This County, as it stood in the fronts of assaults, so was it strengthened
with twentie-fiue Castles, and preserved with the prayers (as then was thought)
of the Votaries in the houses erected at Carlisle, Lenecoft, Wetherall, Holm^,
Daker, and Saint Bees. These with others were dissolved by King Henry the
eight, and their revenues shadowed under his Crown: but the Province being
freed from charge of subsidy, is not therefore divided into Hundreds in the
Parliament Rowles, whence we have taken the divisions of the rest: only this is
observed, that therein are seated nine Market-Townes, fifty eight
Parish-Churches, besides many other Chapels of ease.

NORTHVMBERLAND. CHAPTER XLII.
THe County of Northumberland, has on the South the Bishopric of Durham,
being shut in with the River Derwent, and with Tyne; the North is confined upon
Scotland, the West upon part of Scotland and part of Cumberland: the East Side
lies altogether upon the Sea, called Mare-Germanicum.

(2) The form thereof is Triangle, and differs not much in the sidings; for
from her South-East unto the South-West-point are near unto 40. miles; from
thence to (...) North-point are sixty miles, and her base along the Sea-shoare
45. miles: The whole in circum^^^^ is about one hundred forty five miles.

(3) The Air must needs be subtle and piercing, for that the Northernly parts
are most exposed to extremity of weathers, as great winds, hard frosts, and
long lying of snowes, etc. Yet would it be far more sharper then it is, were
not the Germane Seas a ready means to further the dissolution of her Ice and
Snow, and the plenty of Coals there gotten, a great help to comfort the body
with warmth, and defend the bitter coldness.

(4) The Soil cannot be rich, having neither fertility of ground for Corn or
Cattle, the most part of it being rough, and in every place hard to be manured,
save only toward the Sea and the River Tyne, where, by the great diligence
and industrious pains of good husbandry, that part is become very fruitful.

(5) The ancient Inhabitants of this Country, mentioned by Ptolemie, were
called OTTALINI, OTTADENI, and OTTADINI, which by an easy alteration (as M.
Cambden says) if it had ^ene called OTTATINI, signifying, about the River
Tyne, or on the further side of Tyne (...) this people were planted) there
would have been much consonance both with the name of the Inhabitants, and the
Position and Site of the Province.

(6) The chiefest commodity that enricheth this County, are those Stones
Linthancraces, which we call Sea-coales, whereof there is such plenty and
abundance dug up, as they do not only return a great gain to the
Inhabitants, but procure also much pleasure and profit to others.

(7) No place of this Province vents forth so many of these Sea-coales into
other regions as Newcastle does, being the very eye of all the Towns in this
County: for it does not only minister relief (by such provision) to all other
parts of England, but does also farnish the wants of foreign Countries with
her plenty. By means of this and the intercourse of traffic which it has,
the place is grown ex^eeding rich and populous. Before the Conquest it was
called Monk-chester: having been ((...)) in the possession of Monks: and
Chester being added, which signifies a bulwark or place of defense, shows
that in ancient time it had been a place of Fortification.

(8) After the Conquest it got the name of Newcastle* by the new Castle which
Robert the Son of William the Conqueror built there, out of the ground. What
it was called in old time is not known, yet some are of opinion, that it may
be thought to have been Gatrosentum for that Gateshead, the suburb (as it
were) of the same, expresses in the own proper signification that British
name, Gatrosentum It is now most enobled both by the Haven (which Tyne makes)
of that notable depth, that it bears very tall Ships, and is able to defend
them against storms and tempests. As also by many favors and honors
wherewith it has been dignified by p^ces: for Richard the second, granted
that a Sword should be carried before the Mayor, and Henry the sixth made it a
County consisting of a Corporation within it self. It is adorned with four
Churches, and fortified with strong walls that have eight gates. It is distant
from the first West line 21 degrees and 30 minutes, and from the Equinoctial
live toward the North Pole thirtie-foure degrees and fiftie-seaven minutes.

(9) The utmost Town in England, and the strongest hold in all Britain, is
Barwicke. From whence it had the name is not certainly made known. Some fetch
it from Berengarius, a Duke (never read of:) Howsoever, this is better to be
said then trusted: and whence soever it has the name, it is seated between
two mighty Kingdoms, shooting far into the Sea, with the which, and the
River Tweed, it is almost encompassed: and whenever any discord fell between
the two Nations, this place was the first thing they took care of. It has
endured the brunts of diverse inroades and incursions, and been oftentimes both
possessed and repossessed of the Scots and English: But since it was reduced
under the command of Edward the fourth, our Kings have from time to time so
strengthened it with new works and fortifications, as they cut off all hopes
of winning it. The Governor of this Town is also Warden of the East Marches
against scotland. The Longitude of it according to Mathematical observation,
is 21. degrees and 43. minutes: the Latitude 55. degrees and 48. minutes.

(10) The Inhabitants of this County are a warlike people, and excellent light
horsemen, and are made fierce and hard by the several encounters of the Scots,
and not much unlike them in neither, betwixt whom in this County, many Battles
have been fought, and the successes oftentimes waued through very doubtfully,
the victory sometimes falling to the scots, sometimes to the English. At
Otterburne was one, in which three or four times it stood doubtfully
indifferent, till in the end the Scots got the upper hand of the English:
Howbeit, their glory was not made so illustrious by this Conquest, but that it
was as much darkened by the foil they received at A^wicke, where William King
of Scots, was taken and presented prisoner to Henry the second. As also by that
Battle at Brumridge, where King Athelstan fought a pitched field against Anlafe
the Dane, Constantine King of Scots, and Eugenius King of Cumberland, and that
with such fortunate success, as it has left matter sufficient to fill the
pens of Historians. Flodden field also, memorable in the death of James the
fourth, King of Scots, who was there slain, and his Army overthrown in a
sharp fight, as he displayed his Banner (in great hope) against England, when
King Henry the eight lay at the siege of Turnay in France

(11) Other Battles in this County have been, as that at Hexam (called by
Bid, Hangustald) wherein John Neuill, Marquess Montacute, encountered the
Leaders of the Lancastrian faction with much courage, and with greater success
put them to flight, for which he was made Earl of Northumberland by Edward the
fourth As also that at Dilston (by Bid called Diuelshur^e,) where Oswald
having the faith of Christ for his defense and armor, slew Cedwall the
Britain in a set battle, himself straight-wayes becoming a professed
Christian, and causing his people to be instructed in Christian Religion.

(12) Many memorable antiquities are found in this Country along the wall, and
in other places: As pieces of Coin, Inscriptions, broken and imperfect Altars,
etc. (the ruins of the wall yet to be seen:) but none that deserves more to
be remembered then Wall-Towne (by Bid called Ad Muru^) for that Segebert King
of the East Saxons was in it baptized in the Christian Faith by the hands of
Paulinus: and Halyston, where the same Paulinus is said to have baptized many
thousands into the Faith of Christ, in the Primitive Church of the English
Nation.

(13) Busy-gap is a place infamous for robbing and theeuing, and is therefore
rather remembered as a cautiatory note for such as have cause to travel that
way, then for any proper matter of worth it has, that merits place with other
parts of this Province.

Other matters of observation are only these, that North Tyne (running through
the Wall) waters two Dales, which breed notable light horsemen, and both of
them have their hills (hard by) so boggy, and standing with water on the top,
that no horsemen are able to ride through them, and yet (which is wonderful)
there be many great heaps of Stones (called Laws) which the neighboring
people are verily persuaded were cast up and laid together in old time, in
remembrance of some that were slain there. There is also a martial kind of
men which lie out, up and down in little Cottages (called by them Sheals and
Shealings) from April to August, in scattering fashion, summering (as they
term it) their Cattle, and these are such a sort of people as were the ancient
Nomades. The last, not least, matter of note is this, that the Inhabitants of
Morpeth set their own Town on fire in the year of Christ 1215. in the spite
they bare to King John, for that he and his Rutars ouer-ranne these Countries.

This County has five Market-Townes in it for her trade of buying and selling,
26. Castles for her strength and fortification, and 460. Parish-Churches for
divine service.

MAN ISLAND. CHAPTER XLIII.
THe I Will of Man is termed by Ptolemy, M^neda; by Pliny, Menauia; by Orosius,
Menania by Beda, Menania secunda, and by Gyldas, (...), and M^naw. The Britain
name it Men^w; the Inhabitants, Ma^^ge; and we Englishmen, The I Will of Man It
boundeth Northward upon Scotland, Southward upon the I Will of Anglesey,
Eastward upon part of (...)-shire, and Westward upon the Coast of Ireland.

(2) The form is long and narrow: for from (...) to the Mull-hils, where it is
longest, it only stretches it self to twenty nine miles; but from the
widest part, which is from Peele-Castle to Douglas-point, are scarce nine; the
whole compass about, is fourscore and two miles.

(3) The air is so cold and sharp, being bordering upon the (...) parts, and
for her shelter having but a wall of water. They have few woods; only they
light sometimes upon so subterranean trees buried under the ground, by digging
up the earth for a ^lammie kind of (...), which they use for fuel.

(4) The soil is reasonable fruitful both for Cattle, Fish, and Corn; yet it
rather commends the pains of the people then the goodness of the ground;
for by the industry of the Inhabitants it ^eeldeth sufficiency of every thing
for it self, and sends good store into other Countries. It has fields (by
good manuring) plenteous of Barley and Wheat, but especially (...) and from
hence it comes that the people eat most of all Oaten-bread. It bears
abundance of (...) and Flax, and is full of mighty flocks of sheep and
other Cattle: yet are they smaller in body then we have in England, and are
much like to the Cattle in Ireland that are neighboring upon it.

(5) This commodity makes this Island more happy then we are here: for the
people are there free from unnecessary commencements of Suites, from long and
dilatory Pleas, and from frivolous feeing of Lawyers No Judge or Clerks of the
Court take there any penny for drawing Instruments, or making of Processes All
Controversies are there determined by certain Judges, without writings or
other charges, and them they call Deemsters, and choose forth among themselves,
If any complaint be made to the Magistrate for wrongs either done or suffered,
he presently takes up a stone, and fixes his mark upon it, and so delivers
it unto the party plaintiff, by virtue of which he both calls his adversary to
appearance, and to produce his witnesses. If the case fall out to be more
litigious, and of greater consequence then can easily be ended, it is then
referred to twelve men, whom they term The Keys of the Island. Another
happiness enricheth this Island, namely the security and government thereof,
as being defended from neighbor enemies by Soldiers that are pressed and ready;
for on the South Side of the I Will stands Bala-Curi (the Bishops chief place of
residence) and the Pyle, and a Block-house standing in a little Island, where
there is a continual Garrison of Soldiers. And it is so well managed for
matter of rule and civil discipline, that tuery man there possesses his own
in peace and safety. No man lives in dread or danger of losing what he has.
Men are not there inclined to robbing or theeuing, or licentious living.

(6) The Inhabitants of this Island are for the most part religious, and loving
to their Pastors, to whom they do much reverence and respect, frequenting
daily to divine Service, without division in the Church or innovation in the
Commonweal. The wealthier sort, and such as hold the fairest possessions, do
imitate the people of Lanca-shire, both in their honest carriage and good
housekeeping. Howbeit, the common sort of people both in their language and
manners, come nighest unto the Irish, although they somewhat relish and favor
of the qualities of the Norwegians.

(7) Things not worthy to be buried in the grave of oblivion are, that this
Island in the midst thereof rises up with hills, standing very thick; amongst
which the highest is called Sceafull, from whence upon a clear and fair day,
a man may easily see three Kingdoms at once; that is, Scotland, England, and
Ireland. This I Will prohibits the customary manner ofbegging from door to door,
detesting the disorders, as well Civil as Ecclesiastical of neighbor
Nations. And last, not least, that deserves to be committed to memory, is, that
the women of this Country, wheresoever they go out of their doors, gird
themselves about with the winding-sheete that they purpose to be buried in, to
show themselves mindful of their mortality: and such of them as are at any
time condemned to dye, are sowed within a sack, and flung from a rock into
the Sea.

(8) The whole Isle is divided into two parts, South and North, whereof the one
resembles the Scottish in speech, the other the Irish. It is defended by two
Castles, and has seauenteene Parishes, five Market-Townes, and many Villages.

A Chronicle of the Kings of MAN. CHAPTER XLIIII.
IT is here very pertinent to the purpose, to insert a small History of this
Island, that the atchieuements heretofore had, may not be utterly buried,
although they are waxen very old, and almost torn from remembrance by the
teeth of Time. It is confessed by all, that the Britains held this Island, as
they did all Britain. But when the Nations from the North ouerflowed those
South parts, like violent tempests, it became subject to the Scots. Afterward,
the Norwegians who did most hurt from the Northern Sea by their manifold
robberies, made this Island and the Hebrides to be their baunt, and erected
Lords and petry Kings in the same, as is expressed in this Chronicle, written
(as is reported) by the Monks of the Abbey of Russin.

A Chronicle of the Kings of MAN.
ANno Dom. 1065. Edward, of blessed memory, King of England, departed this
life, and Harald the Son of Godwyn succeeded him in the Kingdom: against
whom Harald Harfager (King of Norway) came into the field, and fought a Battle
at Stainford-bridge: but the English obtaining the victory, put them all to
flight. Out of which chase Godred, surnamed Crovan, the son of Harald the
black of Iseland, came unto Godred the son of Syrric, who Reigned then in
Man, and honorably received him.

(2) The same year William the Bastard Conquered England, and Godred the son
of Syrric died, his son Fingal succeeding him.

(3) An. 1066. Godred Crovan assembled a great Fleet, and came to Man, and
sought with the people of the Land, but received the worst, and was overcome.

The second time renewing his Forces and his Fleet, he failed into Man, and
joined Battle with the Manksmen, but was vanquished as before, and driven out
of the field. Howbeit, what he could not at first bring to pass with power in
those two several onsers, he afterward effected by policy. For the third time
gathering a great multitude together, he arrived by night in the haven called
Ra^sey, and hid three hundred men in a Wood, which stood upon the hanging
hollow brow of an hill called Sceafull. The Sun being risen, the Manksmen put
their people in order of Battle, and with a violent charge encountered with
Godred. The fight was hot for a time, and stood in a doubtful suspense, till
those three hundred men starting out of the Ambush behind their backs, began
to foil the Manksmen, put them to the worst, and forced them to fly. Who
seeing themselves thus discomfited, and finding no place of refuge left them to
escape, with pitiful lamentation submitted themselves unto Godred, and
besought him not to put to the sword such poor remainder of them as was left
alive. Godred having compassion on their calamities, (for he had been nursed
for a time and brought up among them) sounded a retreat, and prohibited his
Host any longer perfuie. He being thus possessed of the I Will of Man, dyed in the
Island that is called I Will, when he had reigned sixteen years. He left behind
him three sons, Lagman, Harald, and Olaue.

(4) Lagman the eldest, taking upon him the Kingdom, reigned seven years.
His brother Harald rebelled against him a great while; but at length was taken
prisoner by Lagman, who caused his members of generation to be cut off, and his
eyes to be put out of his head, which cruelty this Lagman afterward
repenting, gave over the Kingdom of his own accord, and wearing the badge of
the Lords Cross, took a journey to Jerusalem, in which he dyed.

(5) An 1075. all the Lords and Nobles of the Iland^ hearing of the death of
Lagman, dispatched Ambassadors to Murecard O-brien, King of Ireland, and
requested that he would send some worthy and industrious man of the Blood
Royal to be their King, till Olaue the son of Godred came to full age. The
King yielding to their request, sent one Dopnald the son of Tade, and charged
him to govern the Kingdom (which by right belonged to another,) with lenity
and gentleness. But after be was come to the Crown, forgetting, or not
weighing the charge that his Lord and Master had given him, swayed his place
with great tyranny, committing many outrages and cruelties, and so reigned
three years: till all the Princes of the Islands agreeing together, rose up
against him, and made him fly into Ireland.

(6) An. Dom. 1111. Olaue the son of Godred Crouan aforesaid, began his
reign, and reigned forty years a peaceable Prince. He took to wife Africa,
the daughter of Fergus of Gal-way, of whom he begat Godred. By his Concubines
he had Raignald, Lagman, and Harald, besides many daughters, whereof one was
married to Summerled, Prince of Herergaidel, who caused the ruin of the Kings
of the Islands. On her he begat four sons, Dulgal, Raignald, Engus, and Olaue.

(7) An. Dom. 1144 Godred the son of Olaue, was created King of Man, and
reigned thiritie years. In the third year of his reign the people of Dublin
sent for him, and made him their King. Which Mure-card King of Ireland
maligning, raised war, and sent Osibeley his half brother by the mothers
side with 3000. men at Arms to Dublin, who by Godred and the Dublinians was
slain, and the rest all put to flight. These atchieuements made, Godred
returned to Man, and began to use tyranny, turning the Noblemen out of their
inheritances. Whereupon one called Thorfin (vtters son) being mightier then
the rest, came to Summerled, and made Dulgal (Summerleds son) King of the
Islands: whereof Godred having intelligence, prepared a Navy of 80. Ships to
meet Summerled. And in the year 1156. there was a Battle fought at Sea on
Twelfth day at night, and many slain on both sides But the next day they grew
to a pacification, and divided the Kingdom of the Islands among themselves.
This was the cause of the overthrow of the Kingdom of the Isles.

(8) Ann 1158. Summerled came to Man, with a fleet of fifty three sail, put
Godred to flight, and wasted the Island. Godred upon this crossed over to Norway
for aid against Summerled. But Summerled in the mean time arriving at
Rhinfrin, and having gathered together: fleet of 160 ships, couerting to subdue
all Scotland, by the rust judgment of God, was vanquished by a few, and both
himself and his son slain, with an infinite number of people.

(9) The fourth day after, Raignald, began to reign, but Godred coming upon
him out of Norway with a great multitude of Armed men, took his brother
Raignald, and be rest him both of his eyes and genitall members. On the fourth
Ides of November, An. Dom. 1187. Godred King of the Islands dyed, and his body
was translated to the I Will of Ely* He left behind him three sons, Raignald,
Olaue, and Yuar. He ordained in his life time that Olaue should succeed him,
because he only was borne legitimate. But the people of Man seeing him to be
scarce ten years old, sent for Raignald, and made him their King. I his caused
great division, and many turbulent attempts between the two Brethren for the
space of thirty eight years; which had no end, till at a place called
Tnigualla there was a battle struck between them, wherein Olaue had the
victory, and Raignald was slain. The Monks of Russin translated his body unto
the Abbey of S. Mary de Fournes, and there interred it in a place which
himself had chosen for that purpose.

(10) An. 1230. Olaue and Godred Don (who was Raignalds son) with the
Norwegians came to Man, and divided the Kingdom among themselves. Olaue held
Man, and Godred being gone unto the Islands, was slain in the I Will Lodhus So
Olaue obtained the Kingdom of the Isses. He dyed the twelfth Calends of Lune,
Anno 1237. in Saint Patrickes Island, and was buried in the Abbey of Russin.

(11) Harrold his son succeeded him, being fourteen years of age, and
reigned 12 years. In the year 1239. he went unto the King of Norway, who
after two years confirmed unto him, his heirs and successors, under his
Seal, all the Islands which his predecessors had possessed.

(12) An. 1242. Harrold returned out of Norway, and being by the Inhabitants
honorably received, had peace with the Kings of England and of Scotland. The
same year he was sent for by the King of Norway, and married his daughter. In
the year 1249. as he returned homeward with his wife, he was drowned in a
tempest near unto the coasts of Radland.

(13) An Dom. 1249. Raignald the son of Olaue, and brother to Harrold, began
his reign, and on the thirtieth day there of was slain by one Yuar a Knight,
in a meadow near unto the holy Trinity Church, and lies buried in the Church
of S. Mary of Russin.

(14) In the year 1252. Magnus, the son of Olaue, came to Man and was made
King. The next year following he went to the King of Norway, and stayed there
a year.

(15) In the year 1265. Magnus (Olaues son) King of Man, and of the Islands,
departed this life, at the Castle of Russin, and was buried in the Church of S.
Mary of Russin.

(16) In the year 1266. the Kingdom of the Islands was translated, by reason
of Alexander King of Scots, who had gotten into his hands the Western Islands,
and brought the I Will of Man under his dominion, as one of that number.

(17) An. 1340. William Montacute Earl of Salisbury wrested it from the
Scottish by strong hand and force of Arms: and in the year 1393. (as Thomas
Walsingham says) he sold Man and the Crown thereof unto William Scroope for a
great sum of money But he being beheaded for high Treason, and his goods
confiscate, it came into the hands of Henry the Fourth, King of England, who
granted this Island unto Henry Percy Earl of Northumberland. But Henry Percy
entering into open rebellion the fifth year following, the King sent Sir John
Stanley and William Stanley to seize the I Will and Castle of Man, the inheritance
whereof he granted afterward to Sir John Stanley and his heirs by Letters
Patents, with the Patronage of the Bishopric, etc. So that his heirs and
successors, who were honored with the Title of Earls of Darby, were commonly
called (...) of Man.

HOLY ISLAND. CHAPTER XLV.
THis Island is called Lindisfarne, by the River Lied that is opposite unto it
on the Coast of Northumberland. Beda terms it a Deiny Island. The Britain
name it (...), for that it twice every day suffers an extraordinary inundation
and ouer-flowing of the Ocean in manner of an Island, which twice likewise makes
it continent to the Land, and returning unto her watrie habitation, lays the
Shore bare again, as before. It is called in English, Holy-Iland, for that in
ancient times many Monks have been accustomed to retire themselves thither,
and to make it their receptacle for solitude: having on the West and South,
Northumberland, and more South-Eastward the Island Farne.

(2) The form of it is long and narrow, the West side narrower then the East,
and are both conjoined by a very small spang of land that is left unto Comes.
The South is much (...) then the rest It is from East to West, about two
thousand two hundred and fifty pases; and from North to South, twelve hundred
and fifty pases; so that the circumference cannot be great.

(3) The air is not very good either for health or delight, as being seated on
those parts that are subject to extremity of cold, and greatly troubled with
vapors and toggy mists that arise from the Seas.

(4) The soil cannot be rich, being rockie and full of stones, and unfit for
Corn and T^^age. It is neither commended for hills to seed sheep, nor pastures
to fit Cattle, (...) replenished with sweet springs, or running riuellets,
only one excepted, (...) standing pond. The only thing this Island yields,
is a stand accomodate (...) and fowling.

(5) Notwithstanding, this is very worthy of note concerning the same, which
Alcun wrote in an Epistle to Egelred King of Northumberland, namely, that it
was a place more venerable then all the places of Britain, and that after the
departure of S. Paulinus from York, there Christian Religion began in their
Nation, though afterward it there felt the first beginning of misery and
calamity, being left to the spoil of Pagans and M^^^oants.

(6) It is also remembered of this Island, that sometimes there has been in it
an Episcopal See, which A^dan the Scot instituted (being called thither to
Preach the Christian Faith to the people of Northumberland) being thus
delighted with the solitary situation thereof, as a most fit place for retire.
But afterward when the Danes ^isled and robbed all the Seacoasts, the
Episcopal See was translated to Durham.

(7) This Island so small in account either for compass or Commodity, and so
unpeopled and unprofitable, cannot be numerous in Towns and Villages. It has
in it only one Town, with a Church and a Castle, under which there is a
commodious Haven, defended with a Block-house, situate upon in hill toward the
South-East.

FARNEILE.
THis I Will South-eastward seven miles from Holy Island, shows it self distant
almost two miles from Bambrough Castle. On the West and South it bears upon
Northumberland, and on the North-east-side it has other smaller Islands
adjoining to it, as Widopens and Staple Island, which lie two miles off
Bronsinan, and two lesser then these, which are called the Wambes.

(2) The form of this I Will is round, and no larger in compass then may easily
be ridden in one half of a day. The breadth of it is but five miles, and the
length no more. The whole circumference extends it self no further then to
fifteen miles.

(3) The air is very unwholesome, and subject both to many Dysenteries and
other diseases, by reason of the mistie fogges and exhalations that are
thereunto drawn up from the Ocean. It is many times troubled with unusual
tempests of winds, with boisterous fury of stormy raines, and with several
and uncouth rages of the Sea.

(4) The soil cannot be fertile, being encircled about with craggy clifts;
neither has it in it much matter either of pleasure or profit. It can neither
defend it self from cold, lacking fuel, as Wood, Coal, Turffes, etc. nor
from famine, wanting food, as Corn, Pastures, Cattle, etc. The best commodity
it yields, is Fish and Foul.

(5) This thing nevertheless is worthy to be remembered of it, which Beda
(writing of the life of Cuthbert Bishop of Lindisfarne, that Tutelar Pa^ron of
the Northern Englishmen) reports, namely, that in this I Will he built a City
fitting his government, and erected certain houses in the same; the whole
building standing almost round in compass, and reaching the space of four or
five pearches. The wall about it he made higher then a man's height, to
withold and keep in the want on lasciviousness both of his thoughts and
eyes, and to eleuate the whole intention of his mind up to heavenly desires,
that he might wholly give himself to the service of God. But these are all
made the ruins of time, as sithence many other Monuments have been, of worthy
antiquity.

(6) I cannot report that there are now many houses standing in it, much less
Towns or Villages. Only this, that it has a Tower or place of Fortification
belonging unto it, placed well-neere in the middle part of the I Will.

GARNSEY.
THis Island lies about five leagues Northwest from Iersey, and is compassed
(like to her neighbor) with the British Sea. It lies in length from Plymouth
bay South-west, to Lancrosse de Ancke^^ Northeast, thirteen miles: in breadth
from S. Martins point Southeast, to the How Northwest nine miles; and is in
circuit thirty six miles. The Emperor Antonine having the rule and
domination of France (at that time called Gaul, from whence the word Gallia is
derived) did name this Island Sarnia, which afterward by the change of Times and
corruption of Languages, was long since (and is at this day) called Garnsey.

(2) This I Will in form and fashion stands in the Sea, much like to a Park
that is encompassed round about with a Pale of Rocks, being very defensible
unto the Island from the attempting innovation of enemies.

(3) The Air and Climate of this I Will has little or no difference in temper or
quality from that of Iersey. And this deserves to be remembered of it; that in
this I Will is neither Toade, Snake, Adder, or any other venomous creature, and
the other has great plenty.

(4) It stands for the most part upon a rock, very high in many places from
the Sea. Nevertheless the Soil is very fruitful, yielding forth great
plenty of grass for their Sheep and other Cattle, which they have to serve
all uses* Their fields in the Summer time are so naturally garnished with
flowers of all sorts, that a man (being there) might conceit himself to be in
a pleasant artificial garden.

(5) The Inhabitants are not so much given to tillage as they of Iersey, though
the soil be as fruitful. They have of late taken great delight in planting
and setting of trees of all sorts, and especially of Apples, by reason whereof
they make much Cider. Their commodities are alike, and their helps from the
Sea no less, or rather more.

(6) In this I Will are many great steep Rocks, among which is found a hard stone
called by the Frenchmen Smyris, which we term Emerill. This stone is
serviceable for many purposes, and many Trades, as Glasiers, etc. but
especially for the Goldsmiths and Lapidaries, to cut their precious stones.

(7) It has a head of Land upon the North part thereof, the passage into which
is so narrow, that a man would think that at every Tide (the Sea beating
strongly on both sides) it were in a continual danger to be sundred from the
other part of the I Will. This place is called S. Michaelin the Vale, where (in
former times) stood a Priory, or a Covent of religious persons, the ruins
whereof are at this day to be seen.

(8) The government of this I Will, in nature and form resembles the other of
Iersey, of whom shall be said. The people in their Original and Language alike
also, but in their customs and conditions they come nearer the civil fashions
of the English. Other matters of moment I find not worthy to be recorded.

It has ten Parishes, and one Market-Towne, being also a Haven, and is called
S. Peter's Port, built close by the Peer, and Castle Cornet.

IERSEY.
THe two Islands Iersey and Garnsey, being the only remains of the Dukedom of
Normandy, that in former times many years together was in the possession, and
under the command of the Kings of England, annexing thereunto a large Territory
and glorious title to the Crown, are both seated in the Sea called Mare
Britannicum, the Ocean parting them a good distant asunder, and are now both
adjuncts, and within the circuit of Hampshire. For the first (being the Isle of
Iersey) it lies upon the British Sea, having on the North parts the coasts of
Hampshire, and on the South the Country of Normandy.

(2) This Island is long, not much unlike the fashion of an Egg. It contains
in length from Sentwon Poole upon the West, to Mount Orguil Castle on the East,
ten miles, and in breadth from Dubon point to Plymount-bay six miles: the whole
circuit of the Island being thirty eight miles* It is distant from a little
Island called Alderney, about four leagues. It was in old time called Caesaria;
whether from Julius Octanius, or any the other Caesar's that followed, is
unknown. But the Frenchmen have by corruption of speech long time called it
Iersey.

(3) It is a very delightsome and healthful Island, and gives a pleasant
aspect unto the Seas. It lies Southward not far from a craggie ridge of
rocks, which is much feared of the Mariners, and makes the passage that way
very dangerous, howbeit it serves for a forcible defense against Pirates, or any
strangers that attempt invasion, and they are termed Casquets.

(4) The Soil is very fertile, bringing forth store of Corn and Cattle, but
especially of sheep, that are of reasonable bigness, the most of them bearing
four horns a piece: Their wool very fine and white, of which the Inhabitants
make their Iersey stockings, which are ordinarily to be had in most parts of
England, and yield a great commodity unto the Island.

(5) The first original of the Inhabitants sprung either from the Normans, or
Britains, or both. They speak French, though after a corrupt manner, and have
continued their names, language, customs, and Country, without any, or little
intermixture, these many hundred years, having been under the jurisdiction of
the English ever since the untimely and unnatural death of Robert Duke of
Normandy, eldest son to William the Conqueror.

(6) The people of this Country live very pleasantly, as well by the profits of
the Land, as the helps and furtherances of the Sea, that yields unto them (and
especially in Summer season) great store of fish, but principally Conger and
Lobsters, the greatest and fattest upon the coast of England Wood is very
scant, for their best fuel is Turffe: some Coal they have brought unto them,
but it is very dear; straw, furre, and fern serving their ordinary uses. The
middle part of the Island has many pretty Hills rising in it, yielding a
delightful object unto the valleys, that receive from one another a mutual
pleasure.

(7) The Governor of the I Will is the Captain thereof, who appoints certain
Officers under him: the principal of whom, carries the name and title of a
Bailiffe, that in civil causes has the assistance of twelve Iurats to
determine of differences, and minister Justice: in criminal matters seven: in
matters of reason and conscience, five. Their twelve are chosen out of the
twelve Parishes: so that no man goes further to complain, then to his own
Iurate in ordinary Controversies; but matters of moment and difficulty are
determined before the Bailiffe in a general meeting.

(8) This I Will has two little Islands adjacent; the one S. Albons, the other
Hillary Island. It has twelve Parishes, and four Castles. No other Monuments
of name or note.

THE DESCRIPTION OF WALES. CHAPTER I.
Antiquity has avouched, that the whole Isle of Britain was divided into
three parts* The first and fairest lay contained within the French Seas, the
Rivers of Seuerne, Dee, and Humber, called then ^^oyger, which name yet it
retains in W^^sh; in English called England. The second part occupied all the
land Northward from Humber, to the Orkney Sea, called by the Latins, Mare
Caledonium, or Deucaledonium, now famously known by the name of Scotland. The
third part was this, lying betwixt the Irish Seas, the Rivers Seuerne and Dee,
and was called Cambria, which name does yet continue with them, though we, the
English, call it Wales, as the people Welshmen, which is strange and strangers;
for so at this day the dwellers of Tyroll in the higher Germany, whence our
Saxons are said to have come, do name the Italian (their next neighbor) a
Welshman, and his language Welsh.

(2) This opinion Verstegan does altogether contradict, rather judging by the
ancient Tentonicks tongue, which the Germans spoke, and wherein the G. is
pronounced for W. that these Saxons called them Gallish from the Go^les, whence
their original proceeded, rather then Wallish from strangers: which he
thinks could not be, considering their habitations ^o near unto them; and
that the like was in use, he proves by the words of French, Guardian for
Wardian, Corangalles for (...) yea, and Galls for Wales, calling our most
famous Edward, Prince of Galls, not Prince of Wales; insomuch that the County
of Lombardy, bordering along upon the Germans, was of them called Gallia
Cis-alpina, and at this day Welsh-land. So likewise do the Netherlanders call
the Inhabitants of Henal^ and Artois, Wallen or Wallons, and some parts of
Braban^ and Flander^, Welsh-Braban^, and Welsh-Flanders, and all because of the
language or lineage of the Gauls. Neither do the mere Natives of Wales know
any other name of their Country then Cambria, of themselves, then Cambri or
Cumri, or of their language then Cambraoc. But leaving this opinion free to his
affection, we will proceed*

(3) Wales therefore being anciently bounded as before, the Saxons did
afterward win by force from the Britains, all the plain and champion Country
over the River Dee; and especially Offa King of Mercia, made their limits
straiter, by making a ditch of great breadth and depth, to be a Mere betwixt
his Kingdom and Wales. This ditch is in many places to be seen at this day,
and bears the name of Claw^ Offa, that is, Offaes Ditch. The Country between
it and England is commonly called the Marches, and is for the most part
inhabited by Welshmen, especially in North Wales, even to the River Dee. This
admirable Trench began at Bassingwerke in Flintshire, between Chester and
Ruthlan, and ran along the hills to the South Sea, a little from Bristow,
reaching above an hundred miles in length.

(4) Siluester Giraldus makes the River Wye to be the Meare between England
and Wales, on the South part, called South Wales: whence he ascribes the
breadth of Wales unto Saint David's in Meneuia, to be an hundred miles; and the
length from Caerleon upon Vske in Gwentland, to Holly head in Anglesey, an
hundred miles, he might have said thirty more.

(5) About the year of Christ 870. our Alfred reigning in England, Rodericus
Magnus King of Wales did divide it into three, Talaiths, Regions, or
Territories, which were called Kingdoms. This Rodericus Magn^^ gave Venedotia,
Gwineth or North Wales, to Anarawd his eldest son; to Cadeth his second
son, Demetia, Deheubarth or South Wales; and to Meruin his third son, Powys.

(6) North Wales had upon the North side, the Irish Sea, from the River Dee at
Bassingwerke to Aberdyni: upon the West and South-West, the River Dyni, which
divides it from South Wales, and in some places from Powysland. And on the
South and East, it is divided from Powys, sometimes with high hills, and
sometimes with Rivers, till it come again to the River Dee. It is generally
full of high mountains, craggie rocks, great woods, and deep valleys, many
straight dangerous places, deep and swift Rivers.

(7) This Land was of old time divided into four parts, Mon, Aruon, Meryonyth,
and y Berued^wlan, or the middle Country, and each of these were again divided
into several Cantrenes, and they subdivided into their Cymeden or Commots,
wherein we follow that division which was in the time of Llewylyn ap Gruffin,
last Prince of Wales, according to a Copy imparted to me by a worshipful
friend and learned Antiquarie, as seeming far more exact then that of Doctor
Powels.

(8) Anglesey the chiefest, is separated from the maine Land with the River
(...), wherein at Aberfraw was the Princes Court, now a mean village. In this
Island is a fair Town called Beaumarish, and a common passage to Ireland at
Caergy^i, in English, Holly-head.

(9) Aruon, the second part of North Wales, is now called Carnaruonshire, the
strongest Country within that Principality, giving place to none for
fertility of the ground, of for plenty of Wood-Castle, Fish, and Foul, etc.
Here are the Towns of Ca^^naruon, in old time called Caer-Segon^, and Bangor
the Bishops See, with diverse other ancient Castles, and places of memory. This
portion has on the North, the Sea and Moena^; upon the East and South-east,
the River (...), which divides it from Denbigh-shire: and on the South-west is
separated from Merioneth, by Rivers, Mountains, and Meares.

(10) Merioneth was the third part of Gwyneth, and keeps the name till this
day: is full of hills, and much noted for the resort of people that repair
thither to take Hertings. Upon the North it has Aruon and Denbigh-land; upon
the South, Caerdigan-shire; and upon the East, Montgomery-shire, heretofore
part of Powys. In this County stands the Town of Harleth, and a great Lake
called Ilyn Tegyd. This Country is likewise full of Cattle, Foul, and Fish,
and has in it great store of read Dear and Roes, but there is much scarcity
of Corn.

(11) Y Beruedhwlad was the fourth part of Gwyneth, and may be called in
English, The middle Country: is enclosed with hills, on the East, West, and
South-parts, and with the Sea Northward. It is plentiful of Cattle, Fish, and
Foul, as also of Corn: and is divided in the midst with the River Clwyd, to
which run a number of other Rivers from the hills. In this part is Dyffryn
Clwyd, the fairest Valley within Wales, containing eighteen miles in length,
and seven in breadth. In which is the Town and Castle of Ruthlan, near unto
the Sea; and not far thence, S. Assaph, an Episcopal seat, between the
Rivers Clwyd and Elwy. Herein stands the fair Town and goodly Castle of
Denbigh, situated upon a Rock, the greatest Market-Towne of North Wales: and
from thence is seen the Town and Castle of Ruthyn, fair for prospect, and
fruitful for site. This part of North Wales, has the Sea upon the North; Dee
toward the East; Aruon, the River Conwey, and Merionyth upon the West; and the
Country then called Powys, upon the South.

And these were the Meares and bounds of the four parts of Venedotia, Gwyneth,
or North Wales.

(12) The second Talaith or Kingdom, was Mathraual or Powys. To this belonged
the Country of Powys, and the Land between Wye and Seuerne. It had South Wales
upon the South and West, with the Rivers Wye and Tywy, and other Meares: upon
the North, Gwyneth; and upon the East, the Marches of England, from Chester to
Wye, a little above Hereford. This part was divided into Powis Vadoc, Powis
between Wye and Seuerne, and Powis Wenwynwyn In Powis Vadoc is the Castle of
Holt in Bromefeild, and the Castle of Chirke in Chirkeland; the Castle likewise
of Whittington; and Lordship of Oswestrie, with others.

(13) The second part of Powis, or the Territory belonging to Mathraual, is
Powis between Wye and Seuerne, (or Gwy and Hauren) whereof some is at this day
in Montgomery-shire, some in Radnor-shire, and some in Brecknock-shire; and
among sundry other, has these Towns and Castles following.

Montgomery: The Castle of Clyn: The Town of Knighton: The Castle of Cymaron:
Presteyn: The Town and Castle of Radnor, called in Welsh, Maesyuet, which is
at this day the Shire-Towne: The Town of Kinton, and the Castle of Huntingdon.

(14) The third part belonging to Mathranal (chief seat of Powys, after the
Welsh were driven from Pengwern or Shrewsburie) was Powys Wenwynwyn; a Country
full of Woods, Hills, and Rivers, having in it among others, the Towns of
Welsh-Poole, Newtowne, Machinhaeth Arustly was anciently in this part, but
afterward it came to the Princes of Gwyneth.

This may suffice, for the description of that which in old time was called
Gwyneth and Powys.

(15) It now remains that we describe the last kingdom of Wales, called
Demetia, Deheubarth, or the Talaith of Dineuowr, which although it was the
greatest, yet was it not the best, because it was much molested with Flemings
and Normans, and for that also diverse parts thereof would not obey their
Prince, as in Gwent, and in Morganw^.

(16) This was divided into six parts, of which Caerdigan was the first, and
is a Champion Country, without much Wood. It has Merionyth-shire on the
North: part of Powys upon the East: Carmarden-shire and Pembroke-shire, with
the River Tiu^, upon the South: and upon the West, the Irish Sea. In this part
is the Town of Caerdigan upon Tiu^, not far from the Sea; as also the Town
of Aberstwyth upon the River Istwyth; and Lhanbadarneuowr, which in times past
was a great Sanctuary: there were also many Castles; as of Stratneyrie, of
Walter, of Lhanrysted, of Dyuer^h, and of Aber Roydell, etc.

(17) The second part was called Dyuet, and at this day Penbroke-shire. It has
upon the North and West, the Irish Sea; upon the East, Carmarden-shire; and
upon the South, Seuerne. There are in it sundry Towns and Havens: among
others, these: Penbroke: Tenby: Hereford West, with the goodly and many
branched Haven of Milford, called in Welsh, Aberdangledhett: S. David's, or
Meneui^, which is the chiefest See in Wales: Fiscard, called Aberwayn: and
Newport, named Tresdreth.

(18) The third part was Caermarden-shire, which is a Country accounted the
strongest part of all South Wales: as that which is full of high Mountains,
great Woods, and fair Rivers.

(19) The fourth, called Morganwe, now Glamorgan-shire, has on the South, the
Seuerne Sea, which divides it from Devonshire and Cornwall: upon the West and
North-west, Carmarden-shire: upon the North-east, Breckneck-shire; and upon the
East, Monmouth-shire.

(20) The fifth, now called Gwent, and in Monmouth-shire, has in it the ancient
City of Caerlbeon upon Vske. There are also diverse Towns and Castles,
Chepstow, Glynstrygul, R^s, Tynterne upon the River Wye, etc. This is a fair
and fertile Country. It has on the West, Glamorgan and Brecknock-shires: upon
the North, Hereford-shire: upon the East, Gloucestershire: with the River Wye
and the River Seuerne upon the South and South-east.

(21) The last is Brecknock-shire, for the most part full of Mountains, Woods,
and Rivers. This Country is both great and large, being full of fair plains
and vallyes for Corn: it has plenty of the thick Woods, Forests, and
Parkes. It is full also of clear and deep Rivers, of which Seuerne is the
chiefest; although there be other fair Rivers, as Vske and the like.

(22) Thus far concerning the ancient Welsh division by Talaiths: but the
present division distributeth them more compendiously into two Countries, and
twelve Shires, enacted so by Parliament under King Henry the eight. The
Countries are North Wales and South Wales, which have shared, and as it were
devoured between them, all Powysland; each of which Countries contains six
Shires.

North Wales. Anglesey. Ca^^^aruon. Merionyth. Denbigh. Flint. Montgomery
South Wales. Caerdigan. Pembroke. Carmarden. Glamorgan. Brecknocks. Radn^r.

But whereas Monmouth-shire, and Radnor, were anciently parts, the first of
South Wales, the other of Powys-land: Monmouth-shire by Act of Parliament also
under the same King, was plucked away wholly from Wales, and laid to England,
one of whose Counties and Shires, it was from that time forward, and is at this
present reckoned; and Radnor-shire (as it were in lieu thereof) is comprehended
in South Wales. Humphrey H^^yd a Welsh Gentleman, in his Epistle and Map of old
Wales, makes mention of a West-Wales, which he calls Demetia and Dyser, the
one the Latin, and the other the British name thereof: but because it is
wholly swallowed up by this last division, we will not perplex the Reader with
superfluous and impertinent recitals.

PEMBROKE-SHIRE. CHAPTER II.
PEMBROKE-SHIRE, the furthest Promontory of all West-Wales, lies parted on the
North from Cardigan-shire with the Rivers Ty^y and Keach; and on the East is
confronted by Caermarden-shire; the South and West shooting far into the
Irish Seas, is with the same altogether washed.

(2) The form thereof is longer then it is broad; for from S: (...)
South-point to Cardigan-bridge in the North, are twentie-sixe miles; the
Eastern Landenie to S. David's point in the West, are twenty miles; the whole
in circumference is nintie three miles.

(3) The Air is passing temperate, by the report of Giraldus, who confirms
his reason from the site of Ireland, against which it butteth, and so near
adjoined, that King Rufus thought it possible to make a Bridge of his Ships
over the Sea, whereby he might pass to Ireland on foot.

(4) Anciently it was possessed by the Demetia, further branched into Cardigan
and Caermarden-shires, as in that County has been said, and in the Saxons
Conquest and Heptarchte, by the Britains forced into those parts for refuge,
whither Henry the first, and third of the Normans King, sent certain Flemings
(whose Country was ouer-whelmed with the breaking (...) of the Seas) to
inhabit the maritine Tract called Rosse, lying West upon the River Dougledye.
These Dutchmen (says Giraldus) were a strong and stout Nation, inured to
Wars, and accustomed to seek gain by Clothing, Traffic, and Tillage, and
ever ready for the Field to fight it out: adding withal, that they were most
loyal to the English, and most faithful to the Englishmen. Whereupon
Malmesbury writes thus: Many a time did King William Rufus assail the Welsh,
but ever in vain: which is to be wondered at, considering his other fortunate
success. But (says he) it may be the unevenness of the ground, and
sharpness of the air, that maintained their courage, and impeached his
valor: which to redress, King Henry his brother found means; for those
Flemings, who in regard of his mothers kindred by the fathers side, sorely
pestred and endammaged the English, he sent into Wales, both to purge and
disburden his own Kingdom, and to quell and keep back the courage of his
enemies. These men here seated, deceived not his expectation, but so carried
themselves in his quarrel, that they seldom communicated with their
neighbors, so that to this day they speak not the Language, and the Country
is yet called Little England beyond Wales.

(5) The commodities of this Shire are Corn, Cattle, Seafish, and Foul, and
in Giraldus his days of saleable Wines, the Havens being so commodious for
Ships arriuage: such is that at Tenby, and Milford, an Haven of such capacity,
that sixteen Creekes, five Bays, and thirteen Roades, known all by several
names, are therein contained, where Henry of Richmond, of most happy memory
arrived with signal hopes of Englands freedom from under the government of an
usurping Tyrant.

(6) Near unto this is Pembroke the Shire-Towne seated, more ancient in show
then it is in years, and more houses without Inhabitants, then I saw in any
one City thorowout my survey. It is walled long-wise, and them but indifferent
for repair, containing in circuit eight hundred and fourscore pases, having
three Gates of passage, and at the West end a large Castle, and locked-causey,
that leads over the water to the decayed Priory of Monton. The site of this
Town is in the degree of Longitude, as Mercator does measure, 14. and 55.
minutes, and the elevation from the North Pole in the degree of Latitude 52.

(7) A City as barren is old Saint David's, neither clad with Woods, nor
garnished with Rivers, nor beautified with Fields, nor adorned with Meadows,
but lies always open both to wind and storms. Yet has it been a Nursery
to holy men; for herein lived Calph^^rnius, a Britain Priest, whose wife was
Concha, sister to Saint Martin, and both of them the parents of Saint Patricke
the Apostle of Ireland. Deus a most religious Bishop, made this an
Archiepiscopall See, removed from Is^a Legionum. This the Britains call Tuy
Dewy, the house of Deui; we Saint David's: a City with few Inhabitants; yet
has it a fair Cathedral Church, dedicated to Saint Andrew and David, in the
midst of whose Quire lies intombed Edmund Earl of Richmond, father to King
Henry the seventh: whose Monument (as the Prebends told me) spared their Church
from other defacements, when all went down under the hammers of King Henry the
eight. About this is a fair wall, and the Bishops Palace all of free stone, a
goodly house I assure you, and of great receipt, whose uncovered tops cause the
curious works in the walls daily to weep, and them to fear their downfall
ere long.

(8) But Monton the Priorie, and S. Dogmels, places of devout piety erected in
this County, found not the like favor, when the commission of their
dissolutions came down against them, and the axes of destruction cut down the
props of their walls.

(9) This Shire has been strengthened with sixteen Castles, besides two
Block-houses, commanding the mouth of Mi^ford Haven, and is still traded in
five Market-Townes, being divided into seven Hundreds, and in them seated one
hundred forty five Parish-Churches.

RADNOR-SHIRE. CHAPTER III.
RADNOR-SHIRE lies bordered upon the North with the County Monmouth; upon the
East touches Shropshire and Herefordshire: the Rivers Clarwen and Wye divide
it from Breknock in the South: and the West part does shorten point-wise into
Caerdigan-shire.

(2) The form thereof is in proportion triangle, every side almost containing
a like distance: for from West to North are twenty miles; from North to South,
twenty two miles; and from South to West are twenty four miles: the whole in
circumference extending to fourscore and ten miles.

(3) The Air thereof is sharp and cold (as most of Wales is) for that the
snow lies and lasts long vnmelted under those shadowing high Hills and
ouer-hanging Rocks.

(4) The Soil is hungry, though not barren, and that in the East and South the
best: the other parts are rough and churlish, and hardly bettered by painful
labor; so that the riches of the North and West consists chiefly in the
brood of Cattle.

(5) Anciently this County was possessed by the Silures, a (...) people, and
great withstanders of the Romans impositions, who had not only them to fight
against, (...) withal the inaccessible Mountains, wherewith this Shire is so
ouerpressed and burdened, (...) many times I feared to look down from the
hanging Rocks, whereunder I passed into those deep^ and dark dales, seeming
to me an entrance into Limbo. Among these (as say our Historians) that hateful
Prince to God and Man, Vortiger, his Countries scourge, and last M^narke of the
British blood, by fire from Heaven was consumed with his incestuous wife, for
whom (...) names the Country where (...) Castle stood, Guartiger-Maur, of
whose rubbish the Castle Guthremion was raised, as some are of opinion* Yet
they of North Wales will have his destruction and Castle to stand in their
parts ^eere unto Beth-Kelleck, whereof we will further speak in the relation
of his life. Fatal was this place also to Llewellin the last Prince of the
British Race, who being betrayed by the men of Duelth, fled into those vast
Mountains of Radnor, where by Adam Francton he was slain, and his head
(crowned with Iuy) set upon the Tower of London.

Places most worthy of note in this Shire, are as ensues: The first is Radnor,
from whom the County receives her Name, anciently Magi, where the Commander of
the Pacensian Regiment lay, and thought to be the Magnos in Antonine the
emperors Survey. This Town is pleasantly seated under a hill, whereon
stands mounted a large and strong Castle, from whose Bulwark a Trench is
drawn along the West of the Town, whereon a wall of stone was once raised, as
by the remains in many places appears. This Trench does likewise inuerge her
West side so far as the River, but after is no more seen: whose Graduation
is observed to have the Pole elevated for Latitude 52. degrees, and 45 minutes;
and for L^ngitude, from the first point of the West set by Mercator 17. degrees
and one minute.

Presiayn for beauteous building is the best in this Shire a Town of Commerce,
wonderfully frequented, and that very lately* Next is Knighton, a Market-Towne
likewise, under which is seen the Clawdh-Offa, or (...) whose tract for a
spa^e I (...) along the edge of the Mountain; which was a bound (...) the
Welsh from the English, by the Mercian King Offa: and by Egbert the Monarke a
Law (...), by the instigation of his Wife, that it should be present death for
the Welsh to pass over the same, as John Beuer the Monk of Westminster
reports: and the like under Harald, as Ioha of Salisbury writes; wherein it
was ordained, that what Welsh-man soever should be found with any weapon on
this side of that Limit, which was Offaes Ditch, should have his right hand cut
off by the Kings Officers. The fourth place for account is Raihader Gowy, who
besides the great fall of Wye with a continual noise, has her Markets there
kept upon the Sabbath, which I there observed, and here note for an offense.

(7) Many Rivers arise and run through this Shire, which were it not that the
hills so cluster together, might make the soil both fertile and fat. Such are
Teme, Lug, Ithon, Clowdok, Dulas, Comarton, Somegill, Guithel, Arro, Machaway,
Edway, Hawye, Eland, Clarwen and Wye, besides other Loughs that stand betwixt
the hills.

This Shire is divided into six Hundreds, wherein are seated three Forests,
four Market-Townes, six Castles, and fifty two Parish-Chrches.

BREKNOCK-SHIRE. CHAPTER IIII.
BREKNOCK-SHIRE, in the British language Brechineau, (so called, as the
Welshmen relate, of a Prince named Brechanius, the father of an holy
offspring, whose twenty four daughters were all of them Saints) is a County
neither very large, not greatly to be praised or disliked of, whose bounds upon
the North is parted from Radnor with the Rivers Clarwen and Wye: the West lies
butted upon by Cardigan and Caermarden-shires: the South is confined by
Glamorgan; and the East with Monmouth and Radnor-shire, is wholly bound.

(2) The length of this Shire from North to South, betwixt Llanuth^ and
Istradgunies, are twenty eight English miles; and her breadth from East to
West, extended betwixt Fentrisso and E^ywell, are twenty miles; the whole in
circumference, about one hundred and two miles.

This County is full of hills, and uneven for travel, which on the South part
mount in such height, that as Giraldus has written, They make the air much
colder, and defend the Country from the excessive heat of the Sun, whereby
acertaine natural whole (...) of air makes it most temperate: and on the
East side, the Mountains of Edgar and Ewias do as ^ were fore-fence the same.
Among which, there arise and run so many fruit springs that their valleys are
thereby made most fertile, yielding in plenty both Corn and Grass.

(4) The ancient Inhabitants and possessors of this Shire, with the rest in
this South Tract, were the Silures, much spoken of, and great opposites to the
Romans, whose Countries were first made subject by Julius Froutinus, who
besi^^s the valor of the enemy, had to struggle with the Mountains and
Straits, as Tacitus tells us; neither any more hard, we may well say, then them
of this Shire; whereof one in the South, and three miles from Breknock, is of
such height and operation, as is incredible: and were it not that I have
witness to affirm what I shall speak, I should blush to let the report
thereof pass from my pen: In my perambulations in these parts, remaining in
Breknock to observe the site of that Town, the Aldermen or chief Seniors
thereof regarding my pains, with friendly and courteous entertainments at my
departure, no less then eight of them, that had been Bailiffes of the Town,
came to visit me; where they reported upon their credit and trials, that from
the top of that hill, in the Welsh called Mounch-denny, or Cadier Arthur, they
had oftentimes cast from them, and down the North-East Rock, their Cloakes,
Hats, and Staves, which notwithstanding would never fall, but were with the
air and wind still returned back, and blown up: neither, said they, will
any thing descend from that Cliffe being so cast, unless it be stone or some
metalline substance: affirming the cause to be the Clouds, which are seen to
rack much lower then the top of that Hill. As strange tales are told of the
Mere Llynsauathan, two miles by East from Breknock, which at the breaking of
her frozen I^e, makes a fearful sound like unto thunder. In which place, as
is reported, sometimes stood afaire City, which was swallowed up in an
Earthquake, and resigned her stone-wals unto this deep and (...) water:
whither unto this day leads all the ways in this Shire: which, as le^^^ed
Cambdin^ ^^ctureth, might be that Louentrium, which Ptolemy in this tract
places; and the most confirmed (...) name adjoining, being also called
Leuenny, which River also passes through this (...) the same stream, and no
greater then wherewith she first entered in.

(5) The Towns for Commerce, are Hay, Bealt, and Breknock, two of them
unfortunate of their former greatness, whom wars and sedition have defaced
a^ least down. Hay upon Wye and Dulas, pleasant for situation, in the
rebellion of Owen Glendower^ (...) was diswalled, depopulated, and burnt, in
whose foundations for new repaires, many Roman Coins have been found; and
thereby thought to be the seat of their Legions: and Buelth, now Bealt, though
of good frequencie, yet not so great as when Ptolemie observed her position for
graduation, who calls it Buleum Silurum, neither when it with the Country was
possessed by Aurelius Ambrosius, by whose permission Pascentius the son of
Vortiger ruled all, as Ninius writes; nor yet as of later times, when Leolin
the last Prince of the Britains, was therein betrayed and slain.

(6) Breknock the Shire-Towne, for buildings and beauty retains a better
regard, whose walls in Ouall-wise are both strong and of good repair, having
three Gates for entrance, with ten Towers for defense, and is in circuit six
hundred and fortiepaces about, upon whose west part a most sumptuous and
stately Castle is seated, the like whereof is not commonly seen, whose decays
approaching do increase her ruins daily, and in the end is feared will be her
fall* This Town is seated upon the meeting of two Rivers, Houthy and Vske,
whose yearly government is committed to two Bailiffes, fifteen Aldermen, two
Chamberlaines, two Constables a Towne-Clerke, and two Sergeants their
Attendants: having the Poles elevation in 52* 21. minutes of Latitude, and for
Longitude is placed in the 16. and 32. minutes, as the Mathematicians do
measure them.

(7) This Shire is strengthened with ^ine Castles, divided into six Hundreds,
wherein are seated three Market-Townes, and fifty (...) Parish-Churches.

CARDIGAN-SHIRE. CHAPTER V.
CARDIGAN-SHIRE, (in the Welsh called Sire Aber-Tiui) is parted on the North
from Merioneth-shire with the River Doui; by the Plinillimon hills from
Montgomery-shire in part of her East; and the rest from Breknock-shire, with
the water Towy; and with Tyuy altogether on the South from Caermarden-shire:
the West is wholly washed with the Irish Sea.

(2) The form thereof is horne-like, bowing compass, long and narrow, and
growing wider still toward the North: so that from Cardigan, the Shire-Towne
and uttermost point: in the South, unto the River Doui, her farthest North
bounder, are thirty two miles: and from the head of Carwen in the East, to
Aberysthwyth on her West, the broadest part in the Shire, are only fifteen:
the whole in circumference is one hundred and three miles.

(3) The Air is open and somewhat piercing; the soil is hilly, and
(Wales-like) uneven: yet more plain and champion toward the Sea, then in the
East or North of the Land. For besides that great and high hill called
Plinil^^on, a continual range of lesser does shoot along, yielding in their
valleys both goodly rich Pastures, and very large Pooles, which being assisted
with Springs from the Rocks, do branch themselves, as veins in the bod^
(...) make fruitful their passages unto the Sea. In Tyuy one of these, as
Giraldus (...) Beauer has been found, a creature living both by land and
water, whose stones the (...) in great price. His fore-feete are like unto a
dog, but the hinder whole skin, as is the (...) the dogge-like serve him on
shore for to run; and the Goose-like as Oraes give him swift (...) in swimming:
this tail broad and gristly, he uses as a stern, wherewith on the sudden
(...) divert his swift floating course. But this creature in these parts a long
time has not been seen, whose room we may well say the Salmon has
possessed, who still coveting into fresh water Rivers, at their downright
falls uses this policy: He bends himself backward, and takes his tail
in his mouth, and with all his strength unloosing his circle on the sudden (as
a lath let go) mounteth up before the fall of the stream; whereupon such
water-falles are called the Salmons leap: and in these Rivers many such
Salmons are caught.

(4) The commodities of this Shire chiefly consist in Cattle, Sea-sowle, and
Fish; Corn sufficient, but of Woods some scarcity: and at the head of Istwyd
are certain veins of Lead, a merchandise of no mean regard or wealth.

(5) The ancient people that possessed this Province, were the Dimetae, by
Ptolemie branched through the Tracts of Caermarden, Penbrooke, and this Shire;
who in their struglings against the Romans, did not a little rely upon
Caractacus their most warlike King, (from whose name, though unlikely, some
will have the Shire called Cardigan) yet lastly felt the fortune of subjection
with the rest, when Julius Frontinus warred with these Mountains. Scarce had
the Normans settled their Kingdom in Britain, but that they assailed this
County, as well to enjoy so far a Possession, as to secure those Seas from
any invasion against them: so that Rufus first wrested from the Welshmen the
maritime Coasts, and Henry the first gave the whole County to Gilbert de (...).

(6) This Gi^bert fortified (...) the Shire-Towne, with a Wall and strong
Castle, whose aged lineaments do to this day (...) industry both of nature and
Art: for the Town is seated upon a steep bank, her South (...) guarded with
the deep River Tyny, and passable no way but by a bridge under the Castle.
They (...) takes the advantage of the rising rocks, and circulate the Town
even round about. The Castle is ^^^gher built upon a Rock, both spacious and
fair, had not storms impaired her beauty, and time (...) her carcass a very
Anatomy. The walls range as thou see, and are indifferent for repair,
having three ways for entrance, and contain in compass six hundred and
fourscore pases: whose position for Latitude is set in the degree 52. 33
minutes from the North Pole, and for Longitude from the first West-point by
Mercator, in the degree 15. and 10. minutes.

(7) This Shire, as it is little in circuit, so accordingly is besprinkled with
Towne-ships, whereof four only have the trade of Markets: neither find I
other remembrance of religious foundations, but at Cardigan, Istradfleet, and
at Llan-Badern-Vaur, where sometimes was seated an Episcopal See, which (as
Houeden writes) was decayed many years since, when the people had wickedly
slain their Pastor. And yet Llan-Deui-breui, built, and so called in memory
of the most famous David Bishop of Meneura, was in great esteem, where in a
frequent Synod there holden, he refuted the Pelagian Heresy, sprung up again
in Britain, both by the authority of holy Scripture, and also by miracle, as
is reported, while the earth whereon he stood and preached, rose up unto a
certain height under his feet*

(8) The Shires division, for businesses belonging either to the Crown or
Commonwealth, is into five Hundreds, wherein are seated for (...), and sixty
four Parish-Churches for Gods divine and daily service.

CAERMARDEN-SHIRE. CHAPTER VI.
CAERMARDEN-SHIRE, so called from the chief Town Caermarden, lies bordered
upon the North with Cardigan-shire; upon her East, by Brecknock and
Glamorgan-shires; upon the South, with a Bay of the British Seas; and upon the
West with Pembroke-shire.

(2) The form of this County is long, and shoots it self from the
South-west into the North and by-East, betwixt whose furthest bounds are
thirty five English miles, and in her broadest part twenty miles; the whole
in circumferance about one hundred and two miles.

(3) This Shire is not altogether so pestred with hills as her bordering
neighbors are: and those that she has, neither so high nor so thick, and
therefore is better for Corn and Pasturage, yea and in Woods also, so that for
victuals this County is very well stored, which the stomach does as well
digest, the air being wholesome, temperate, and pleasing*

(4) Anciently these parts were possessed by the Di^^^tree, as Ptolemie,
Gildas, and Ninius do name them: though Pliny holds opinion that they were
part of the Silures, with whom no doubt they were subdued to the Romans yoke by
(...), when he struggled with the rockie hills in those Southern parts And this
County is (...) by Writers to be the very strength of South Wales. In the West
thereof, at Kilman^^ (as it (...) seem) their Legions kept, where lately an
earthen Po^ hoarded with store of (...) Coins, was by the spade dug up,
being stamped upon imbased silver, from the time of Co^^^odus unto the first
Tribuneship of Gordian the third, which fell in the year of Christ two hundred
^^^tie three: and amongst these were the Coins of Heluins Pertinax, Marcu^
Opellius, Antonius Di^^^menianus, Julius Verus Maximus, the son of Maximu^,
of Calius Balbinus, of Clodius Pupienus, of Aquilta Senera, the wife of
Helingaba^^, and of Sall-Barbia Orbi^na, pieces rarely found.

(5) The commodities of this Shire chiefly consist in Cattle, Pit-coale, Foul,
and Seafish, whereof the Salmon is common among them, and that of such
greatness and plenty, as no place is better furnished therewith then the
Shire-Towne Caermarden is.

(6) Which Town by Ptolemie is called Maridunum; by Antonius the Empe^our,
M^ridunum; by the Britains, Caer-fridhin; and by us, Caermarden. It is
pleasantly seated upon the South-west side of the River Touy, that runs
through the midst of this Shire, and falls South from hence into the British
Sea, where before times was a convenient Haven for Ships (...), but now is sore
pestred with Sands and Shelfes: notwithstanding some small Vessels ascend up
the River, even unto the Bridge of this Town, which is fairly built of
freestone. And over the same, upon a hanging Rock, stands a very large
Castle, from whose stone-wall another intermingled with brick rangeth about
the Town, being in circuit one thousand and four hundred pases. The
Inhabitants of this place do not a little glory of their Merlin who (at they
say) was therein borne, the son of a bad Angel, or of an Incubus spirit, the
(...) great Apollo, whom Geffrey ap Arthur would rank with the South saying
Seer, or rathe^ (...) true Prophets themselves; being none other then a mere
Seducer and fantastical Wizard. (...) howsoever Alani de Insulis in his
Commentaries has labourered to unlock those dark and hidden (...), wherewith
his book is pestred and full, yet was it not without cause forbid the reading
by (...) Council of Trent, as vain, and not worthy of countenance or credit.

At the entrance of the Normans, this Town was brought vn^^ their obedience,
and for a long time was distressed with the calamities of war, yet afterward
it is made by the English Princes the Chaucdry and Exchequer for all
South Wales: and at this day is yearly governed by a Mayor, who ever after is
an Alderman and Justice of the Peace, two Sheriffs elected out of sixteen
Burgesses, all of them in skarlet, a Sword Bearer, a Towne-Clerke, and two
Sergeants with Maces: from whence the Pole is raised 52. degrees 15. minutes in
Latitude, and for Longitude is in the degree 15. and 30. minutes from the first
point in the West, according to Mercator.

(7) East from this place are the ruins of Carreg-Castle, which stood mounted
on a high hill, under the which many vaults and spacious Caves far into the
ground are seen, wherein is thought the people unable to fight, were therein
secured in time of their Wars. Where also is a Well (take the report from
Giraldus, who writes it) that in this place twice in four and twenty hours
ebbing, and twice flowing, resembles the unstable motions of the maine Sea.

(8) This Shire is watered with twenty eight Rivers and Riuerets of name,
strengthened with ten Castles, traded in six Market-Townes, divided into six
Hundreds, wherein are seated fourscore and seven Parish-Churches.

GLAMORGAN-SHIRE. CHAPTER VII.
GLAMORGAN-SHIRE, as some think, named from Prince Morgan the possessor
thereof, or according to others, is taken from Morgan an Abbey, founded by
William Earl of Gloucester, upon the Sea-shoare in the South of this Shire,
lies bounded upon that part altogether with the British Sea; the West by
Loghor, is parted from Caermarden-shire; the North butteth upon the County of
Brekn^ck; and the East by Remney is divided from Monmouth.

(2) The form of this Shire grows still wider from her West-point, spreaking
her broadest touch in the East, betwixt which extremes I find by measure to
be well-neere forty English miles, and from North to South, not altogether
twenty miles: the whole in circumference, about one hundred and twelve miles.

(3) The air is temperate, and gives mo^^^ntent to the mind, then the soil
does fruit or ease unto Travelers. The hills being high and (...), which from
the North notwithstanding are lessened as it were by degrees; and toward (...)
Seacoasts, the Country becomes somewhat plain, which part is the best both
for plentie^^ Grain, and populous of Inhabitants. The rest all Mountain, is
replenished with (...) which is the best means unto wealth that this Shire
does afford; upon whose Hills you may ^^hold whole Herds of them feeding; and
from whose Rocks, most clear springing waters (...) the valleys trickling,
which sportingly do pass with a most pleasant sound, and did not a little
(...) my wearied spirits among those vast Mountains, employed in their search:
whose infancy at first admitted an easy step over; but grown unto strength,
more boldly forbade me such passage, and with a more stern countenance held on
their journey unto the British Seas: and Taue among these is accounted for a
chief.

(4) Upon whose fall, and East-banke, the fairest Town of all South Wales is
seated the (...) Caerdid, the English Caerdiffe, which Fitz-Haimon fortified
with a Wall and Castle, in the reign of King Rufus, when he and his Norman
Knights had overcome Rhese the Prince of these parts, and thrust out Iestine
from his lawful possession. This Town he made his own Seat and Court of
Justice, enioyning his Consorts to give aid to this honor, and to hold their
portions in vassallage of him. Strong was the Castle, as by the trust therein
reposed may well appear, where the youngest brother Beautlark kept captive the
eldest Curthose, both of them sons to the Conqueror, the space of twenty
six years. This Castle is large, and in good repair, whence the Towne-wall
went both South and East to the Rivers side, through which, four Gates enter
into the four winds, and contain in compass nine hundred and twenty pases;
and along the River (a sure defense) upon her West side, three hundred more; so
that the Town contains in circuit twelve hundred and fourscore pases. But
as the Taue is a friend to the Town, in making a Key for arriuage of shipping;
so is she a foe to S. Mary's Church in the South, with undermining her
foundations, and threatening her fall. The Town is governed by a Mayor, yearly
elected out of twelve Aldermen, assisted with other twelve Burgesses, a
Towne-Clerke, four C^^stables, and two Sergeants with Maces: whose site is
observed from the North-Starre to lie in the degree of Latitude, 51. and 49.
scruples; and from the first point in the West, 16. and 53 scrup^^^.

(5) In the same graduation almost is sited the ^itie Landaf, wherein is a
Castle and Cathedral Church, dedicated to S. Telean, Bishop of the same,
without any other memorable matter worthy the speaking of.

(6) But things of strange note are these, by the report of ^^aldus, who
affirms that in a Rock or Cliffe upon the Sea side, and Island Barry, lying
near the South-^^st point of this County, is beard out of a little Chinke (let
him take heed what he says) the noise as it (...) of Smiths at their work;
one whiles the blowing of Bellows to increase the heat, then the strokes of
the Hammer, and sound of the (...); sometimes the noise of the Grind-stone in
grinding of Iron tools; then the hissing sparks of Steele-gads, as they fly
from their beating, with the puffing noise of flames in a Furnace. And whether
this is the place whereof Clemens Alexandrinus speaks, I determine not; where
in his writings he has these words: They that have recorded Histories (says
he) do say that in the I Will of Britain, there is a certain Hole or Ca^e under
the bottom of an Hill, and on the top thereof a gaping Chinke, into the which
when the wind is gathered, and tossed to and from in the womb or concauitie
thereof, there is heard above, a sound of Cymbals: for the wind being driven
back from his hole, is forced to make a loud sound at her vent.

(7) More Westward from hence, upon the River Ogmore, and near unto Newton, in
a sandy plain about an hundred pases from Seuerne, there springs a Well,
though not of the clearest water, where at the flowing and fullness of the Sea,
can hardly any water be gotten; but at the ebb and fall of tide it walloweth
up amain. The cause may be, as Polybius reports of the like at Cadys; Wherein
the windy air, when it is deprived of his wonted issues, forcibly returns,
shutting and stopping up the passages and veins of the Spring, whereby (...)
waters are kept in. But contrariwise, when the surface thereof is void and
empty of water, the vein^^ of the Source or Spring are unstopped and set free,
which then boileth up in great abundance.

(8) And upon the same shore more (...) and by West, on the top of a hill
called Minyd-Margan, is erected a Monument inscribed wit^^ strange Character,
and as strange a conceit held thereof by the by-dwellers, whose opinions are
possessed, that if any man read the same, he shall shortly after die.

This Shire, as it is the furthest (...) of South Wales, and lay open to
foreign invasion; so was is fortified with twentie-fiue strong. Castles,
whereof times and storms have devoured the most: such were Barry, Saint
Doneitis, Den^^^owis, Morlashe, Menes^e, Logho^, Llanddeny, Llanquian, Oxwich,
Oystermouth, Ognior, Pile, Porkery, Pe^^arth, Winston, Newcastle, Caerfly,
Coche, Peullys, (...), Kenfeage, Talla^^^, Treer and Cothy.

Neither was the County so ill seated for sufficiency of life, or barren of
grain, but that therein were planted places for divine piety: such were
Neath, Margan, and Caerdif, besides the Episcopal See of Landa^: which last
still remains; the other three suppressed among the fall of their like, under
King Henry the eight.

This Shire is divided into ten Hundreds, wherein are seated ssixe
Market-Townes, and one hundred and eighteen Parish-Churches.

MONMOVTH-SHIRE. CHAPTER VIII.
MONMOVTH-SHIRE, from Monmouth Town, and that from Mounowe-water bearing name,
is altogether enclosed on the North, and is separated from Hereford-shire with
the same River, upon the East both it and Wye diuides this County from
Gloucestershire. The South Side wholly is washed by the Seuerne Sea; and some
of her West part by Rempney is parted from Glamorgan, and the rest lies
bordered upon by Breknock-shire.

(2) The form thereof is Scallop-wise, both long and broad, shooting her North
point to Llantony, and her South to the fall of Rempney, betwixt which two are
twenty four English miles: and from Chepstowe East, to Blanagwent West, are
not altogether nineteen miles: the whole in circuit draws somewhat near to
seauentie seven miles.

(3) The Air is temperate, healthful an^ (...), the soil is hilly, woody
and rich, all places fruitful, but no place barren. The Hills are (...) upon by
Cattle and Sheep, the Valleys are laden with Corn and Grass, never
ungrateful of (...) bandmans pains, nor makes frustrate his hope of expected
increase; whose springs abundantly ^sing in this County with many streams,
do fatten the soil even from side to side.

(4) Anciently the Sil^^es inhabited this Shire, whose chief City by the
Emperor Antonine is named Venta Silarum, by the Welsh Caer-went, and was by
Tath^ the British Saint, made an Academi^, and a divine place for worship. So
like wise Caer-lion now, once Isca, was, where the second Roman Legion called
Augusta lay, as by their Coins, Altars, Tables, and Inscriptions there found,
and daily therein dug up, does evidently appear.

By the report of Giraldus, in this City was the Court of great Arthur,
whither the Roman Ambassadors resorted unto him, and as Alexander Elsebinsis
writes, therein was a School of two hundred Philosophers, skillful in
Astronomy and other Arts. Which is the more credible, for that A^phibalus, S.
Albans instructor, was therein borne, and Julius and Aaron, two noble
Proto-Martyrs of great Britain, in this Citiereceiued the Crown of
Martyrdom, where their bodies were also interred. But as all things find
their fatal period, so this City for beauty, circuit, and magnificall
respect is laid in the ruins of her own decay; neither may any more lament
the loss of glory then Munmouths Castle, which captiue-like does yield to
conquering Time. Her downe-cast stones from those lostie turrets, do show what
beauty once it bare, standing mounted round in compass, and within her walls
another mount, whereon a Tower of great height and strength is built, which was
the birthplace of our Conquering Henry, the great Triumpher over France, but
now decayed, and from a Princely Castle, is become no better then a regardlesse
Cottage. In this Town a beautiful Church built with three Isles is remaining,
and at the East end a most curiously built (but now decayed) Church stands,
called the Monks-(...) In the Monastery whereof, our great Antiquarie Geffrey,
surnamed Munmouth, and Ap (...) his History of Great Britaine^ whose pains as
they were both learned and great, so (...) bred great pains among the learned
both to defend and to disprove. The Towns situation is pleasant and good,
seated betwixt the Rivers Monnowe and Wye: three Gates yet stand, besides that
Tower or Lock of the Bridge, and a Trench or tract of wall running betwixt the
^on each side down to the River, containing in circuit about eight hundred
paces. The Town is (...) good repair, and well frequented, governed by a
Mayor, two Bailiffes, fifteen Common Councellers, a Towne-Clerke, and two
Sergeants for their Attendance. It is in Latitude removed from the Equator 52.
degrees and 8. minutes, and from the West point of Longitude is set in the
degree 17. 36. minutes.

Religious Houses erected and suppressed in this Shire, for greatest account
have been in C^^on, Chepstow, Gold-cliffe, Munmouth and Llantony; which last
stood so solitary, and among hills, that the Sun was not seen to shine there,
but only betwixt the hours of one and three.

This Shire is strengthened with fourteen Castles, traded with six
Market-Townes, divided into six Hundreds, wherein are situated one hundred
twenty and seven Parish-Churches, and is not accounted among the
Welsh-shires, being subdued by Henry the second, who passing the Naut
Pen-carne, a small Brook and of no danger, yet held fatal by the Welsh, over
credulous to a Prophecy of Merlin Siluester the British Apollo, who had
foreshewed that when a-stout and frecled faced King (such as Henry was) should
pass over that Ford, then the power of the Welshmen should be brought under;
whereby their stout courage was soon abated, and the whole County the sooner
in subjection to the English.

MOVNTGOMERY-SHIRE CHAPTER IX.
MOVNTGOMERY-SHIRE, in the British speech called (...), and that of the
principal Town Mountgomery, lies bounded upon the North with Denbigh-shire,
upon the East with Shrop-shire, on the South with Ra^^or and Cardigan-shires,
and on the West with Merioneth-shire.

(2) In form it somewhat resembles a Pear or Pineapple, as it were growing
out of the West, and rising thence with many high Hills and plentiful Spring^
which water and make fruitful the Soil query where* whose searching rilles
with a longing desire haste ever forward to find an increase, and to (...)
their growth into a bigger body whereof the S^uerne is the chief and the
second River in the Land: whose head rising from the spired mountain
Plymillimon, runs not far without the receipts of other riuer^^^ into her
stream, and with many wings does spore her self through all the East part of
this Shire.

(3) That this River took her name from (...), the beautiful (...) daughter
of (...) begotten out of wedlock upon Estrildi^ the daughter of (...) the (...)
King, ^^^rinuaded this Land, and both of them drowned in this River by
Guen^^lena King (...) ^^^uiuing widow: let (...) relate, and Poets enlarge,
whereof one among them in good account, thus writes: -- In (...) pracipitatur
Abren,
Nomen Abren (...) de Virgin, (...)
^
Into this stream fair Abren headlong cast,
Gave name of Abren to those waters wast,
Corruptly called Sabrina now at last.


(4) This River makes the East part of this Shire for fruitfulness to be
compared with most of the Land, and to exceed any other Shire in Wales: the
West side is more hilly and less inhabited, yet surely those mountains breed
innumerable of Cattle, especially of horses, whose portraiture for making and
incomparable swiftness, Giraldus Cambrensis Archdeacon of Breknocke does
greatly commend.

(5) The ancient Inhabitants that were seated in Gwineth and Powisland, whereof
this Shire was a part, were to the Romans known by the name of ORDOVICES, a
puissant and courageous Nation, whose hearts and hills held them the longest
free from the yoke of subjection, either of the Romans or English. for unto the
days of Domitian, they kept plea with the Romans, (...) were not brought to
the will of the English before the reign of King Edward the first. Those
ORDOVICES inhabited the Counties of Mountgomery, Merioneth, Caer^^^, Denbigh,
and Fl^t, which are of us called now North Wales, a people generous and of
affable^^ (...), goodly for feature, fair of complexion, courageous of mind,
courteous to strangers, and that which is most commendable, most true and
loyal to the English Crown.

Towns for Trades and commerce in this County are fix the chiefest thereof
and Shire-Towne is Mountgomery, very wholesome for air, and pleasant for
situation, upon an easy ascent of an hill, and upon another far higher
mounted, stands a fair and well-repaired Castle, from the East Rock whereof,
the Town has been walled, as by some part yet standing, and the tract and
trench of the rest even unto the North-side of the said Castle, may evidently
be seen: whose graduation for Latitude is placed in the degree 53. and for
Longitude 17. the lines cutting each other in the site of this Town.

This Town has lately received the honor and Title of an Earldom, whereof
Philip Herbert the second son of Henry Earl of Pembroke, was created the
first, in Anno 1605. And the Shire divided into seven Hundreds, wherein are
seated six Market-Townes, and forty seven Parish-Churches.

MERIONETH-SHIRE. CHAPTER X.
MERIONETH-SHIRE, which the Britains call Sira-Verieneth, and in Latin
Mer^inia; is bordered upon the North by Carnar^^on and Denbigh-shires, upon the
East with Mongomery, upon the South by the River Dowy, is parted from
Cardigan-shire, and the West side altogether washed with the Irish Seas, whose
rage with such vehemence beats against her banks, that it is thought and
said, some quantity of the Land has been swallowed up by those Seas.

(2) In form this Shire somewhat resembles a Welsh-Harpe, though small is the
Music that to her Inhabitants she makes, being the roughest, and most
unpleasant to see to (as Giraldus their own Historian writes) in all Wales.
The air for great pleasure, nor soil for great profit, I cannot greatly
commend, unless it be for the many and mighty great winds, that for the most
part therein do rage, and the spired hills clustered together so near and so
high, as the same Author affirms, that Shepherds upon their tops falling at
odds in the morning and challenging the field for fight, before they can come
together to try out the quarrel, the day will be spent, and the heat of their
fury shut up with their sleep,

(3) These mountains formerly did abound with Wolves, for whose auoydeance
Hdgar the peaceable, did impose (as Malmesbury writes) a yearly Tribute of
three hundred Wolves, upon Ludwall Prince of that Country, whereby in three
years space they were quite destroyed: and now their faces are covered with
fruitful flocks of Sheep, besides Neat and other Cattle that therein
abundantly do grase, wherein the only riches of this Shire does consist: for
by reason of the unevenness of the soil and rocks so noere the face of the
earth, the Plough cannot be (...) Corn prosper, which some have imputed to the
idleness of the Inhabitants, wherein they have been greatly wronged.

(4) These people are a part of the Ordonices, of whom we have spoken, who by
the advantage of these mountains held out with the longest against the
Romans, and their necks not brought under the yoke of bondage, before the
days of King Edward the first; since when they have attempted to east off
their subjection to the English, upon whose stirs raised by Owin Glendouer,
who having been a favorite of King Richard the second, and discontented by
King Henry the fourth, in a quarrel with the Lord Gray of Ruthin, that
intruded upon his demaines, quarrelled with the King, and entered into open
rebellion and confederacy with all other his rebels, drawing the Welsh-men
wholly to his side, in hope to have had Princes restored of their own blood:
and he maintained the same with wonderful pride, policy, and obstinacy for a
long time, until his consederates followers and fauorates, and his own
courage, credit, and maintenance, were brought so low by that powerful King,
that in the end he perished for very want of food.

(5) Their Towns are not many, neither those that they have of any stately
buildings, whereof Bala, ^olgethe, and Harlech are the Marke^^: (...) in the
North-east of this County, in the Welsh (...), in English, Pi^^^le-meane, a
great poole of water does drown at least eight score Acres of ground: whose
(...) the high land floods though never so great, cannot (...) bigger by their
(...) but if the (...) be^^oubled with over great blasts and tempests of
wi^des, she in as great a rage rises and passes her banks, as if she would
encounter that enemy in fight Into the South whereof the two headed Dee with a
pretty sharp stream enters, and through the same glideth without any mixture
of the same water, as the Inhabitants believe; more strongly conceited in their
opinion for that the Salmon, usually taken in Dee, is never found in that
Poole; and the fish called Guimad, bred in that Meart, never is seen in the
River- Dee. South thence near Dolgelhr, in a lower hill, a great Rampire of
stone and compass is seen, and has been some fortification or defense in
war: which whilst we were curious to find out some instructions thereof, by
report this only we learned, that it was called Caddoryrita Dren, according to
the name of her neighbor and far higher hill.

(6) Upon the West and Seashore of this Shire, Harlech a Market and Major
Town stands, bleake enough and barren, but only for Foul and Fish; houses
not many, neither curiously built, wherein stands a little Chapel decayed
and without use, in which lies buried Sir Richard Thimblebye, an English
Knight, who for the delight he took in that game, removed his abode from a
far better soil. Here also stands a most strong and beautiful Castle,
mounted upon a hill, and with a double Bulwark walled about, commanding the
Sea, and passage of entrance of such as seek to invade the Goast: And surely a
great pity it is to see so fair a work fall to decay: the Constable whereof
by Patent is ever the Major of this Town; near unto which are two great
Inlets of Seas, which at low water may be passed upon the Sands with Guides.
Upon whose shore, as upon the Seacoasts in this County, abundance of Herrings
are caught, for which cause they are much frequented in the season of the
year, by many people from diverse Countries.

(7) This Town being the chiefest of the Shire, the Pole shall be elevated
only from thence, whose height for Latitude stands in the degree 53. 29.
minutes, and for Longitude in the 15. 47. minutes. The whole being divided into
six Hundreds, wherein are seated thirty seven Parish-Churches.

DENBIGH-SHIRE. CHAPTER XI.
DENBIGH-SHIRE, called in Welsh, Sire Denbigh, retyring more from the Sea
within the Country, on this side of the River Conwey shoots Eastward in one
place as far as to the River Dee: on the North, first the Sea (for a small
space) and then Plint-shire encompasseth it: on the West, Caernaruon and
Merioneth-shire; on the East, Cheshire and Shrop-shire; and on the South,
Mountgomery-shire*

(2) The form thereof is long, growing wider still toward the North-west, and
narrower toward the East It is in length from East to West, one and thirty
miles, and in breadth from North to South, seauenteene miles: in the whole
circuit and circumference, one hundred and fourteen miles.

(3) The air is very wholesome and pleasant, yet bleake enough, as exposed to
the winds on all sides, and the high hills, wherewith it is in many places
enuitoned, long retaining the congealed snow. The tops whereof, in the Summer
time, are the haruest-mens Almanacks, by the rising of certain vapors thereon
in the mornings, and foreshew a fair day ensuing.

(4) The soil is but barren toward the West part: yet the middle, where it
lies flat in a valley, is most fertile. The East side, when it is once past
the valley, finds Nature to be a very sparing niggard of her savors: but
next unto Dee it feels a more liberal extent of her blessings. The West part
is but here and there inhabited, and mounteth up more then the other with bare
and hungry hills: yet the leanesse of the soil (where the hills settle any
thing flatting) has been now a good while begun to be overcome by the
diligent pains and careful industry of the husbandmen; for they paring away
the upper coat of the earth into certain Turffes, with a broad kind of spade,
pile them up artificially on heaps, and fire them, so as being turned into
ashes, and thrown upon the ground so pared, they fructify the hungry
barrenness and sterilitie of soil, and make the fields bring forth a kind of
Rye or Anull-corne, in such plenty, as is hardly to be believed.

(5) The ancient Inhabitants of this Country were the Ordouices, who being
also named Orde^ices, or Ordo^icae: a puissant and courageous people, by reason
they kept wholly in a mountainous place, and took heart even of the soil it
self: for they continued longest free from the yoke both of Roman, and also of
English dominion. They were not subdued by the Romans, before the days of the
Emperor Domitian (for then Julius Agricola conquered almost the whole Nation)
nor brought under the command of the English, before the reign of King Edward
the first; but lived a long time in a lawless kind of liberty, as bearing
themselves bold upon their own magnanimity, and the strength of the Country.

(6) The Mountains of this County yield sufficiency of Neat, Sheep, and
Goats. The Valleys in most places are very plenteous of Corn, especially
Eastward on this side, betwixt the Rivers of Alen and Dee; but the more
Westerly part is heathy, and altogether barren. The heart of the Shire shows
it self beneath the hills, in a beautiful and pleasant Vale, reaching
seauenteene miles in length from South to North, and five miles, or
thereabouts, in breadth, and lies open only toward the Sea. It is environed on
every side with high hills, amongst which, the highest is Mo^llenlly, on the
top whereof is a warlike Fense with Trench and Rampire, and a little fountain
of clear water. From these hills, the River Cluyd resorts unto this Vale, and
from the very springhead (increased with beckes and brooks) does part it in
twain, running through the midst of it; whereof in ancient time it was named
Strat Cluyd: for Mariam^s makes mention of a King of the Strat Cluyd of the
Welsh: And at this day it is commonly called Diffryn Cluyd, that is, The Vale
of Cluyd.

This thing is worthy observation, as a matter memorable, both for admiration
and antiquity, that in the Parish of Llan-sanan within this Country, there is
a place compass cut out of the maine rock by man's hand, in the side of a
stony hill, wherein there be four and twenty seats to sit in, some less,
some bigger, where children and young men, coming to seek their Cattle, use
to sit, and to have their sports. And at this day they commonly call it Arthurs
round Table.

(7) Henry Lacy Earl of Lincoln, obtaining Denbigh by the grant of King
Edward the first, after the conviction and beheading of David brother of
Llewellin for high Treason, was the first that fortified it with a wall about,
not large in circuit, but very strong, and on the South Side with a fair
Castle, strengthened with many high Towers. But he gave it over, and left the
work unfinished, conceiving grief (as a sorrowful father) that his only
son came to untimely death, and was drowned in the Well thereof: The fame of
this Town spreads it self far for repute, as being reckoned the most
beautiful place in all North Wales: and it is of no less report, for the
Castle adiunct unto it is impregnable for fortification. And this strange
accident happning there in the year 1575* deserves not to be omitted, being
left as a continual remembrance of Gods merciful providence and preservation
at that time: that whereby reason of great Earthquakes, many people were put
into great fear, and had much harm done unto them both within and without
their ho^ses, in the Cities of York, Worcester, Gloucester, Bristow, Hertford,
and in other Countries adjacent, yet in the Shire-hall of Denbigh the bell was
caused to toll twice, by the shaking of the earth, and no hurt or hindrance at
all either done or received. The government of this Town is managed by two
Aldermen, and two Bailiffes, who are yearly elected out of twenty five
burgestes, that are their assistants. It has one Recorder, one Towne-Clerke,
and two Sergeants at Mace: and by observation of the Mathematickes, the Pole is
elevated in the degree of Latitude 53. and 49. scruples, and from the first
point in Longitude 16. and 45.

(8) This County, with them of Flint and Car^ar^on-shires, are not divided by
pricks into their several Hundreds, according to the rest of this work, the
want of their particulars in the Parliament Rowles so causing it, which for the
good of these three Shires, I earnestly sought to have supplied from the Nomina
Villarum, in their Sheriffs books, and had promise of them that might easily
have procured the same. But whether a fearelesse jealousy possessed their
spirits, left the riches of these Shires, by revealing such particulars, should
be further sought into, I cannot say: yet this I have observed in all my
Survey, that where least is to be had, the greatest fears are possessed. Take
these Shires therefore to be done as I could, and not as I would, that wish
both the wealth of them all, and their esteem to be of better regard by those
that may do them good.

(9) This Shire then is divided into twelve Hundreds, for the readier ordering
of businesses necessary to the State of the Country; wherein are placed three
Market-Townes, fit for buying and selling, and other negotiations. It has five
Castles to defend her self, and to offend her enemies, and fifty seven
Parishes for Gods divine service and worship.

FLINT-SHIRE. CHAPTER XII.
FLINT-SHIRE, stretching out in length, broad at one end, and narrow at
another, is not much unlike in fashion to a wedge, a piece of which is cut off
by the meeting of Cheshire and Denbigh-shire, South-East in distance some four
miles. It borders Eastward with part of Cheshire, from whence it is guarded in
length with the River Dee unto the North, which parts Worrall and
Flint-shire, till you come to a little Island called Hel^bree. Northward it is
bounded with the Virgiuian Sea: on the West, a little River, called Cluyd,
parts her and Denbigh-shire asunder: and on the South altogether by
Shrop-shire*

(2) This Country is nothing mountainous, as other parts of Wales are, but
rising gently all along the River of Dee, makes a fair show and prospect of
her self to every eye that beholds her, as well upon the River, being in most
places thereabouts four or five miles broad, as upon the other side thereof,
being a part of Cheshire.

(3) The Air is healthful and temperate, without any foggie clouds or fennie
vapors, saving that sometimes there arises from the Sea, and the River Dee,
certain thick and smoky-seeming mists, which nevertheless are not found
hurtful to the Inhabitants, who in this part live long and healthfully.

(4) The Clime is somewhat colder there then in Cheshire, by reason of the Sea,
and the River that engirts the better part of her; by which, the Northern
winds being long carried upon the waters, blow the more cold; and that side of
the Country upward, that lies shoaring unto the top, having neither shelter
nor defense, receives them in their full power, and is naturally a Bulwark
from their violence unto her bordering neighbors, that makes the snow to lie
much longer there then on the other side of the River.

(5) The Soil brings forth plenty both of Corn and Grass, as also great
store of Cattle, but they be little. To supply which defect, they have more by
much in their numbers then in other places where they be bigger. Great store of
Fish they take in the River of Dee, but little from the Sea, by reason they
have no Havens or Creekes for boats. No great store of woods either there or in
any other part of Wales are found, it having been a general plague unto all
the Country ever since the headstrong rebellions of their Princes and great
men against the Kings of England, that (in time) took away the principal
helps of their Innouations, by cutting down their woods, whereof in this
Shire there has heretofore been great plenty. Fruits are scarce, but milk,
butter, and cheese plenty, as also store of honey, of the which they make a
pleasant wine, in color like (in taste not much unlike) unto Muskadine, which
they call Mathegli^. Yea, and in the days of Giraldus Cambrensis, near the
place now called Holy-well, was a rich Mine of Silver, in seeking after which,
men pierced and pried into the very bowels of the earth.

(6) The ancient Inhabitants of this Country were the Ordouices, a sturdie
people against the Romans, but now most kind and gentle toward the English,
and indeed make much of all strangers, except they be crossed, and then they
are the contrary.

(7) Places of defense are the Castles of Flint, Hawarden, vulgarly Harden,
Treer, Rudland, Mold, Yowley, and Hope: of which, Flint and Harden are the two
principal. The Castle of Flint, famous for the benefit it received from two
Kings, and for the refuge and relief it gave unto the third. It was founded by
Henry the second, finished by Edward the first, and long after gave harbor and
entertainment to that noble, but unfortunate Prince, Richard the second,
coming out of Ireland, being within her walls a free and absolute King, but
no sooner without, but taken prisoner by Henry Bullingbrooke, Duke of
Lancaster, losing at that time his liberty, and not long after his life. This
stands in the graduation of Latitude 53. 55. minutes, in Longitude 17.

For the Castle of Hawarden, no record remains of the first founder, but that
it was held a long time by the Stewards of the Earls of Chester. Howbeit,
their resistances did not so generally consist in the strength of their Castles
and Fortifications, as in their Mountains and Hills, which in times of danger
served as natural Bulwarks and Defenses unto them against the force of
enemies. As was that which stands in a certain strait set about with woods,
near unto the River, Alen, called Coles-hull, that is, Coles-hill, where the
English, by reason of their disordered multitude, not ranged close in good
array, lost the field, and were defeated, when King Henry the second had made
as great preparation as might be to give battle unto the Welsh, and the very
Kings Standard was forsaken by Henry of Essex, who was Standard Bearer to the
Kings of England in right of inheritance.

(8) This Country has many shallow rivers in it, but none of fame and note,
but Dee and Cluyde. Howbeit, there is a Spring not far from Rudland Castle,
of great report and antiquity, which is termed Fons Sacer, in English,
Holy-Well, and is also commonly called S. Winefrids Well; of whom antiquity
thus reports: That Winefrid a Christian Virgin, very fair and virtuous, was
doated upon by a young lustful Prince or Lord of the Country, who not long
able to rule his headstrong affections, having many times in vain attempted
and tried her chastity both by rich gifts and large promises, could not by any
means obtain his desires; he therefore (in a place of advantage) suddenly
surprised and ravished her weak (yet resisting) body. After the deed done, the
cruel Tyrant, to stop her cries and acclamations, slew her, and cut off her
head: out of which place did suddenly arise a Spring that continues to this
day, carrying from the Fountain such a forcible stream and current, as the
like is not found in Christendom. Over the head of the Spring there is built a
Chapel of free stone, with Pillars curiously wrought and engraued, in the
Chancell whereof, and glass window, the picture of the Virgin is drawn,
together with the memorial of her life and death. To this Fountain Pilgrims
are accustomed to repair in their zealous, but blind devotion; and diverse
others resort to bathe in, holding firmly that the water is of much virtue.

There be many red stones in the bottom of this Well, and much green moss
growing upon the sides: the superstition of the people holding that those red
spots in the stones were drops of the Ladies blood, which all the water in the
Spring can never wash away; and that the moss about the wall was her hair,
which though some of it be given to every stranger that comes, yet it never
wastes. But howsoever this be carried for truth by the tradition of time, the
moss it self smells exceeding sweet.

There is also hard by Kilken (a small village) within this County, a little
Well of no great note, that at certain times rises and falls, after the
manner of Sea-tydes.

(9) In the South part of this Country, divided from the rest, is a place (in
some written Coppies of Antonine, called Bouium) which we now term Banchor,
first a City, and afterward a Monastery of famous memory, and the first that
is read of in the world: wherein (as Beda says) were a great number of Monks,
and them divided into seven Companies, every one having his several Ruler
assigned. None of these Companies had less then three hundred persons devoted
to prayer, and to get living by their own labor, for themselves and the
poor: although it has long since been utterly ruinate, so as now there is
scarce seen the face and outward show of a dead City or Monastery. It has
only the names of two Gates remaining, one standing a mile distant from
another, and betwixt which the River Dee now runs, where are often times
found many pieces of Roman Coin, and other tokens of antiquity. But of these
shall be more mention made in the following History.

Another like Monastry, but of lesser account, stood in the Vale beneath Varis
(a little City placed the Romans in the confines of this Shire and
Deabigh-shire) and upon the Rank of Elwy and Cluyd: This the Britains call
(...), of the River, the Englishmen, Asuph, of the Founder; and the
Historiographers, Asphensis. It is more famous for antiquity, then for
building o^ bravery: for about the year 560 Kentigein Bishop of Glas^, being
fled (...) out of Scotland, placed here a Bishops See, and erected a Monastry,
gathering together 66^. in a religious brotherhood, whereof 300. that were
unlearned, gave themselves to husbandry, and to work within the Monastery;
the rest to prayer and meditations. When he returned into Scotland, he ordained
Asaph, a godly and upright man, to be gouernous over this Monastery, of whom it
took the name, and is called Saint Asaphs.

Another Monastry of great account was at Basingwarke in this County, near
unto which began that admirable Ditch drawn thence unto the mouth of (...) by
King Offa, the Tract whereof I have expressed through this Shire, and will
further speak thereof in the following History.

(10) This Shire is divided into five Hundreds, fortified with seven Castles,
has only one Market-Towne, and twenty eight Parishes, in which there is a
continual celebration of divine Service.

ANGLESEY. CHAPTER XIII.
ANGLESEY was in the time of the Romans called Mona, by the Britains Mon, and
Tir-Mon, (that is) the Land of Mon, of the ancient English-Saxons Moneg: And at
last, after the Englishmen had by their sharp and several assaults brought it
under their rules, and became Lords thereof, it was termed Anglesey, as one
would say, The Englishmens Island.

(2) For, an Island it is, albeit it be severed from the Continent of Britain,
but with a small and narrow straight of the river Menai, and on all other parts
beaten upon with the surging and troublous Irish Sea, in which it lies
somewhat square-wise, not much different in length and breadth; being, where it
reaches out in length, from Beau-marish Eastward, to the utmost Promontory
Westward, which we call Holy-head, twenty miles; and in breadth from
Llanbaderik Northward, to the point of Menai Southward, seauenteene miles;
the whole circuit or circumference amounting toward seauentie miles.

(3) The air is reasonable grateful and healthful, and not generally subject
to diseases, excepting certain Agues at some times, which are occasioned by
the sogs and misty exhalations, which arise from the Sea called Mare Virginium,
with the which this I Will is encompassed.

(4) The Commodities that commend (or rather beautify) this Country, are in
Corn and Cattle, wherewith it not only enricheth it self exceedingly, but
sends out great provision thereof to others to supply their defects, and
although the ground may seem dry and stony, or unpleasant and nothing sightly,
wherein for the outward quality it resembles some other parts of Wales, that
are not so fruitful, yet for the inward bounties of nature, it is far
unlike: for above all the Coasts of Wales it is most plentiful of Wheat,
insomuch as by Giraldus Cambrensis report, they are wont to say in Welsh, by
way of a Proverb, Mon Mam Combry, which is to say, Mon is the mother of Wales;
for that when other Countries harvest fails round about, or their provision is
exhaust and drawn dry, this alone, like a provident and full-brested mother,
is able to sustain the rest Whereunto Nature most prouidently has added
another benefit serviceable and necessary to the former, in that the Country
produces also those kind of stones which are called Mol^res, is of all other
fittest to make Millstones or Grind-stones. In some places also it yields an
earth of Alumino^^ quality, out of which some not long since began to make
Alom and Coperose, who (like vnflesht Soldiers) gave over their enterprise
without further hope, because at first they saw it not answer their
ouer-hastie expectations.

(5) The ancient Inhabitants of this Country were the Ord^^ices, mentioned
before in the precedent Provinces of Denbigh-shire, Flint-shire, and
Carnaruon-shire. And this very Island was that ancient, and so much enobled
seat of the British Druyds, who so amated the Army of Roman inuaders, as
Tacitus reports, and as elsewhere we have related in the sixth Book and
seventh Chapter of our ensuing History.

(6) This Nation was attempted first by Pa^linus Suetonius in the reign of
Nero, but brought under the Roman Empire by Julius Agricola. When the Empire
of the Romans in Britain began to decline and go downward, some out of
Ireland entered into this Isle by stealth, and nestled themselves there, as may
be gathered by certain mounts of earth entrenched about, and yet to be seen,
which they call the I^^sh men's Cottages: as also by a place named of the
Irish-men, in Hieriey Gwidid, who did there (as is recorded) put the Britains
to flight, under the leading of Sinigus. The Norwegians also were often
infestuous to this Island; but King Ethelreds Fleet, having in the year 1000.
scowred the Seas round about this Isle, far exceeded all both Irish and
Norwegian depopulations, for they wasted the Country in all hostile manner.

(7) After this, two Hughs, both Normans, did greatly afflict this Island: The
one being Earl of Chester, the other of Shrewsbury; at which very time Magnus
the Norwegian arriving there, shot Hugh Earl of Shrewsbury through with an
Arrow, and departed after he had ransacked the Island. It was afterward
grievously infested by the Englishmen, who never gave over from time to time to
invade it, until in the reign of King Edward the first, it was wholly brought
under his subjection.

(8) The principal Town in this Isle is Beaumarish, which the said King
Edward the first built in the East side thereof, and for the fair situation,
though in a Morish place, gave it the name which it now bears, whereas in
times past it was called Bonouer; which he also fortified with a goodly Castle.

(9) The Mayor is the chiefest Magistrate of the Towno, who is yearly chosen,
and has the assistance and help of two Bailiffes, two Sergeants at Mace, and
one Towne-Clerke: by whose careful diligence the affairs of this Town are
orderly managed and commanded: whose Latitude is 54. and Longitude 15. 45.
minutes.

(10) Not far from hence is Lhaanuais, in times past a fair religious house of
the Friars Minors, which although it be now in a manner raced out of memory,
yet antiquity makes mention that it has been of great regard among the
Kings of England, who have showed themselves very bountiful Patrons unto that
Covent, both in respect of the sanctimonious life of such as conuersed there,
as also because there the bodies of very eminent persons, as the daughter of
King John, the son of a King of the Danes, as likewise of many great Lords,
Knights, and Squires, were enterred, that were slain in the wars against the
Welsh, in the time of many illustrious Kings of England.

(11) This Isle is reckoned to have had anciently many Villages in it, even to
the number of three hundred threescore and three; and the same even at this day
is very well peopled.

The division of this I Will for disposition of affairs that belong either to the
state of the Cro^^^, or to the condition of the Country, is into six Hundreds:
in which are seated two Market-Townes, and seventy four Parish-Churches for
Gods divine honor and worship.

CAERNARVON-SHIRE. CHAPTER XIIII.
CAERNARVON-SHIRE, in Welsh, Sire Caer-ar-von, so called because it is just
over against Anglesey, (which the Britains call Mon,) and in composition was
termed also Snowden-Forrest, before Wales was laid into Shires; the North-side
whereof and the West butteth upon the Irish Sea, the South Side is enclosed
with Merioneth, and the East with Denbigh-shires, from which it is severed by
the River Conwey.

(2) The form thereof is much like a wedge, long and narrow toward the South,
and growing still wider toward the North: so that from Penenkel-point
Southward, to Orms-head-point Northward, are forty miles, from the River
Conwey Eastward, to the River Llenoy Westward, miles twenty: and the whole
circumference one hundred and ten miles.

(3) The Air is sharp and piercing, by reason that the Country has not
natural provision to ensconce her self against the extremity of winds and
weather: but especially as may be thought, through the continuance of the Snow
on the hills, which also exclude the Suns aspect and warmth.

(4) The soil cannot be much commended for the fertility, except those parts
of the Seacoasts, which lie on the West toward Ireland: but for the heart of
this Shire, it is altogether mountainous, as if Nature had a purpose here, by
rearing up these craggy hills so thick together, strongly to compact the joints
of this our Island, and to frame the Inland part thereof for a fit place of
refuge to the Britains, against those times of adversity which afterward did
fall upon them; for no Army though never so strongly, or scarce any Travelers,
though never so lightly appointed, can find passage among those so many rough
and hard Rocks, so many Vales and Pooles here and there, crossing all the
ways, as ready obstacles to repel any Inroades of foreign a^^ailants. These
Mountains may not unfitly be termed the British Alps, as being the most vaste
of all Britain, and for their steepness and cragginesse not unlike to those
of Italy, all of them towering up into the Air, and round encompassing one
far higher then all the rest, peculiarly called Snowdon-Hill, though the
other likewise in the same sense, are by the Welsh termed Cralg Er^ry, as much
as Snowy Mountains, taking their name as does (by Plinies testimony) Niphates
in Armenia, and Imaus in Schithia: For all the year long these lie mantelled
over with Snow hard crusted together, though otherwise for their height they
are open and liable both to the Sun to dissolve them, and the winds to
ouer-sweepe them.

(5) The ancient Inhabitants of this Country were the Ordouices, of whom we
have sufficiently spoken in the description of the former Provinces; neither
need I insist either upon the pleasures or profits that this Country yields,
by reason of the great affinity it has both of Climate and Commodities with
Denbigh-shire and Flint-shire before mentioned But this beyond the other in
some places breeds certain Shel-fishes, which being conceived by an heavenly
dew bring forth Pearls, in ancient times (...) of then now they are.

(6) Touching places of note, that City is very ancient which the Emperor
Antonine calls Segontium, taking name of a River running by, which at this
day is called Seront: some relics of the walls whereof do yet appear, near
unto a little Church consecrated to the honor of Saint Publicius. This City
Ninius calls Caer Custenith, which some interpret the City of Constantine.
Indeed Matthew Westminster says (how true I know not) that Anno 1283. here was
found the body of Constantius (Father to great Constantine) which King Edward
the first caused to be sumptuously bestowed in the Church of the new City,
which he raised out of the ruins of the old, and is now called Ca^^naruon,
which gives name to this whole Shire. The Town it self yields a most
excellent prospect toward the Sea, and is encompassed (in a manner) round with
the walls of the Castle: so as we may say, it is a City within a Castle, which
takes up the whole West Side of it: and great pity it is, that so famous a
work should not be perpetuous, or ever become the ruin of time, which is much
feared, for the merciless underminings of the Sea, that with her daily and
forcible irruptions never cease to wash away the foundations of the Key. The
people of this Town are well approved for courte^ie, and also Civil
government, which is administered by the Constable of the Castle (who is ever
Mayor by Patent) having the assistance of one Alderman, two Bailiffes, two
Sergeants at Mace, and one Towne-Clerke. The Townsmen do not a little glory
that King Edward the second was borne there, in a Tower of the Castle called
Eagle-Tower, and surnamed of Caer-nar-uon, he being the first Prince of Wales
of the English line. The site of this Town according to Mathematical
observation is in the degree of Longitude 15. and 50. scruples from the first
West-point, and the Pole elevated in Latitude 53. and 50.

Bangor the Bishops See, though it be now but a small Town, yet it was in time
past so large, that for the greatness thereof it was called Banchor Vaur, that
is, Great Banchor; which Hugh Earl of Chester fortified with a Castle: But it
has been long since utterly ruinated and laid level with the ground, in so
much as there is not any footing to be found, or other monuments left thereof,
although they have been sought with all diligent enquiry. This Bishops See
has within the Dioces ninety six Parishes. But the ancient Church which was
consecrated unto Daniel, sometime Bishop thereof, was defaced and set on fire
by that notorious Rebel Owen Glendowerdwy, who had a purpose also to destroy
all the Cities of Wales, for that they stood for the King of England. And
though the same Church was since repaired about the time of King Henry the
seventh, yet has it scarce recovered the resemblance of her former dignity.

The River Conwey (which limitteth this Shire on the East Side) is in Ptolemy
by corruption or ignorance of Transcribers called Toisonius, in stead of
Cononius, whence Canonium (a Town mentioned by Antonine) took name: and
albeit both it and its name be now utterly extinct, yet is there a covert
remembrance thereof in the new name of a poor Village, standing among the
rubbish thereof, called Caer-hean, (that is) The ancient City: Out of the
spoil whereof King Edward the first, built a new Town at the Rivers mouth,
termed thereupon Aber-Conwey: (that is) the mouth of Conwey, which being
formerly fortified by Hugh of Chester, and strongly situate and fenced both
with walls and a fair Castle by the Rivers side, deserves rather the name of a
City then a Town, if it were more populous and traffiqued with Inhabitants
Neither must I here forget Newin, though but a small Market-Towne, for that it
pleased the English Nobles Anno 1284 to honor it and the memory of King
Arthur, with triumphant celebritie, after they had subdued the rebellious
Ringleaders of Wales.

(7) Other matters of memorable note this Country affords not much, unless
perhaps this; That just over against the River Conwey, where it iflueth into
the Sea, there sometimes stood an ancient City named Diganwey, which many
years ago was consumed by lightning, and so made utterly desolate, as many
other monuments have been, of ancient and worthy memory. As likewise that in
the Poole Lin-Peris, there is a kind of Fish called there Torco^h, having a
red belly, no where else seen. For touching these two other miracles famoused
by Giraldus and Geruasius, that on those his high hills there are two Pooles
called the Meares, the one of which produces great store of fish, but all
having only one eye, and in the other there is a moveable Island, which as
soon as a man treads on, it forthwith floateth a great way off, whereby the
Welsh are said to have often escaped and deluded their enemies assailing them:
these matters are out of my Creed, and yet I think the Reader had rather
believe them, then to go to see whether it be so or no.

It is traded with five Market-Townes fit for bargaining, buying and selling,
fortified with four Castles, and has sixty eight Parish-Churches in it,
where the Inhabitants concur and meet together for the celebration of Divine
Service.

SCOTLANDS GENERAL DESCRIPTION. CHAPTER I.
SCOTLAND, the second Kingdom of Great Britain, and the North part of the
Island, has on the East the Germane Ocean, on the North, the Orkneys, and
Deucalidon Sea, the West affronted with Ireland, and the South has the River
Tweed, the Cheuiot Hills, and the adjacent Tract, reaching to the Sulway Sands,
whereby it is separated from England.

(2) This Kingdom is fair and spacious, and from these South-borders
spreads it self wide into the East and West, till again it contracts it
self narrower unto the Northern Promontories: furnished with all things
befitting a famous Kingdom; both for Air and Soil, Rivers, Woods,
Mountains, Fish, Foul, and Cattle, and Corn so plenteous, that it supplyeth
therewith other Countries in their want. The people thereof are of good
feature, strong of body, and of courageous mind, and in wars so venturous,
that scarce any service of note has been performed, but that they were with
the first and last in the field. Their Nobility and Gentry are very studious
of learning, and all civil knowledge; for which end they not only frequent
the three Universities of their own Kingdom (S. Andrews, Glasco, and
Edenbrough, the Nurseries of Piety, and Mansions of the sacred Muses) but also
much addict themselves to travel into foreign Countries.

(3) The Counties contained in this Kingdom are many, and every where
bestrewed with Cities, Town, and Borrowes, as is that of England: and, as
England, I intended to describe it, had I not been happily prevented by a
learned Gentleman of that Nation, who has most exactly begun, and gone through
the greatest difficulties thereof; to build upon whose foundations, I hold it
injurious: and am so far from any ambition to prevent his noble purposes,
that I heartily with all happy furtherances thereto, with a longing desire to
see, by his industrious labors, another Scene added to the perfecting of the
Theater of Britains glory.

(4) Yet, in the mean while, lest I should seem too difectiue in my
intendments, let me without offense (in this third, though short Book) give
only a general view of that Kingdom, upon observations from others; which to
accomplish by mine own survey (if others should hap to fail, and my
crazy-aged-body will give leave) is my chief desire; knowing the Island
furnished with many worthy remembrances, appertaining both unto them and us,
whom God now has set under one Crown: and the rather, for that their more
Southern people are from the same Original with us the English, being both
alike the Saxon branches: as also, that the Picts anciently inhabiting part of
that Kingdom, were the inborne Britains, and such as thither fled to avoid
the Roman servitude: whose names began first to be distinguished under
Dioclesian the Emperor, when they were termed Picts for painting their bodies,
like the Britains, as such Flauius Vigetius: which is more strengthened, for
that the Northern Britains converted by Saint Columb, are called Britain
Picts.

(5) But the Highland-men (the natural Scot indeed) are supposed to descend
from the Scythians, who with the Getes infesting Ireland, left both their Issue
there, and their manners, apparent in the Wild-Irish even to this day: And from
Scithae (as is thought) the name of Scot grew; for so the Netherlanders by
Scutten express indifferently the Scythian or Scot: so Gildas calls the
Irish-Britaines, Scythians: so King Elfeed in translating the History of
Orosius, turns Scotos into Scyttan: and so says Walsingham, from one and the
same original, Scythae, Scytici, Scotae, Scotici, take their names, as from
Getae, Getici, Gothi, Gothici have done.

(6) Their manner were alike, says Diodorus, Siculus, and Strabo, and their
garments not much different, as by Sidonius Apollinaris may be gathered, where
he seems rather to describe the modern Wild-Irish, then the antike Get.
Notwithstanding this Nations Original by some has been derived from Scota,
the supposed Daughter of the Egyptian King Pharaoh, that nourished Moses,
afterward married unto Gaithelus, the son of Cecrops, (Founder of Athens) who
first seating in Spain, passed thence into Ireland, and lastly into Scotland,
where his Wife Scota gave Name to the Nation; if we believe that they hit the
mark, who shoot at the Moon.

(7) But that the Scythians came into Spain, (besides the Promontory bearing
their Name Scythi^um) Silius Italicus, a Spanyard borne, does show, who
brings the Concani, a Nation therein seated, from the Massagetae, which were
the Scythians; and the Sarmatae, whom all confess to have bin Scythians, were
the builders (as he says) of the City Susanna in Spain* And how from Spain
they possessed themselves of Ireland, (at the time when the Kingdom of Iulah
flourished,) Ninius the Disciple of Eluodugus does tell, and their own
Histories of Nemethus and Delas, besides Cisnerus and others, do show; who
were first known by the name of Scots, as is gathered out of Prophyry
(alleged by S. Jerome) in the reign of Aurelianus the Emperor. Gildas
calls them the Irish-Spoilers: Giraldus, A Scottish Nation, descended from
Ireland: which in regard of them by Eginbardus is termed The I Will of Scots: by
Beda, The I Will inhabited by the Scots; and by other Historians, Scotland the
great; as their seat in Britain was called Scotland the less.

(8) These, when the Roman Empire was far in the wane, burst into Britain
under Reuda their Captain, who entering amity with the Picts, possessed the
North part of the Island, and assisted them against the Britains, then ready to
fall, when the Romans were gone. But these afterward entertaining dissentions
amongst themselves, put the hazard of their estates on the trial and chance of
one days battle, fought betwixt them in the year of Salvation, 740. Wherein
the Picts not only lost their lives, but soon after even their very name
also, and Fortune crowning the Scots with victory, advanced their Kingdom unto
such fame and strength, that the same has long continued without any absolute
conquest or surprise, against the assaults of whatsoever enemies.

(9) Scotlands South part in Galloway, washed with the warer of Solway Bay,
touches degree 56. of Latitude, and thence inbosoming many Loughes and In-lets
upon the East and West, extends it self unto the degree 60 and 30 minutes;
whose Longitude is likewise laid betwixt the degree 13 and 19 and the same
grown very narrow, being so near the North Pole, as lying directly under the
hindermost Stars of the Greater Bear.

(10) The whole Kingdom is divided into two parts by the great River Tay; the
South whereof is the more populous, and more beautified in manners, riches, and
civility: the North more rude, retaining the customs of the Wild-Irish, the
ancient Scot, in whose several Territories these Counties ensuing are
contained. South.
Teifidale. Merch. Laudien. Liddesdale. E^kedale. Annandale. Niddesdale.
Galloway. Carricke. Kyle. Cunnigham. Arran. Cluidesdale. Lennox. Stirling.
Fife. Strathorn. Menteith. Argile. Ca^tire. Lorne.
North.
Loq^abr^a. Brdidalthin. Perth. Athol. Anguis. Merns. Mar. Buquhan. Murrey.
Rosse. Sutherland. Cathanes. Strathnauer^.


(11) And these again are subdivided into Sherifdomes, Stewardships, and
^^^wickes, for the most part inheritory unto honorable Families. The
Ecclesiastical Government is also subject under two Metropolitan Archbishops,
which are of S. Andrews, (the Primate of Scotland,) and of Glasco; whose
Jurisdictions are as follows.

S. Andrews.
Dunkeld. Aberdon. Murray. Dunblan. Brechin. Rosse. Cathanes. Orkeney.
Glasco.
Galloway. Argile. Isles.
Amongst the things worthy of note of Antiquity in this Kingdom, most
memorable was that Fortification drawn from Abercorne upon the Frith of
Edenborough, unto Aleluya, how Dunbritton, opening upon the West Sea, where
Julius Agricola set the limit of the Roman Empire; past which, says Tacitus,
there was no other bounds of Britain to be sought for: and that here the
second Legion Augusta, and the 20. Legion Victrix, built a part of the Wall,
certain Inscriptions there dug up, and reserved at Dunloyr and Cader, do
witness: as also an ancient coped monument of an high and round compass,
which, as some think, was a Temple consecrated unto the God Ter^^^: others, a
Trophey raised by Carausius, who fortified this Wall with seven Castles, as
Ninius does declare.

(12) At this place began the great and dark Wood Caled^nia, famous for the
wild white Bulls that therein were bred whose Manes were Lion like, thick and
cuuled, of nature fierce and cruel, and so hateful to mankind, that they
abhorred whatsoever was by them handled or breathed upon: these Woods stretched
far and wide with many turnings, dark shades, and dreadful dens, and so
famous in the Roman Writers, that they often used that name for all Britain;
whose Inhabitants were the last in this Island, that yielded their necks to the
yoke of subjection, is shall appear in our following Story.

(13) Ninian a Britain is recorded to have converted the South-Ficts unto the
Faith of Christ in the reign of Theodosius the younger, and the Church in
Galloway bearing his name does witness it: so likewise in the same age Palladius
sent from Pope Coelestine, became an Apostle unto the Scots, whose relics lay
enshrined at Fordo^ in Mernis, as was verily supposed: but that Christianity
had been formerly planted in this uttermost Province, is testified by
Tertuilian, in saying the Britains had embraced the faith farther then the
Romans had power to follow or persecute them, whereupon Peter Monk of (...)
Spain, concludes their conversion to be more ancient then the Southern
Britains.

(14) But touching things obseruable for the present, surely admirable is the
report of the plenty of Cattle, Fish, and Foul there abiding: their Neat but
little, yet many in number: Fish so plentiful that men in some places (for
delight) on horseback hunt Salmons with Spears: and a certain Foul, which
some call Soland-Geese, spreading so thick in the air, that they even darken
the Suns light; of whose flesh, feathers and oil, the Inhabitants in some
parts make great use and gain; yea, and even of fishes brought by them,
abundant provision for diet, as also of the sticks (brought to make their
nests) plentiful provision for fuel.

(15) With these, as of wonders I might speak of the natures of those two
famous Loughes, Lomund and Nessa, the latter whereof never freezeth in Winter,
though never so extreme, and the waters of the other most raging in the
fairest and calmest weather, wherein also floateth an Island that remoueth from
place to place, as the wind forces her spongeous and vnfastned body. In
Buquhan upon the banquet of Ratra is a Well, whose trickling drops turn (in
Piramidy-wise) into hard stone, and another near Edenbrough that floateth with
Bitumen. In Dee and Done, besides the admired plenty of Salmons, is found a
Shellfish, called the Horse-mu^^^ll, wherein Pearls are engaendred, most
precious for Physic, and some of them so Orient, that they give not place to
the choicest.

(16) No less strange then any the forementioned waters, but more lamentable
is the remembrance of the great in^ndation, happing by the sudden rising of
Tay. which bare away the Walls and Town of Berth, and with it the Cradle and
young son of King William into the Sea, wherein the Royal Insant with many
others perished, the King and his Courtiers hardly escaping the danger with
life. The ruin of this Town raised another more famous, and more commodiously
seated, even Perth, since called Saint Iohns-Towne.

(17) Islands and Ilets yielding both beauty and subjection to this Scottish
Kingdom, are the Western, the Orknayes, and the Shetlands, reckoned to be
above three hundred in number; the Inhabitants for the most part using the
frugalitie of the ancient Scot.

(18) The Western lying scattered in the Deucalidoman Sea, were anciently
ruled by a King of their own, whose maintenance was out of their common
Coffers, and the Regal Authority never continued in line all succession, for
(to prevent that) their Kings were not permitted to have wives of their own,
but might by their Laws accompany with other men's: as the like Law was in the
other parts of Scotland, that the Virginity of all new wives, should be the
Landlords prey, till King Malcolme enacted, that half a mark should be paid
for redemption. The residence of those forementioned Kings, was chiefly in
Ila, Bunals, and Iona, now Columbkill, where (as Donald Munr^, who traveled
through these Islands reports) are three Tombs, having the several
Inscriptions of the Kings of Scotland, of Ireland, and of Norway.

(19) Among these Western Islands, the Hebrides, Sky, Mula, Ila, and Arran,
are the greatest: All of them plentiful of Corn, Woods, Salmons and
F^errings, as others of Conies Dear, Horses, and Sheep, where in some they
are wild, and in others without any owners; but the people uncivil, and
lacking Religion, they rather live rudely in state of necessity, then as Lords
of these portions which God has allotted them; and with a sufferable ease,
ignorant of ambition, enjoy those contentments, which some others (though they
no great sum) do more laboriously attain unto by the precepts of
Philosopie: for, feeding themselves with competencie without any excess, they
return all the ouer-plus unto their Lords, as do the Inhabitants of Hirta and
Rona; but alas, Religion not known among them, these penurious virtues are
rather the curses of Cham, then the followings of Christ, who forbids us to be
too careful for the morrow.

(20) The Isles of Orkenay upon the North of Scotland, lying in a most raging
and tempestuous Sea, are about three and thirty in number, whereof thirteen
are inhabited, and the other replenished with Cattle: in these are no venomous
Serpents, nor other ugly vermin; the air sharp and healthful, and the soil
apt to bear only Oats and Barley, but not a stick of wood: among these,
Pomonia is the greatest, accounted and called the Maine-land, affording six
Minerals of Lead and Tin, and in her chief Town a Bishops See: wherein are
seated twelve Parish-Churches, one of them very magnificent for so remote a
Country.

(21) Of all the Romans, Julius Agricola first discovered the Orkenays; yea,
and subdued them, if we will believe Tacitus: but Pomponius Mela, that wrote
thirty years before him, does mention them, and Iuuenal in Hadrians time
after him, tells us the Romans had won them; and lastly, Claudian names Saxons
that were slain in them and so does Ninius name Octha and Ebissus, Saxon
Commanders, who in their rouing Pinnaces wasted the Orknays. These Islands
Donald Bane the usurper of the Scottish Crown, gave to the King of Norway for
his assistance, and by the Norwegians were they held the space of an hundred
and sixty years, until that Alexander the third King of Scotland, with sword
and composition got them from Magnus the fourth, King of Norway, which
afterward King Haquin confirmed unto King Robert Bruce: but lastly, Christian
the first, King of Norway and Denmark, utterly renounced all his right to
those Islands, when he gave his daughter in marriage unto King James the third,
which deed was further ratified by the Pope, who opens the way to the
possession of Kingdoms with his own key.

(22) More North, and further then this Chart could well express, lie the
Isles of Shetland, of some thought to be Thule, and by the Commenter upon
Horace, the Fortunate Island, where as Tzetz^s fabuleth, the souls of good men
are ferryed into those Elizia^ fields that ever grow green, and whence Julius
Caesar could hardly be drawn, as Muretus has written: but their fictions
intended only that the virtuous souls of the dead passed the uttermost bounds
of earthly abode, and attained to an ouer-pleasing repose, and euer-flourishing
happiness; which whether they horrowed from the description of Paradise,
(taken both for a fair Garden and the souls happy rest) I cannot define; but
sure they would not have made those fields always green, if they had seen
how they lie ever covered with Ice and Snow, being in the 63. degree of
Latitude, as Ptolemie has placed it, where (for the most part) is a continual
Winter: but for proof that this was the Thule, besides Ptolemies Positure,
Saxo^ Grammaticus betwixt Norway and Scotland has placed it; and Solin^^, two
days sailing from the point of Caleoni^ and Tacitus says, that the Romans
kenned Th^le a far off, as they sailed about Britain by the Orcad^s: and
lastly, Mela makes it to face Berge a City in Norway.

IRELAND DESCRIBED. CHAPTER I.
THe Traditions of time have delivered unto us diverse names, whereby this
famous Island is recorded to have been called: yet none of more fair
probability, then that of Orpheus, Aristotle and Claudian, by whom it is named
Ierna: by Iuuenal and Mela called Iuuerna: by Diodorus Siculus, Iris: by
Martian of Heraclea, Ioyepnia: by Eustachius, Oyernia, and Bernia by the native
Inhabitants, Eryn: by the Britains, Yuerdon: the Welsh-Bards in their Ballads,
Tiruolas Totidanan, and Banno: and by the English, Ireland. But from whence
these diversities were derived, arise many opinions. Doubtless it is, that
Hibernia, Iuuerna, and Ouernia, came from Ierna, spoken of by O^pheus and
Aristotle; and the same Ierna, as also Iris, Iuerdhon, and Ireland, from Erin,
the term that the Inhabitants now use. From this Erin therefore (a word proper
to the Nation) the original is most likely to be deduced.

(2) Some derive Hiber^^a from Hiberno tempore, that is, from the winter
season; some from Hiberus a Spaniard; some from a Duke named Irnalph; some
again from the ancient River Iberus, and (...) from Hiere, an Irish word,
which signifies the west, or a western coast, whence Erin may also seem to
setch the deriuation: for it lies furthest Westward of any Region in all
Europe. As also for that the River running in the most remote west-part of this
Island, is in Ptolemy called Iernus: like as the furthest Western Promontory in
Spain, from whence our Irish men came, is by Strabo called Ierne, and the
River next unto it, by Mela, Ierna: yea, and Spain it self, for the Western
situation, is called Hesperia: the West-Cape of Afric, Hesperium; and in
Germany, Westrich and Westphale^ from their position have their names.
Postelius (a man that rather followed his own fancy, then the judgment of
others) fetches the original of Ireland from the Hebrews, as if Irin should
be as much as Iurin, that is, the Jews land: which opinion I hold no better
then those that would have it from the Winter-like storms, although upon every
wind the air is cold there.

(3) Festus Auienus, in that little book which he entitled Ora maritima
calls Ireland, Sacram Insulam, that is, the holy Island: to which opinion the
people are soon drawn, by reason of the many Saints that the Island is said to
produce, and the blessed soil that affords no venomous creatures to retain
life. It is thought that Plutarch meant Ireland by his Ogygia, for her great
antiquity; and of latter times by ^sidore and Bid it was called Scots of
those Scots that inhabited it: and that thence the name of Scotland, together
with the Scots themselves, came into Britain.

(4) For largeness and circuit, in times past, this Island challenged the third
place in rank of all the Isles of the then known world: for thus have
Geographers left us, that the Indian Taproba^ for greatness was the first, the
I Will of Britain the next, and this of Ireland the third: and for that cause
does Ptolemy call it the little Britain. But how soever Strabo has extended
the breadth, as broad as the length, and others have formed it in shape like an
egg, yet latter dimensions have found it far otherwise, twice longer then
broad, and may be compared to the forelegge of a Bear, if the Si^ile breed no
offense. Whose East Side has on it that tempestuous Sea that cutteth her
channel betwixt England and this Ireland: the West is washed with the Western
Ocean; the North with the (...) Caledonian; and the South with the Vergiuian
Sea.

(5) The air of this Island is delectable and wholesome, though neither so
clear nor sub^^^ of England, which (as Mela says) is nothing favorable for
the ripening of Cor^e: but so grateful to the ground, that it causes grass
to grow abund^ntly, not only fresh and long, but withal very sweet for all
Cattle, and in Winter is more subject to wind then snow: and that I may use
the words of Giraldus, It is of all Countries most temperate, neither forcing
the Inhabitants to seek shade from the frying heat of Cancer, nor the chilling
cold of Capricorn to drive them to the fire: but at all seasons most mild,
betwixt a sufferable cold, and gentle warm heat.

(6) The soil (says Cambrensis) is uneven, woody, wild, waterish and boggy,
so full of Loghs and Meeres, that great ponds of water are found upon the high
Mountains. These indeed make the places somewhat dangerous unto all new
comers, by breeding of rheums dyssenteries and fluxes, whose usual remedy is
Vskebah, a wholesome Aqua vita, that dries more, and enflameth less, then
many other hot confections.

(7) The Commodities of this Kingdom chiefly consist in Cattle, whose feed is
so sweet and so rank, that they will soon graze to a surfeit, if they may be
suffered to feed as they will. Their sheep are many, but bear not the best
wool, which twice are shorn within one year. Of these they make Mantles,
Caddowes, and Couerle^s, vented from thence into foreign Countries. Their
Hobbies likewise are of great esteem, and are answerable to the ^ennets of
Spain. Bees are there in such abundance, that honey is found in holes of old
trees, and in rests of the rocks. No annoyance of hurtful Snake or venomous
creatures; and to speak all in a word, nothing wanting for profit or pleasure:
for so much does Giraldus affirm, in saying, that Nature had cast into this
Western Kingdom of Zephyrus a more gracious eye then was ordinary.

(8) Touching the original peopling of this fair Island, if we will believe
their records, they make antiquity it self but young unto themselves,
affirming the damsel Caesarea, and niece unto Noah, to have found it out
before the Flood; and that three hundred years after; when Ia^hets posterity
took into these West-parts of the world, one Barthela^^^ of his progeny, a
S^ythian by birth, encouraged by the late success of N^^rod (who now had
intruded upon the Monarchy of Syria) wandered so far West, that Fortune at
last cast him and his people upon the coast of Ireland. There he settled with
his three sons, Languinna, Salarus, and Ruthurgus, who searching through
every creek and corner of the Land, left their own names by three notable
places, Langui^^, Stragrus, and Mount Salanga, which the revolution of times
has since called by other names, as S. Dominickhill, Ruthurgi, and Stag^^^.
Under the government of these three sons, and their offspring, this land was
kept about three hundred years; at which time there arrived also in Ireland a
Giant-like kind of people of Nimrods race, who in bodily shape exceeded the
proportion of vsuallmen, using their strengths to win (...) and to oppreste
with rapine and violence. These growing to numbers, accounted it neces^ary to
prevent dominion, lest the curse of slavery (prophesied by Noah) should light
upon them: to prevent the which, they set up a King of their own; then
quarrels bred daily, either parties purposing to hold their interest by their
swords: against whom, lastly a battle was fought, and an infinite company of
Giants slain* when also died most of those of the posterity of Iapheth,
leaving them of Cham Lords of Island.

(9) Whereupon Nemethus a Scythian, with his four sons, arrived in Ireland,
and by strong hand seated themselves among these Grants; where for two hundred
and sixty years they kept, but then no longer able to hold out against them,
they left their standings, and departed the land.

(10) Soon after, the five sons of Dela, descended from the said Nemethus,
came into these coasts, and with manly prowes^e drove these miscreants out of
Ireland, whereby the seed of Cham was utterly expelled, and these of Iapheth
divided the land into five parts, whereof they became themselves Kings: but
falling at variance, gave advantage unto others, among whom the BRITAINS set
in a foot.

(11) But to make this Island more famous, certain Historians have fetched
their Kings from most uncertain Records, as namely from Gaothel the Grecian,
and Scotia (the daughter of King Pharao, and nourisher of Moses) his wife: who
at that time, when Israel were in Egypt, with a Colony came into Spain, and
after into Ireland, where he was made King, and in honor of his Queen, the
land named Scotia, from whom also the Inhabitants took name: his posterity
increasing in the parts of Spain, where first they had seated, in proces^e of
time sought further adventures under the four sons of Milesius King of
Spain, whose names were Hibernus, Hermion, Ever, and Erimon.

(12) These, by the direction sufferance, and assistance of Gurguntius, King of
the Britains, after that Ireland had been very much dispeopled by a
contagious pestilence, seated themselves, and from the eldest, Hiberius, called
the I^^and Hibernia, as some are of opinion: these divided the whole into five
Pro^^nces, famously known by the names of Mounster, Leinster, Connaught,
Vlster, and M^ath in their midst: and from these the present Irish repute
themselves to come. Yet surely, as I make no question, but that this Island
became inhabited even of old time, when mankind again ouer-spred the face of
the earth, so doubt I not, but that our Britains pas^ed thereinto themselves,
such infinite number of words in the Irish language yet in use, such ancient
names of Waters, Isles, Mountains, and places, merely British words, yet
remaining, and the testimony of ^acitus, who says, that their manners were
fashioned to the Britains, inforceth so much; and Ptolemy before him, calls
that Island by the name of little Britain: all which show a former interest for
Ireland, then that which by conquest under Henry the second was made.

(13) That it ever was subject to the Romans, is doubtful, though Agricola did
wish it, and Tacitus held most necessary: yea, and in the division of their
Empire, Ireland, with Britain and Thule, fell unto Constantine the son of
Constantine the great; yet their manners vnreclaimed, and barbarism retained
long after those days, do witness no such (...) sown, to be in that plot.
But when Romes great Empire began to grow less, the Scots or Scythians grew
mighty in Ireland: and as Oros^^^ writes, that Island was wholly inhabited by
the Scottish Nation in the days of Honorius, and Ar^^dius, the Emperors: whose
wars and slaughter, Claudian does lightly touch in this his Verse.

Scotorum cumulos fleuit glacialis Ierne.
The frozen Ireland wept to see, her Scots all slain on h^apes to be.
(14) As these for the most part, by the testimony of Ninius, were the ancient
Inhabitants, so by other ancient Writers, their customs and manners are thus
set forth: Strabo says, The Inhabitants of Ireland are more rude then the
Britains, they feed upon the flesh of men, yea, and think it a point of worth
to eat their dead parents: want only they accompany with women, making no
difference of other men's wives, their own sisters, nor of their natural
mothers: but of these things (says he) we have no certain witness of
sufficient credit. Po^ponius Mela records, that the Irish are vn^iuill,
ignorant of virtues, and void of religion: And Solinus affirms, that after
victory they drink the blood of the slain, and besmeare their own faces
therewith; so given to war, that the mother at the birth of a man-child,
feeds the first meat into her infants mouth, upon the point of her husbands
sword, and with he at^enish imprecations, wishes that it may die no otherwise
then in war or by sword.

(15) But from these ancient and barbarous manners, let us come to the
conditions of their middle time; whom Giraldus Cambrensis describes as
follows: The Irish (says he) are a strong and bold people, martial and
prodigal in war, nimble, stout, and haughty of heart; careless of life,
but greedy of glory; courteous to strangers, constant in love, light of
belief, impatient of injury, given to fleshly lusts, and in enmity
implacable. At the baptizing of their Infants, their manner was, not to dip
their right arms into the water, that so (as they thought) they might give a
more deep and incurable blow; never calling them by the names of their Parents
whilst they lived together, but at their death took it upon them. Their women
nursed not the children they bare; and they that nursed others, did affect and
love them much more then their own.

(16) So much were they given to fantastical conceits, that they held it very
ominous to give their neighbors fire upon May Day: to eat an old egg,
endangered the death of their horse: and before they cast in their seed, they
send salt into the field: to hang up the shelles in the roof, was a
preservative of the chickens from the kite: to set up green boughs at their
doors in the Month of May, increased their kines milk; and to spit upon
Cattle, they held it good against Witchery, whereof Ireland was full.

(17) Superstitious Idolatry among the wild Irish was common, yielding divine
honor unto the Moon after the change, unto whom they both bowed their knees,
and made supplications; and with a loud voice would thus speak unto that
Planet: We pray thee leave us in as good estate as thou foundst us. Wolves
they did make their Godsibs, terming them Chari Christ, and so thought
themselves preserved from their hurts: the hoofes of dead horses they accounted
and held sacred: about childrens necks they hung the beginning of Saint John's
Gospel, a crooked nail of an horse-shooe, or a piece of a Wolves skin; and
both the sucking-childe and nurse were girt with girdles finely plated of
woman's hair; so far they wandered into the ways of error, in making these
arms the strength of their healths.

(18) Their wives were many, by reason of diuorcements, and their maids married
at twelve years of age, whose customs were to send to their lovers, bracelets
plated, and curiously wrought of their own hair; so far following Venus in
the knots of these a^^urements. The men wore linen shirts exceedingly large,
stained with Saffron, the sleeves wide, and hanging to their knees, strait and
short trustes plated thick in the skirts, their breeches close to the thighs,
a short skeine hanging point down before, and a mantle most times cast over
their heads. The women wore their hair plated in curious manner, hanging down
their backs and shoulders, from under soulden wreathes of fine linen, rolled
about their heads, rather loading the wearer, then delighting the beholder: for
as the one was most seemly, so the other was unsightly: their necks were hung
with chains and carkaneths, their arms wreathed with many bracelets, and over
their side-garments the shagge rugge mantles purfled with a deep Fringe of
diverse colors, both sexes accounting idlenes^e their only liberty, and ease
their greatest riches.

(19) In wars they were forward, and fought with battle-axes, whose bearers
were called Galloglasses, the common Soldier but lightly armed, who served
with darts and sharp skeines; their Trumpet was a Bagge-pipe, and word for
encounter, Pharroh; which at the first onset with great acclamation they
uttered, and he that did not, was taken into the air, and carried into the
vale of Kerr^, where transformed (as they did believe) he remained until he
was hunted with Hounds from thence to his home.

(20) For the dying and dead they hired women to mourn, who expostulated with
the sick, why he would die; and dead, at his Funeral such outcries were
made, such clapping of hands, such howlings, and gestures, that one would
think their sorrows unrecoverable, holding the opinion of Pythagoras for the
souls departed.

(21) Their diet in necessity was slender, feeding upon watercresses, roots,
mushromes, shamrogh, butter tempered with oat-meale, milk, whey, yea, and raw
flesh, the blood being crushed out: their use was also to let their kine blood,
which standing a while, and coming to a ielly, with butter they did eat, as a
very good dish.

(22) That the Gospel of Christ should be preached in Ireland by James the
Apostle, I will not affirm, though Vincentius has said it: neither will I,
with the Scots, bring the Islands conversion from a Christian woman, who (as
their Historians do avouch) first instructed the Queen, and the Queen her
husband, and he again his Subjects, till all became Christians. But most true
it is, that the Scots first received the doctrine of Christ in this Kingdom of
Ireland; for thus writes Prosper: Coelestin Pope of Rome sent his Archdeacon
Palladius into Britain to withstand the Pelagian heresy, who at one time did
drive out these enemies of grace, and ordained a Bishop among the Scots,
whereby that barbarous Nation embraced Christianity. Yet Ninius reports,
that Palladius did nothing in neither, being taken away by untimely death: but
that S. Patricke, borne at E^burne in Cluedsdale, the son of Calphurus, by
the sister of S. Martin, was the first Apostle for Ireland, who sowed his
heavenly seed with such plentiful increase, that the soil it self shortly
was called Sanctorum Patria, the Country of Saints: for whose Sepulcher after
his death rose as great variance, as was for Homer amongst them of Greece: they
of Down challenged his grave to be with them, upon certain Verses written on
a Tomb, which ascribes Patricke, Briget, and Columbe to be buried therein:
they of Armagh lay claim by the warrant of S. Bernard, who says, that
Patricke in his life time there ruled, and after death there rested.
Glascenbury in England by ancient records will have his body interred with
them; and Scotland avouches his birth to be at Glasco, and bones to rest at
Kirk-Patricke with them: of such reverent esteem was this Irish Apostle.

(23) This Patricke in his youth had been taken captive by the Irish Pirates,
and for six years continuance served Mac^uain as his slave, and keeper of his
swine: in which dejected condition, so desirous he was of the Lands salvation,
that in his dreams he thought the Infants unborn cried unto him for Baptism;
and redeeming himself thence for a piece of gold found in the field, which a
swine had turned up, in his aged years came back again into Ireland,
preached the Gospel, converted the people, and lastly became Archbishop of
Armagh. Of whose miracles and Purgatory, I leave others to speak; that are
more credulous in the one, and have better leisure to relate the other, and
will show thee Ireland as now it is, first in general, and then in parts.

THE PROVINCE OF MOVNSTER. CHAPTER II.
THis Province, called in Irish, Mown; in a more ordinary construction of
speech, Wown; in Latin, Momonia; and in English, Mounster; lies open South
ward to the Verginian Sea: Northward it affronteth part of Connaught: The East
is neighboured by L^i^ster: and the West is altogether washed with the West
Ocean.

(2) The length thereof extended from Ballatimore-Bay in her South, unto the
Bay of Galway in her North, are about nintie miles. Her broadest part from East
to West, is from Waterford-Hauen to Feriter Haven, and contains an hundred
miles. The whole circumference, by following the prometaries and indents, are
above five hundred and forty miles.

(3) The form thereof is quadrant or foure-square. The (...) mild and
temperate, neither too chilling cold, not too scorching hot. The soil in some
parts is hilly, looking (...) with woody, wild, and solitary mountains: yet
the valleys below are garnished with Corne-fields. And generally, all, both
pleasant for fight, and fertile for soil.

(4) This Province is at this day divided into two parts that is, the West-
Mounster, and the South- Mounster. The West- Mounster was inhabited i^ old
(...) by the (...) the Velabri, and the Vteri^^: the South- Mounster by the
Oudi^^ or (...), and the Cori^ndi. The Velabri and (...) are said (by Orosius)
to have dwelt in that part of the Country, where it lies outmost Westward, and
passing toward the Cantabrian Ocean, looks a far off to Gallitia in
Spain. The Luceni of Ireland (who seem to have derived their name and
original from the Lucen^^ of Gall^tia, and of whom there still remain some
relics in the Barony of Lyxno^^) are supposed to have bin seated in those
parts that lie neighboring upon the bank of the River Shemon.

(5) The general Commodities of this Province, are Corn, Cattle, Wood, Wool,
and Fish. The last whereof, it affords in every place plenty and abundance of
all sorts. But none so well known for the store of Herrings that are taken
there, as is the Promontory called Eraugh, that lies between Bantre and
Ballatimore Bay, whereunto every year a great Fleet of Spaniards and Portugals
resort (even in the midst of Winter) to fish also for Cods.

(6) The principal City of the Province is Limericke, which the Irish call
Loumeagh, compassed about with the famous River Shennon, by the parting of the
Channel. This is a Bishops See, and the very Mart-Towne of Mounster. It was
first won by Reymond le Gross an Englishman, afterward burnt by Duncnald an
Irish petty King of Thuetmond. Then in process of time, Philip Breos an
Englishman was infeoffed in it, and King John fortified it with a Castle, which
he caused therein to be built. In this Castle certain Hostages making their
abode in the year 1332 grew (as is reported) so full of pride and insolency,
that they flew the Constable thereof, and seized the Castle into their own
hands. But the resolute Citizens, that could neither brook nor bear with such
barbareus cruelty, did in revenge then show such manly courage and viuacitie,
as they soon after recovered the Castle again, repaying the Hostages in such
hostile manner, as that they put them all to the sword without partiality. The
position of this Town is by Mercator placed for Latitude 53. degrees 20.
minutes; and for Longitude, 9. degrees and 34. minutes. Near unto the River
that Ptolemy calls Daucona, and Giraldus Cambrensis (by the alteration of
some few letters) names Sauranus and Sauarenus, which issues out of Muskerey
Mountains, is seated the City Cork, graced also with another Episcopal
dignity (and with the Bishops See of Clon annexed unto it) which Giraldus
calls Corragia, the Englishmen Cork, and the native Inhabitants of the
Country Coreach. This Town is so beset on every side with neighboring
molesters, as that they are still constrained to keep watch and ward, as if
there lay continual siege against it. The Citizens of this place are all linkt
together in some one or other degree of affinity, for that they dare not match
their daughters in marriage into the Country, but make contracts of matrimony
one with another among themselves. In this place, that holy and religious man
Briock is said to have his birth and breeding, who flourished among the Gauls
in that fruitful age of Christianity, and from whom the Diocese of Sanbr^och
in Britain Armorua, commonly called S* Brieu, had the denomination.

(7) The City which the Irish and Britains call Porthlargy, and the English,
Waterford, though it be last in place, yet is it not least in account, as being
the second City of all Ireland, as well for the conuenience and
commodiousnesse of the Haven, that affords such necessary aptitude for trade
and traffic, as also for the faithful loyalty which it has always showed
to the Imperial Crown of England: for ever since it was won by Richard
Earl of Pembrook^, it still performed the obedience and peaceable offices of
duty and service unto the English, as they continued their course in the
conquest of Ireland: whence it is that the Kings of England have from time to
time endowed it with many large Franchises and Liberties, which King Henry the
seventh did both augment and confirm.

(8) Although since the time of S. Patricke, Christianity was never extinct in
this Country, yet the government being haled into contrary factions, the
Nobility lawles^e, and the multitude wilful, it has come to pass, that
Religion has waxed (with the temporal common sort) more cold and feeble,
being most of them very irreligious, and addicted wholly to superstitious
observations: for in some parts of this Province, some are of opinion, that
certain men are yearly turned into Wolves, and made Wolfe-men. Though this
has been constantly affirmed by such as think their censures worthy to pass
for current and credible; yet let us suppose that happily they be possessed
with the disease and malady that the Physicians call Lycanthropy, which
begets and engenders such like fantasies through the malicious humors of
Melancholy: and so oftentimes men imagine themselves to be turned and
transformed into forms which they are not. Some again embrace another
ridiculous opinion, and persuade themselves, that he who in the barbarous
acclamation and outcry of the Soldiers, which they use with great forcing and
straining of their voices, when they join battle, does not howte and make a
noise as the rest do, is suddenly caught from the ground, and carried as it
were flying in the air, out of any Country of Ireland, into some desert
valleys, where he feeds upon grass, drinks water, has some use of reason,
but not of speech, is ignorant of the present condition he stands in, whether
good or bad: yet at length shall be brought to his own home, being ^aught with
the help of Hounds and Hunters. Great pity that the foul fiend and father of
darkness, should so grievously seduce this people with misbeliefe, and that
these errors be not chased away with the truth of Christian Religion, whereby
as they carry much grace in their countenances, they may also not be void of
the inward grace of their souls and understanding.

(9) This Province has been fore wasted in the rebellions of Desmond, to
whose aid Pope Gregory the thirteenth, and Philip King of Spain, sent
certain companies of Italians and Spaniards, who arrived not far from
Dingle, fortified themselves, and gave it the name of Fort de Ore, founding
loud threats against the whole Country. But A^^^ur (...) Gray, Lord Deputy of
Ireland, at the first onset decided their quarrel, by sheathing his sword in
their bowels: and Desmond fearfully flying into the woods, was by a Soldier
cut shorter by the head. And again, when the Kingdom of Ireland lay bleeding,
and put almost to the hazard of the last cast, Don John D' Aquila, with 8.
thousand Spaniards (upon confidence of the excommunications of Pius the fifth,
Gregory the thirteenth, and Clement the eight, Popes, all of them discharging
their curses like unto thunder bolts against Queen Elizabeth of blessed
memory) landed near unto Kinsale presuming that the rebellions of Tyrone had
turned the hearts of the Irish for Rome: Sir Charles Blunt Lord Montioy, in the
depth of Winter, and with his tired Soldiers, so d^^nted their Spanish hearts,
that with one victory he repressed their bragging boldness, and recovered the
Irish that were ready to revolt.

(10) God has oftentimes showed his tender love and affection to this people,
in laying his fatherly chastisements and afflictions upon them, sometimes by
winds, sometimes by famine and dearth, and sometimes again by opening his
hand of plenty into their laps to convert them to himself, and to divert their
hearts from superstitions. In the year 1330 about the Feast of Saint John
(...), there be an such a dea^th of Co^^e in this Country, by the abundance of
rain and the inundation of waters (which continued until Michaelmas
following) that a Cranoc of Wheat was sold for (...), a Cranoc of Oats for
eight shillings, a Cranoc of Pease, Beans, and Barley for as much. (...)
wind^s the same year were so mighty, that many were hurt, and many slain
outright by the fall of houses that was forced by the violence of the same. The
like whereof were never seen in Ireland. In the year 1317 there was such a
dearth of Corn and other victuals, that a Cranoc of Wheat was sold for twenty
three shillings. And many Householders, that before time had sustained and (...)
a great number, were this year driven to beg, and many famished. In the time
of which ^^mine, the mercy of God so disposed, that upon the 27. day of June,
in the year 1331* there came to land such a mighty multitude of great
Sea-fishes (that is) Thursheds, such as in many ages past had never been
seen, that the people were much comforted in this distress, and received
great relief and sustenance by the same.

(11) Places of Religion in this Country, were the two Abbeys at Yoghall,
called the North-Abbey and South-Abbey: The two Abbeys at Limericke, S. Francis
Abbey, and S Dominicke Abbey: The two Abbeys at Cork, the Abbey of the I Will,
and S. Frances Abbey: and the famous Abbey (in times past) of the holy Cross
which has had many privileges and liberties granted unto it, in honor of a
piece of Christ's Cross, that was (as they say) sometimes preserved there. Thus
were Christians persuaded in ancient times* And it is a wonder in what Troops
and Assemblies people do (even yet) conflow thither upon devotion, as unto a
place of holiness and sanct^^e; so firmly are they settled in the Religion of
their Forefathers, which has been increased beyond all measure by the
negligent care of their Teachers, who should instruct their ignorance, and
labor to reduce them from the errors they persevere in.

This Province is governed by a Lord President, who has one assistant, twelve
learned Lawyers, and a Secretary to keep it in duty and obedience. It was in
times past divided into many parts, as Towoun, that is, North-Mounster;
Deswoun, that is, South-Mounster; Hierwoun, that is, West-Mounster; Mean-woun,
that is, Middle Monaster; and Vrwoun, that is, the Front of Mounster. But at
this day it is distinguished into these Counties; Kerry, Desmond, Limericke,
Tipperary, Holycrosse, Waterford, and Cork: which County in times past had
been a Kingdom, containing with it Desmond also: for so in the Grant given by
King Henry the second unto Robert Fitz-Stephen, and to Miles de Cogan, it is
called in these words: Know ye that I have granted the whole Kingdom of
Cork, excepting the City and Cantred of the Oustmans, to hold for them and
their heirs, of me and John my son, by the service of sixty Knights. The
County of Waterford, King Henry the sixth gave unto John Talbot Earl of
Shrewsburie, with the name, style, and title of Earl of Waterford, which was
afterward again assumed to the Crown. Touching the County of Holy-Crosse, as
the opinion of that much frequented Abbey is much lessened, so that County is
swallowed up altogether in the County ^ipperary. It is fortified with five
strong Castles, traded with six Market-Townes, and divided as follows.
MOVNSTER L^^ericke. Kery. Cork. Waterford. Desmond. Holy Cross in Tipporary.



LEINSTER. CHAPTER III.
THis Country, the Natives call Leighnigh, the Britains Lein; in Latin,
Lagenia; in the ancient lives of the Saints, Lagen; and in English, Leinster.
It lies Eastward along Hibernicum Sea: on Connaught side Westward it is
bounded with the River Shanon; the North with the Territory of Louth, and the
South with part of the Province of Mounster. This Country butteth upon England,
as Mounster and Connaught do upon Spain.

(2) The form thereof is triangle, and sides not much unequal, from her
South-East unto the West-point about 80. miles, from thence to her North-West
about 70. miles, and her East Coast along the Irish Seashore, eighty miles:
the circumference upon two hundred and seauentie miles.

(3) The air is clear and gentle, mixed with a temperate disposition, yielding
neither extremity of heat or cold, according to the seasonable times of the
year, and the natural condition of the Continent. The soil is generally
fruitful, plentiful both in fish and flesh, and in other victuals, as butter,
cheese, and mile. It is fertile in Corn, Cattle, and pasture grounds, and
would be much more, if the husbandman did but apply his industry, to which he
is invited by the commodiousnesse of the Country. It is well watered with
Rivers, and for the most part well woodded, except the County of Diuelin,
which complains much of that want, being so destitute of wood, that they are
compelled to use a clammie kind of fat turffe for their fuel, or Sea-coale
brought out of England.

(4) The Inhabitants of these parts in Ptolemies days were the Brigantes,
Mena^^^, Cauci, and Blain; from which Blani may seem to be derived and
contracted the latter and modern names of this Country, Lein, Leighnigh, and
Leinster. The Mena^^^ (as the name does after a sort imply) came from the
Menapians, a Nation in Low Germany, that dwelt by the Seacoasts. These
Brigantes, ca^^ed also Birgantes, Florianus del Campo (a Spaniard) labors to
fetch from the Brigants of his own Country, of whom an ancient City in Spain
(called Brigantia) took the name. But they may seem rather to derive their
denomination from the River Birgus, about which they inhabited; for to this the
very name is almost sufficient to persuade us.

(5) The commodities of this Country do chiefly consist in Cattle, Sea-fowle,
and Fish. It breeds many excellent good horses, called Irish Hobbies, which
have not the same pace that other horses have in their course, but a soft and
round amble, setting very easily.

(6) This Country has in it three Rivers of note, termed in old time the three
sisters, Shour, Neor, and Barraeo, which issue out of the huge Mountain
(called by Giraldus, Bladina Montes) as out of their mothers womb, and from
their rising tops descending with a downfall into several Channels, before
they empty themselves into the Ocean, join hand in hand all together in a
mutual league and combination.

(7) Places very dangerous for shipping are certain fiats and shallowes in the
Sea, that lie over against Holy-point, which the Mariners call the Grounds.
Also the shelues of sand that lie a great way in length opposite to Newcastle,
which ouer-looketh them into the Sea from the top of an high hill adjoining.

(8) In this Province are placed many fair and wealthy Towns, as Kilkenny,
which for a Burrough-Towne excels all the midland Buroughs in this Island.
Kildare, which is adorned with an Episcopal See, and much graced in the first
infancy of the Irish Church, by reason of Saint Bridgid a venerable Virgin, had
in great account and estimation for her virginity and devotion, as who was the
Disciple of S. Patricke of so great fame, renown, and antiquite: Also Weisford
(a name given unto it by these Germans, whom the Irish term Oustmans) a Town
though inferior to some, yet as memorable as any, for that it became the first
Colony of the English, and did first submit it self unto their protection,
being assaulted by Fitz Stephen, a Captain worthily made famous for his valor
and magnanimity.

(9) But the City which fame may justly celebrate alone, beyond all the Cities
or Towns in Ireland, is that which we call Diuelin, Ptole^ie Eblana, the
Latinists Dublinium, and Dublinia; the West-Britaines, Dinas Dulm; the
English-Saxons in times past, Duplin; and the Irish, Balacleigh, that is, the
Town upon hurdles: for it is reported that the place being fennish and
moorish, when it first began to be builded, the foundation was laid upon
hurdles.

(10) That it is ancient, is persuaded by the authority of Ptol^mie. That it
was grievously rent and dismembered in the tamultuous wars of the Danes, and
brought afterward under the sub^ection of Eadgar King of England, (which his
Charter also confirms, wherein he calls it the noble City of Ireland) is
written by Saxo Grammaticus. That it was built by Harold of Norway, which may
seem to be Harold Har^ager, when he had brought the greatest part of Ireland
into an awful obedience unto him, we read in the life of Griffith ap S^^an
Prince of Wales. At length it yielded unto the valor and protection of the
English, at their first arrival into Ireland, by whom it was manfully defended
from the fierce assaults as well of Auscoulph Prince of the D^blinians, as
afterward of Gottard King of the Isles: since which time it has still
augmented her flourishing estate, and given approved testimony of her faith and
loyalty to the Crown of England, in the times of any tumultuous streights and
commotions.

(11) This is the royal seat of Ireland, strong in her munition, beautiful in
her buildings, and (for the quantity) matchable to many other Cities, frequent
for traffic and intercourse of Merchants* In the East Suburbs, Henry the
second, King of England (as H^ueden reports) caused a royal Palace to be
erected: and Henry Loundres, Archbishop of Diuelin, built a Storehouse about
the year of Christ 1220. Not far from it is the beautiful College
consecrated unto the name of the holy Trinity, which Queen Elizabeth of
famous memory dignified with the privileges of an University. The Church of
S. Patricke being much enlarged by King John, was by John Comin Archbishop of
Dublin, borne at Euesham in England, first ordained to be a Church of Prebends
in the year 1191. It does at this day maintain a Deane, a Chanter, a
Chancellor, a Treasurer, two Archdeacons, and twenty two Prebendaries.

This City in times past, for the due administration of Civil Government, had
a Provost for the chief Magistrate. But in the year of man's redemption 1409
King Henry the fourth granted them liberty to choose every year a Mayor and
two Bailistes, and that the Mayor should have a gilt sword carried before him
for ever. And King Edward the sixth (to heap more honor upon this place)
changed the two Bailiffes afterward into Sheriffs: so that there is not any
thing here wanting that may serve to make the estate of a City most
flourishing.

(12) As the people of this County do about the neighboring parts of Diuelin
come nearest unto the civil conditions and orderly subjection of the English:
so in places farther off they are more tumultuous, being at deadly feuds
amongst themselves, committing often times Manslaughter one upon another, and
working their own mischiefs by mutual wrongs: for so the Irish of Leinster
wasted Leinster with many Towns in the same Province in the year 1294. And in
the year 1301. the men of Leinster in like manner raised a war in the winter
season, setting on fire the Town of Wyk^^lo, Rathdon, and others, working
their own plague and punishment by burning up their sustenance, and losing
their Castle by depredation.

(13) Matter of observation, and no less admiration among them, is the Giants
dance, commonly so called, and so much talked of, which Merlin is said by Art
Magic to have translated out of this Territory unto Salisburie Plain: which
how true it is, I leave to the vain believers of miracles, and to the
credulous obseruers of antiquity.

(14) In this County have been erected many famous Monasteries, Abbeys, and
religious houses, consecrated to devout and holy purposes: As the Monastery of
Saint Mary's of Oustmanby, ^ounded for preaching Friars, unto which of late
days the Judicial Courts of the Kingdom have been translated: also the
magnificent Abbey called S. Thomas Court at Dublin, builded and endowed in
times past with many large privileges and revenues of King Henry the second,
in expiation of the murder of Thomas Archbishop of Canterbury. Likewise
Tiutern Monastery, or the notable Abbey which William Marshall Earl of
Pembrooke founded, and called De roto, for that he had vowed to God (being
tossed at Sea with many a sore and dangerous tempest) to erect an Abbey
wheresoever he came to land, and being (after shipwreck) cast upon land in
this place, he made performance of his vow accordingly.

This Province contains the Counties of Kilkenny, Caterlogh, Queens Ceunty,
Kings County, Kildare, East-Meath, West-Meath, Weisford, and Dublin (to say
nothing of ^icklo and Fernes, which either be already, or else are to be
annexed unto it) and subdivided into ofreene Market-Townes. It has been
fortified with the strength of many Castles against the power of enemies, and
is thus divided: Counties, East Mead. West Mead. Kilkenny. Caterbough.
Queens County. Kings County. Kildare. Weisford. Dublin.



THE PROVINCE OF CONNAVGHT. CHAPTER IIII.
THis Province named by Giraldus Cambrensis, Conachtia, and Conacia, by the
Irish, Conaughty, and by Englishmen, Connaught: is bounded Eastward, with
part of the County of Leinster; Northward, with part of Vlster; Westward,
with the West-maine Ocean; and on the South, it is confined with a part of the
Province of Mounster, closed in with the River Sbennon, and butting against the
Kingdom of Spain.

(2) The form thereof is long, and toward the North and South ends, thin
and narrow; but as it grows toward the middle, from either part it waxes
still bigger and bigger: extending in length from the River Shennon in her
South, to Enis Kelling in her North, 126. miles, and the broadest part is from
Tromer in her East, to Barragh-Bay in her West, containing about fourscore
miles. The whole in circuit and compass is above four hundred miles.

(3) The air is not altogether so pure and clear, as in the other Provinces
of Ireland, by reason of certain moist places (covered over with grass) which
of their softness are usually termed Boghes, both dangerous, and full of
vaporous and foggie mists.

(4) This County as it is divided into several portions, so is every portion
severally commended for the soil, according to the seasonable times of the
year. Twomond or the County Clare, is said to be a Country so conveniently
situated, that either from the Sea or Soil there can be nothin wished for more,
then what it does naturally afford of it self, were but the industry of the
Inhabitants answerable to the rest. Galway is a land very thankful to the
painful husbandman, and no less commodious and profitable to the Shepherd.
Maio, in the Roman Provincial called Mageo, is replenished both with pleasure
and fertility, abundantly rich in Cattle, Dear, Hawks, and plenty of Honey.
Slego (coasting upon the Sea) is a plenteous Country for feeding and raising of
Cattle. Le-Trim (a place rising up throughout with hills) is so full of rank
grass and forage, that (as Solinus reports) if Cattle were not kept
sometimes from grasing, their fullness would endanger them. And Rosco^en is a
Territory, for the most part plain and fruitful, feeding many Herds of
Cattle, and with mean husbandry and tillage, yielding plenty of Corn, As
every particular part is thus severally profitable by inbred commodities; so
is it no less commended (in the generality) for the many accomodate and fit
Bays, Creekes, and nauigable Rivers, lying upon her Seacoasts, that after a
sort inuit and provoke the Inhabitants to navigations.

(5) Such as in ancient time made their abode and habitations in this Province,
were the GANGANI, who were also called CONCANI, AVTERI, and NAGNATAE. As the
Luceni (that were next neighbors unto them) came from the Luceniji (in Spain)
so those Gangam and Coneani may seem also to have fetched their deriuation from
the Concan (Nation of the selfsame Country) both by the affinity of name,
and vicinitie of place. In Strabo, according to the diversity of reading, the
same people are named Coniaci and Conisci: and Silius testifies them at the
first to have been Scythians, and to have used ordinarily to drink horses
blood (a thing nothing strange among the wild Irish even of late days.) And
some may also happily suppose that the Irish name Conaughty, was compounded of
Concani and Nagnatae. Howsoever, it is sure that these were the ancient
Inhabitants of this Country, as is to be seen in Ptolemie.

(6) The principal City of this Province, and which may worthily be accounted
the third in Ireland, is Galway, in Irish, Galliue, built in manner much like
to a Tower. It is dignified with a Bishops See, and is much frequented with
Merchants, by reason whereof, and the benefit of the Road and Haven, it is
gainful to the Inhabitants through traffic and exchange of rich commodities,
both by Sea and Island. Not far from which, near the West shore that lies
indented with small in-lets and out lets in a row, are the Islands called Arran,
of which many a foolish fable goes, as if they were the Islands of the living,
wherein none died at any time, or were subject to morality; which is as
supersitious an observation, as that used in some other corners of the Country,
where the people leave the right arms of their Infants males vnch^stned (as
they term it) to the end that at any time afterward, they might give a more
deadly and ungracious blow when they strike: which things do not only show
how palpably they are carried away by traditious obscurities, but do also
intimate how full their hearts be of inueterate revenge.

(7) This ^ouince presents no matter more worthy of memory, then the battle of
Knoe-toe (that is) The ^ull of axes, under which, the greatest rabble of
Rebels, that were ever seen before in Ireland (raised and gathered together by
the Arch-Rebels of that time, William Burk O Brien, Mac-Nomare, and O-Carrol)
were after a bloody overthrow discomfited and put to flight by the noble
service of Girald F^^z-G^rald Earl of ^ildare* And the suppression of certain
Irish (the posterity of Mac-William) who usurping a tyranny in these parts,
raged sometimes upon themselves, with mutual injuries, and oppressed the poor
people a long time with extorting, pilling, and spoiling; so as they left
scarce one house in the Country vnrifled, or vnrased; but were bridled and
repressed (even in our remembrance) by the severity and resolution of the
Commissioner of those their unjust doings, would be a means to draw the people
away from the due obedience to their Prince: such therefore as refused to obey
the laws, and sided with the tumultuous, with all care and diligence he soon
scattered, forcing their Forts, and driving them into woods and lurking holes
(for troubling the blessed estate of tranquillity) till the Lord Deputy, who
took pity of them, upon their humble supplication, commanded by his missiues,
that they should be received upon terms of peace. But they being a
stiffenecked people, took arms again, entered a-fresh into actual rebellion,
drove away booties, made foul vprores, and upon fair promises procured the
aid of the Scottish Ilanders, from out of the Hebrides: whereupon the Governor
assembled an Army, and pursued them with such powerful violence through the
Woods and Forests, that after six or seven weeks, being grievously
hunger-bitten, they submitted themselves in all humility. The Auxiliarie
Forces also of the Scots, he by day and night affronted so near, and followed
so hardly, that he put them to flight, after he had killed and drowned about
three thousand of them in the River Moin.

(8) About the year 1316. there was such a great slaughter made of the Irish
in this Province of Connaught, through a quarrel that arose there between two
Lords or Princes, that there were slain on both sides about four thousand
men; and so great a tribulation at that time came upon the people, that they
did devour and eat one another, so as of 10000. there remained not above 200.
living. And it is reported for truth, that the people were then so
hunger-starued, that in Churchyards they took the dead bodies out of their
graves, and in their sculs boiled the flesh, and fed upon it: yea, and that
women did eat their own children. Thus appeared the ire and anger of God, in
punishing their sins, and seeking their conversion.

(9) Places memorable, are, Inis Ceath, well known by the Monastery of Colman
(a devout Saint) founded for Scots and Englishmen; and Inis Bouind, which Bid
calls, White Calse Isle. Also Ma^o, a Monastery built (as Bede writes) for
thirty men of the English Nation. Likewise the Barony of Boil, under Carlew
hills, where in times past was a famous Abbey built, together with the Abbey
of Beatitude, in the year of grace 1152: These Abbeyes and Monasteries erected
at the first for religious services, and through ignorance and other
obseurities diuerted since unto superstitious uses, are now made the ruins of
time.

(10) The Province of Connaught is at this day strengthened with fourteen
Castles, traded with nine Market-Townes, and divided as ensues. Counties.
Clare, or Twomond. Gallway. Maio. Slego. Letrim. Roscomen.



THE PROVINCE OF VLSTER. CHAPTER V.
THis Province, called by our Welsh-Britaines Vltw, in Irish Cui Guilly, in
Latin Vltonia, and Vlidia, in English V^sier; on the North is divided by a
narrow Sea from Scotland; Southward it extends it self to Connagh and
Leinster; the East part lies upon the Irish Sea; and the West part is
continually beaten with the boisterous rage of the maine West Ocean. This
Province and furthest part of Ireland, affronteth the Scottish Islands, which are
called the Hebrides, and are scattered in the Seas between both Kingdoms;
whose Inhabitants at this day is the Irish-Scot, successor of the old Scythian.

(2) The form thereof is round, reaching in length from Coldagh-Hauen in her
North, to Kilmore in her South, near an hundred miles; and in breadth from
Black-Abbey in her East, to Calebegh point in her West, one hundred thirty and
odd miles: The whole in circumference, about four hundred and twenty miles.

(3) This Country seldom feels any unseasonable extremities, the quick and
flexible winds cooling the heat of Summer, and soft and gentle showers
mollify the hardness of the Winter. Briefly, the frozen nor torrid Zone have
not here any usurpation; the clouds in the air very sweet and pleasant, yea,
and when they are most impure, are not unwholesome, nor of long continuance,
the rough winds holding them in continual agitation.

(4) This equal temperature causes the ground to bring forth great store of
several Trees, both fit for building, and bearing of fruit; plentiful of
grass for the feeding of Cattle, and is abundantly furnished with Horses,
Sheep and Oxen; the Rivers likewise pay double tribute, deep enough to ^arry
Vessels either for pleasure or profit, and Fish great store, both for their
own uses, and commodity of others. Salmons in some Rivers of this County
abound more in number then in any River of Europe. To speak (in general)
though in some places it be somewhat barren, troubled with Loughes, Lakes, and
thick Woods, yet is it every where fresh, and full of Cattle and forage,
ready at all times to answer the husbandmans pains. But nature is there so
little beholding to Art or Industry, that the various show upon banks, the
shady groves, the green meadows, hanging hills, and fields fit for Corn,
(if they were manured) do seem to be angry with their Inhabitants for
suffering all to grow wild and harbarous, through their own negligence.

(5) This Country in Ptolemies days was wholly possessed by the Volutij,
Darni, Robogdji, and Erdini, who branched and spread themselves into the
several parts that Island.

(6) The people of this Province were accustomed in controversies and solemn
protestations, to swear by S. Patrickes Staff, which oath they feared more to
break, then if they had sworn by the holy Evangelist* Their ancient custom
in making their King, was this: A white Cow was taken, which the King must
kill, and sees the same in water whole, then must he bathe himself therein
stark naked; and sitting in the Cawdron wherein it was sod, accompanied with
his people round about him, he and they used to eat the flesh and drink the
broth wherein he sat, without cup, or dish, or use of hand. How far these
prescriptions and customs were different from the conformities of other civil
Monarchies, we may well perceive by these and other like observations of those
gross times, and as yet they are more barbarous then is any other part of the
Island besides.

(7) Historians relating of Ireland, tell of several Islands in the several
Provinces: some full of Angels, some full of Devils; some for male only, some
for female; some where none may live, some where none can die; and such effects
of trees, stones, and waters, that a man (but of easy conceit) may well
esteem them as heedlesse as uncertain. So also S. Patrickes Purgatory (a
thing of much note in the Tract of this Province) is a vault or narrow cave in
the ground, (...) (called Erne Liffer) much spoken of, by reason of (I wot not
what) fearful walking spirits and dreadful apparitions, (or rather some
religious horror) which (as some ridiculously dream) was digd by Ulysses when
he went down to parley with those in hell. This is the cave which the
Inhabitants in these days call ^llanu^ Frugadory, that is, The Isle of
Purgatory, and S. Patricks Pargatory: for some persons, less devout then
credulous, affirm that S. Patricke (or rather Patricius Secundus an holy Abbot
of that name) laboring the conversion of the people of this Province, and much
enforcing the life to come, they replied contemptuously unto him, that unless
they saw proofs of those joys and pains he preached, they would not lose the
possession of their present pleasures, in hope or fear of things to come, they
wist not when Whereupon (as they say) he obtained at Gods hands by earnest
prayer, that the punishments and torments which the godless are to suffer
after this life, might be there presented to the eye, that so he might more
easily root out the sins and Heathenish errors, that stuck so fast in the
hearts of the Irish. But touching the credit hereof (although common fame, and
some records do utter it) I neither will urge the belief, nor regard, seeing
it is no Article of our Creed.

(8) Matters memorable within this Province are these: first, that the Bishops
of Ireland were wont to be consecrated by the Archbishop of Canterbury in
regard of the (...) which they had in this Country; until such time as John
Pap^^^ a Cardinal was sent thither from Pop^ Eugenius the fourth, to reform
Ecclesiastical discipline in this Island, which (...) so loo^^, that there were
translations, and pluralities of Bishops, according to the (...) and pleasure
of the Metropolitan* Also that the Irish-men were accustomed to leave and
forsake (...) wedded wives at their own free wills, whereof Lanfrancke
Archbishop of Canterbury complained unto Theraelua^ a King of Ireland. And had
not this Nation been corrupted with this vice, even unto these our days; both
the right of lineall succession had been more certain among them, and the
Gentry and Comminaltie had not in such cruelties imbrued themselves, with such
effusion of their own kindreds blood, about their inheritances and
legitimation.

(9) The principal place in this Tract is Armagh, near unto the River Kalin,
which (albeit it makes a poor show) is the Archiepiscopall See and
Metropolitan of the whole Island. Before Saint Patricke had built there a
fair City, for site, form, quantity, and compass, modelled out (as he
says) by the appointment and direction of Angels, this place was named
Drumfalrch; the Irish tell much that it received the name of Queen Armacha:
but the better opinions are, that it is the same which Bid calls Dearmach,
and out of the Scottish and Irish language interprets it, The Field of Oaks.
Here (as S. Bernard writes) S. Patricke the Apostle of Ireland ruled in his
life time, and rested after death: in honor of whom it was of such venerable
estimation in old time, that not only Bishops and Priests, but Kings also and
Princes were (in general) subject to the Metropolitan thereof in all
obedience, and to his government alone. Among the Archbishops of this Province,
S. Malachy is famoused, who first prohibited Priests marriage in Ireland, and
(as S. Bernard says, who wrote his life at large) borrowed no more of the
native barbarousnesse of that Country, then Sea-fishes do saltness of the
Seas. Also Richard Fitz Ralf (commonly called Armachanus) is of famous memory,
who turning the edge of his style, about the year 1355. began to oppose his
opinion against the Order of Mendicant Friars, as detesting in Christians such
voluntary begging. The chief Fort in this Tract is Enis Kelling, defended by
the Rebels in the year 1593 and won by Dowdall a most valiant Captain:
near unto which is a great downfall of water, termed The Salmon Leap: of
which there is a common speech current among the Inhabitants, that it was once
firm ground very populous and well husbanded with tillage; till it was
suddenly over flowne with waters, and turned into a Lake, for some filthy
abominable acts of the people against Nature committed with beasts.

(10) The places of Religion, sequestered from other worldly services, and
consecrated to holy purposes, erected in this Province, were: The Abbey which
shows it self at Donegal: The Monastery of Derie, where the Irish Rebel
Shane O-N^al received such an overthrow (by Edward Randolph, renowned for his
service in the behalf of his Country) that he could never after recover the
loss he sustained at that time: The Monastery near unto the River Laffer: The
famous Monastery at the Bay of Knockfergus, of the same institution, name, and
order, as was that ancient Abbey in England, near unto Chester, called
Danchor: Also Mellifont Abbey, founded by Donald a King of Vriel, and much
commended by S Bernard: And lastly, the most renowned Monastery, built at
Armagh in the year of our Salvation 610. out of which very many Monasteries
were afterward propagate both in Britain and Ireland. These places were far
and near frequented and sought unto by great confluences of Pilgrims, till
Time proved their devotions to be erroneous, and the pure light of the word
revealed, opening the eyes of their understanding, has taught them to shake
off the shame of such Superstitions.

(11) That the people of this County might be kept within the bounds of their
duty, this Province has been secured with fifty six Castles and Forts; and
for trade of commerce, nine Market-Townes appointed, being divided into these
Counties ensuing. Counties. Dunghall, or Tyr-connell. Upper Tyrone. Nether
Tyrone. Fermanagh. Canan. Monaghan. Colrane. Autrim. Down. Armagh. Lough.



FINIS.
The Table to find the Maps as appears by folio.
ENgland, Scotland, and Ireland. 1 England. 2 Kent. 3 Sussex. 4 Surrey. 5
Southhampton. 6 The Isle of Wight. 7 Dorcetshire. 8 Deuon-shire. 9 Cornwall.
10 Somersetshire. 11 Wiltshire. 12 Barkeshire. 13 Middlesex. 14 Essex County.
15 Suffolk. 16 Norfolk. 17 Cambridgeshire. 18 Hartfordshire. 19 Bedfordshire.
20 Buckinghamshire. 21 Oxfordshire. 22 Glocestershire. 23 Merefordshire. 24
Worcestershire. 25 Warwickeshire. 26 Northamptonshire. 27 Huntingtonshire. 28
Rutlandshire. 29 Leicestershire. 30 Lincolneshire. 31 Nottinghamshire. 32
Darbishire. 33 Staffordshire. 34 Shropshire. 35 Chester. 36 Lancashire. 37
Yorkshire. 38 The Bishopric of Durham. 39 Westmorland and Cumberland 40
Northumberland. 41 The Isle of Man. 42 Holy (...) Wales. 44 Pembrokeshire. 45
Radnor, Breknock, Cardigan, and Ca^rmarden described. 46 Glamorganshire. 47
Monmouthshire. 48 Montgomery etc. 49 Denbigh and Flint described. 50 Anglesey
and Carnar^an. 51 The Kingdom of Scotland. 52 The Southyart of Scotland. 53
The Southern part of Scotland 54 The Eastern part of Scotland 55 Part of
Scotland, Stranauern. 56 The Isles of Hebrides. 57 Cathanes and Orknay. 58
Ireland Described. 59 Mounster. 60 Leinster. 61 Connaught. 62 Vlster. (...)
MIDIA.

