THE CHRISTIAN SWORD AND BVCKLER.

OR, A Letter sent by D. SPRINT, to a man seven years grievously afflicted in
conscience, and fearfully possessed by the Devil.

Very comfortable and commodious to withst and the assaults of Satan.



LONDON Printed by B. Alsop for Samuel Rand and are to be sold at his shop at
Holborne Bridge.

1623.

THE CHRISTIAN SWORD AND BVCKLER.
SIR I am not unmindful of your Letter, though by occasion of business I have
been let. I commend your care to seek comfort from the ordinance of God, that
is his 1 These. 5. 14.
Ministers, who are commanded of God to comfort the feeble minded, Esa. 10. ^,
^,
and to speak comfortably to Jerusalem, and to cry unto her, that her warfare
is accomplished that her iniquity is pardoned; As Christ was anointed, so are
his Ministers appointed to preach the Gospel to the Luke 4. 1^.
poor, deliverance to the captive, recovery of fight to the blind and to set
at liberty such as are bruised.

Wherefore seeing you have entreated me help, I will (by Gods assistance)
satisfy your desire.

Your case was strange to be holden as a creature senseless for seven whole
years. But others also have been holden with the like; Nabuchadnezar Dan. 4.
29.
King of Babell was turned out a grazing among beasts. 7. years; yea Gods
children have been far worse afflicted, as that Daughter of Abraham was for
18. years bound of Satan. The man Luke 13. 16 40. 5.
whom our Savior cured had been diseased 38. years which are far above the
distance of your sickness, wherefore you ought not to think the worse of your
self, for nothing has befallen unto you but that which appertains 1. Cor.
10. 13.
unto man; Nay you ought to comfort your heart in your affliction, for as you
know the sender which is God, and the cause which is your sin: So now you
know your deliverer, and the cause which is his mercy; for it is the Lord who
kills and 1. Sam. 2. 6.
makes alive, brings down to the grave and raises up: And by how much
greater your cross has been, by so much the greater was your deliverance;
The mighty power of God upon your body, and his rich mercy on your soul, has
the more appeared, that so the more he might be glorified, and your heart
comforted; for you may argue thus; The Lord might have in justice destroyed me,
yet he has in mercy spared me; the Lord might have chosen whether he would
have delivered me or not; But in great mercy he rather chose to deliver me;
The Lord might have left me my health, and withdrawn his grace from me, and
given ^he over to the power of Satan: But he has restored my health and
understanding, and renewed my Grace;

Hereby I see God dearly loves me, which I could never see if I had not thus
been afflicted; How should I hence forth distrust his providence, doubt of his
promises, despair of his mercy, why would I not rest assured, and secured of
his present and perpetual love to embrace me, his mercy to pardon me, his
providence to defend me, his goodness to compass me and to work all evils for
my good; Therefore my soul return unto thy rest, for Psalm. 116. 7. 8. 9. 12.
13.
the Lord has been beneficial to thee; he has delivered my soul from death,
and mine eyes from tears, and my feet ^oo^^ falling, I shall walk before the
Lord in the land of the living, what shall I render to the Lord for all his
benefits, I will take the cup of Salvation and call upon the name of the Lord.

The Lord was ready to save me, Psa. 38. ^0.
therefore I will sing my song all the days of my life in the house of the
Lord.

Thus may you comfort your self, yet measure not Gods love so much by your
deliverance, as by his grace which nature gave you not, nor has God taken away.

For as afflictions are no certain tokens of Gods anger: so deliverance, is
not always a token of his favor.

For he gave the Isralites their desires, but he sent heaviness into their
souls: God may in mercy lengthen Psalm. 106. 15
our afflictions, and in judgment make an end of it. The table of the wicked
Psalm. ^9. ^^.
is a snare unto them, and their prosperity their ruin, but it is good for
Gods Psalm. 119. 7^
children that they have been afflicted that they may learn his statutes;
godliness is Gods best portion which is 1. Tim. 6. 6, and 4. 8.
great gain, and is profitable for all things, having the promises of the life
present, and of that which is to come; Wherefore prove the grace that is in you
and to measure the love of God unto you; Try what godly grief you have for
sin; what vexation at your wants, what fear of God, what faith in Jesus
Christ, what love of Gods children, what delight in the word and Ministry,
what desire of the grace you lack, what feruency in prayer, what chearefulnes
in praising God, what care of well doing, and readynes to do the will of God,
what patience in suffering crosses from God, and reproof from man, what holy
Meditations, what gracious speeches, what diligence in your calling, what
dutifulnes to your superiors, what purpose of heart to cleave unto the Lord;
these are the sparkles of Gods Image, the fruits of his spirit, the effects of
his grace, the assurance of his election, the certain tokens of his presence;
For 2. Cor. 1. 5. 2
the Lord is with us, whiles we are with him; and he draws near unto ^^m.
4. 8.
us when we draw near unto him.

Now touching the temptations of Satan that do trouble you, perceive when God
has done with you, the Devil takes you in hand, God afflicts your body,
and the Devil your soul. But as God brought you from sickness to health: So
think that God can bring you from temptations to victory; that being prepared
by affliction in Soul and body, you may both serve him in this life, and live
with him in the next.

Every temptation of a Christian, is a ground of strong consolation, because
Satan's onsets argue that we are none of his; for the Dragon strikes not at
his own soldiers (for Kingdoms Reu. 12. ^.
divided are at an end) but at Mychaell and his Angels; If Christ Math. 12. 25
had not been the Son of God, he would not so fiercely have affailed him;
Warryors never besiege nor batter Cities they have woone, so Satan seeks not
the souls he has deuored; he rages most at those he cannot get, Revel 12. 13
14. 15. 17.
and is most busy with those he has least to do; when this strong man
keeps his Palace in men's souls, the Luke 11. 21.
things that he possesses are in peace; and when he is restrained and muzzeled
by the power of God, he rages at the persons, and roareth in the conscience
of Gods dear Children; your temptations come not to you by chance, but by the
will of God, without whose leave he cannot touch either Job. 1. 10.
man or beast; But God has an hand to limit Satan, and direct his Math. 8. 31.
temptation for our good, as he has an hand to let him loose for our trial
and vexation; Hereby he humbles the 2. Cor. 12. 17.
pride, tries the patience, sifteth the faith and works the victory of his
Job. 1. 11. 12. Luke 22. 31 Revel. 12. 11 Math. 4. 1.
beloved Saints: It is Gods spirit that leads Gods Children to be tempted of
the Devil and he that leads them into the battle can give them victory; 1. Io.
4. 4.
For greater is he that is in us then, he that is in the world; The Serpents
Genesis 3. 15.
head is crushed by the seed of the woman; The Devil is conquered and cast
Reu. 12. 10. 12.
out of heaven, and is come down into the inhabitants of the earth, so that
Angels cannot separate us from the Romans 8. 38. 39. Luke 22. 31. 32.
love of God in Christ, when Satan hinders us, Christ prays that our faith
fail not, for he ever lives to make request for us; when the messenger of
Satan is sent to buffet us, Gods grace is sufficient for us; wherefore 2. Cor.
12. 9
you must rejoice in these temptations, because it is for the trial of your
faith and patience; And for Sathan^ Iam. 1. 2. 3.
fig for him, resist him only and he will fly from you, pray to your
Father to free you from temptations, and i^ he do not free you from them, yet
he Iam. 4. 7.
will deliver you from evil.

The particular points of his temptations, I will briefly touch: He tel^ you,
that the word of God is false: This is the first lesson that the Devil
teaches, and it is his way to mak^ men Atheist; But you must tell hi^ that God
is as true of his word; as h^ is false of his; God is the God of truth; Psalm.
31. 5. Io. 8. 44.
and the Devil is the father of a lie. I^ is not possible that God should lie.
I^ is not possible but the Devil should lie; Heb. 6. 18.
say you unto your soul I must believe the truth, and not a lie, least I turn
Romans 1. 25.
Gods truth into a lie; for he that believes not God has made him a liar; 1.
Io. 5. ^0.
I will rather believe the creator then the creature; the maker then the
destroyer of man: and that which will save me then that which will condemn me;
yea let God be true, and every Romans 3. 4. Iam. 1. 18.
Devil and man a liar; As for the word of god it is the word of truth it is
righteousness altogether, every word thereof is pure and endures for ever; This
the Psalm. 19. 9.
godly show, who only love it, this the wicked show who only hate it; this the
Pro. 39. 5. 1, Pet. 1. 25.
spirit witnesses in the hearts of Gods Children, this the power thereof
proclaims in the conversion of souls: this experience of all times and
places makes evident, the wicked know it to their cost, (both men and Devils)
the faithful to their comfort.

Next if Satan seek to lay your sins before your eyes; thereto you must lay
the sufferings of Christ before your eyes; If he accuse you, tell him the
accuser Reu. 12. 10.
of brethren is cast out; If he charge your conscience with your sins; ask
him who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods chosen? If he condemn ^om.
8. 33. 34.
you for them; say it is God that justifies, who shall then condemn. If he
say your sins are many, and more then can be pardoned; tell him where Romans
15. 20.
sin abounds grace over abounds: If he say you are the greatest sinner in
the world; tell him it is true, but Christ came into the world to save sinners,
whereof I am the chief: If he 1. Tim. 1. 15.
allege the greatness of the guilt, say, though my sins be as red as
Scarlet, Esa 1 18.
yet he will make them as white as Snow: If he say suppose some of thy sins
be cleansed, yet not all, say that the blood of Christ cleanses us from all 1.
Io. 1. 7.
sins: If he say Christ dyed for some but not for all; say he is the
reconciliation 1. Io. 2. 2.
of the sins of the whole world; he is the Savior of all men but specially
of them that believe: If he say suppose God pardon thee, it is but for a season
till thou sin again, tell him 1. Tim. 4 10. Ier. 32. 31. 34
again of the new covenant of God, which says, I will forgive their
iniquity and will remember their sins no more; If he say in all this thou
presumest, 2. Cor. 7. 10
show him your godly sorrow, which causes repentance to salvation; If he say
how know thou whether God will accept of thy repentance or not, tell him if
we acknowledge our 1. Io. 1. ^.
sins, God is faithful and just to forgive our Sins, and to cleanse us from
all unrighteousness; If he say thy sorrow is despair, examine your self 2.
Cor. 13. 5
whether you be in the faith, and say to God, I believe Lord help my
unbelief; Mark 9. 24
If he say thy faith is fained dead and false; say unto him, he that believes
1. Io. 5. 10.
in the Son has witness in himself, as for thee O Satan, I will Iam. 2. 18.
show thee my faith by my wo^kes. If he say thy obedience is but fained dead
and false, and you are but an Hypocrite; say of yourselfe, I know nothing by my
self yet am I not thereby justified; 1. Cor. 4 4.
Turn unto God and say, O that my ways were directed to keep thy Psalm. 1. 9.
5. 80.
statutes; Keep my heart upright i^ thy statutes that I be not ashamed: if he
say thou a^t accursed, because thou contine west not in all things that are
written; say again, Christ has redeemed Gal. 3. 13.
me from the curse of the law, when he was made a curse for one; If he say thy
coruptions be strange and Romans 7. 24. 25.
many; cry out O miserable man that I am, who shall deliver me from this body
of death; I thank God through Jesus Christ: Pray unto God create a Psalm. 51.
10.
clean heart O Lord, ^enue a right spirit within me; If he say for all this
thou shall be condemned, because Gods judgments be exact, and gives every man
according to his works; say there Romans 8. 1.
is no condemnation to them that are in Christ, to them that walk not after
the flesh but after the spirit: lastly if he say, yet thou can have no peace
of conscience but perpetual wound; say, the Lord speaks peace to his people
Psalm. 85. 8.
and to his Saints, that they turn not again to their folly, For being
justified Rom, 5. 1.
by faith we have peace toward God through our Lord Jesus Christ.

I know that Devil may proceed and say, thou art not chosen; But you must say
unto him: that God chose us in Ephesians. 1. 4.
Christ that we should be holy: and I am sure that God has chosen to himself
Psalm. 4. 3.
the man that is godly; virtue joined to our faith makes our calling and
election sure, for such as God has predestined them has he called,
wherefore so long as Gods grace Luke 10. 20.
remains in me, so long I will rejoice that my name is witten in the book of
life: But Satan may object, suppose thou be now in the favor of thy God, yet
thou may fall away from Romans 11. 29.
grace; he may withdraw his spirit. To this you may answer this again, the
gifts and callings of God are Ier 13. 3.
without repentance; i^ he love us he loved us from everlasting, and loves
Io. 13. 1.
us to the end. No creature shall be able Romans 8. 38. 39. Psalm. 23. 6.
to separate us from the love of God in Christ; kindness and mercy shall follow
me all the days of my. life, and this God is our God for ever and ever Psalm.
48. 14.
he shall be our guide unto the death. But he may say, that Gods mind may alter,
and he may hate them for sin, whom he loved of mercy: God answers Mat. 3. 6.
for himself, I am the Lord I change not, and ye Sounes of Jacob 1. Sam. 15.
29
are not consumed, for God is not as man that he should repent. Jesus Heb. 13.
8.
Christ that was yesterday, is the same to day, the same also is for ever; Gods
covenant of life and peace is everlasting. Ier. 33. 20. ^1.
If Satan thou can break Gods covenant of the day and night, that there
shall not be day and night, in their season, then may Gods covenant be broken
with his children, for God has said unto his chosen. The mountains shall
remove, and the hills Esa. 54. 10.
fall down, but my mercy shall not depart from thee, neither shall this
covenant of my peace fall away, faith the Lord which has compassion on thee.
For that mercy and free grace which Rom, ^. 10.
moved God to accept us when we were sinners, strangers, enemies and children
of wrath, and to reconcile us by the death of his Son, must much more move
him, (being reconciled) to accept us, and to save us by the life of Christ.
Thus the foundation of God remains sure.

Yet Satan may reply, suppose there be no alteration or change in God: yet in
thee there is: He is strong, but thou art weak. But Peter answers 2. Pet. 1.
5.
that we are not kept by our own strength, but by the power of God unto
Salvation, and I shall overcome by Reu. 12. 11.
the blood of the lamb, for in his own 1. Sam. 2. 9.
might shall no man be strong: suppose then I may fall, and that most
grievously, as David, Solomon, and Peter did: yet though I fall I shall no be
cast Psalm. 37. 24. 23.
off: for the Lord puts his hand under me: The paths of man are directed by
the Lord, he will keep the feet of his Saints. Wherefore rejoice not against
Sam. ^. 9.
me O mine enemies, though I fall I shall rise, when I sit in darkness Mica. 7.
8. 7
the Lord shall be a light unto me.

If Satan urge you further thus, how dare thou presume of Gods assistance,
thou have not Gods grace at thy command, show him the covenant of God,
confirmed and sealed by the blood of Jesus Christ, who says, Ier. 31. 33.
I will write my law in their hearts, I will make an everlasting covenant Ier.
32. 40.
with them, that I will never turn away from them, to do them good, I will
put my fear into their hearts, that they shall not depart from me, I will give
them a new heart and a new Eze 36. 26. 27. and 11. 19, 20.
spirit, I will take the stony heart out of their bodies, and I will give them
a heart of flesh, I will put my spirit within them, and cause ^^em to walk in
my statutes. It is most true we are not sufficient of our selves, to think 2.
Cor. 3. 5.
any thing of our selves, but our sufficiency is of God: As no man comes unto
Christ, except the father draw Io. 6. 44. 65. Io. 15. 5.
him, so without Christ we can do nothing: Yet through the help of Christ
which strengthens me, I shall be able Phil. 4. 13. Phil. 1. 6.
to do all things. And he that has begun this good work within me, will
perform it until the day of Jesus Christ: And his good spirit shall lead
Psa. 143. 10 Ephesians. 4. 30.
me into the land of righteousness, and seal me to the day of my redemption.

As for the help that Satan offers thee. Ask him, how he can help
another that cannot help himself, and how should one trust the faith of a
deceauour: He offered the world unto our Savior Christ, and told him that
the world was his, but he told a Luke 4. 6.
lie; for albeit he be called the god of this world, because he rules in the
1. Cor. 4. 4.
children of disobedience; yet the earth is the Lords, and all that therein is,
the Ephesians. 2. 2. Psa. 24. 1.
world and all that dwell therein. Wherefore although the wicked of the world
fall down and worship him, to gain far smaller matters then the world, by
lying, swearing, and forswearing, deceiving, and oppressing, and such evil
courses, yet you must utterly refuse this offer, with avoid Satan, and come
behind me Satan, for it is written thou shall worship the Mat. 4. 10.
Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve. If Satan's help might stand a
man in steed, he must have no fellowship with his unfruitful works of
darkness.

Our Savior Christ and his Apostles would none of his assistance to help Ephesians.
5. 11.
to publish the Gospel to the world. It was the bane of Saul and Ahaziah Kings
of Judah, to seek for help of Satan: It is better to trust in the Mat. 1.
25. 1. Cor. 10. 13
Lord, then to put any confidence in man, or evil spirit, for devils cannot
free us from the hands of God, 2. Kin. 1. 4.
but God can keep us from the power of devils: For if God be with us who Psa.
118. 8. Romans 8. 31.
can be against us? He is not far from every one of us, he is as our shadow
Act. 17. 27.
at our right hand: He is a shield to them that trust in him: He keeps Psalm.
121. 5.
his people as the apple of his eye, under Pro. 30. 5.
the shadow of his wings, and as the mountains about Jerusalem, so is Psalm.
17. 8.
the Lord about his people, henceforth Psalm. 125. 2.
and for ever. Say therefore unto Satan, I defy thy power, and renounce thy
help, as I am none of thine because I am bought with a price, so will 1. Cor.
6. 19. 20. Psalm. 181.
I none of thee nor of thy help: The Lord is my helper, my rock, my
fortress, my deliverer, m^ strength, my shield the horn of my salvation, and
Psalm. 17. 1.
my refuge, my light, salvation, and strength of my life; my defense is in God,
who preserves the upright in Psalm. 78. 1^.
heart. The God whom I serve, is able to deliver me, and though he slay Dan. 3.
17.
me I will trust in him: He only makes me to dwell in safety; the Lord is
with me, therefore I will not not fear what man or Satan can do unto me; For
when my flesh fails, and Job. 13. 15.
my heart also, then God is the strength Psalm. 4. 8. Psalm. 73 26.
of my heart, and my portion for ever: So the father of mercyes, and the God of
all comfort, prosper and sanctify that I have written unto you.

Amen.
FINIS.

