AMORETTI AND Epithalamion.

Written not long since by Edmunde Spenser.

Printed for William Ponsonby. 1695.

To the Right Worshipful Sir Robart Needham Knight.
SIr, to gratulate your safe return from Ireland, I had nothing so ready, nor
thought any thing so meet, as these sweet conceited Sonets, the deed of that
welde serving gentleman, master Edmond Spenser: whose name sufficiently
warranting the worthiness of the work: I do more confidently presume to publish
it in his absence, under your name to whom (in my poor opinion) the patronage
thereof, does in some respects properly appertain. For, besides your judgment
and delighte in learned poesy: This gentle Muse for her former perfection long
wished for in England, now at the length crossing the Seas in your happy
company, (though to your self unknown) seems to make choice of you, as
meetest to give her deserved countenance, after her return: entertain her,
then, (Right worshipful) in sort best beseeming your gentle mind, and her
merit, and take in worth my good will herein, who seek no more, but to show
my self yours in all dutiful affection.

W.P

G: W. senior, to the Author
Dark is the day, when Phoebus face is shrouded,
and weaker sights may wander soon astray:
but when they see his glorious rays vnclowded,
with steady steps they keep the perfect way,
So while this Muse in foreign lands does stay,
invention weeps, and pens are cast aside,
the time like night, depriud of cheerful day,
and few do write, but (ah) too soon may slide.
Then, hie thee home, that art our perfect guide,
and with thy wit illustrate Englands fame,
dawnting thereby our neighoures ancient pr^
that do for poesy, challendge cheifest name.
So we that live and ages that succeed,
With great applause thy learned works shall ree
Ah Colin, whether on the lowly plain.
pyping to shepherds thy sweet roudelaies:
or whether singing in some lofty vain,
heroic deeds of past, or present days.
Or whether in thy lovely mistress praise,
thou list to exercise thy learned quill.
thy muse has got such grace, and power to please,
with rare invention bewtified by skill.
As who therein can ever joy their fill.
O therefore let that happy muse proceed
to clime the height of virtues sacred hill,
where endless honor shall be made thy meede.
Because no malice of succeeding days,
can raze those records of thy lasting praise.
G.W. I.

SONNET. I.
HAppy ye leaves when as those lilly hands,
which hold my life in their dead doing might
shall handle you and hold in loves soft bands,
like captives trembling at the victors sight.
And happy lines, on which with starry light,
those lamping eyes will deigne sometimes to look
and read the sorrows of my dying spright,
written with tears in hearts close bleeding book.
And happy rymes bathed in the sacred brook,
of Helicon whence she derived is,
when ye behold that Angels blessed look,
my souls long lacked food, my heavens blis.
Leaves, lines, and rymes, seek her to please alone,
whom if ye please, I care for other none.
SONNET. II.
Unquiet thought, whom at the first I bred,
Of the inward bale of my love pined heart:
and since have with sighs and sorrows fed,
till greater then my womb thou woxen art.
Break forth at length out of the inner part,
in which thou lurkest like to vipers brood:
and seek some succor both to ease my smart
and also to sustain thy self with food.
But if in presence of that fairest proud
thou chance to come, fall lowly at her feet:
and with meek humblesse and afflicted mood,
pardon for thee, and grace for me entreat.
Which if she grant, then live and my love cherish,
if not, die soon, and I with thee will perish.
SONNET. III.
THe sovereign beauty which I do admyre,
witness the world how worthy to be prayzed:
the light whereof has kindled heavenly fire,
in my frail spirit by her from baseness raised.
That being now with her huge brightness dazed,
base thing I can no more endure to view:
but looking still on her I stand amazed,
at wondrous sight of so celestial hew.
So when my tongue would speak her praises dew,
it stopped is with thoughts astonishment:
and when my pen would write her titles true,
it ravished is with fancies wonderment:
Yet in my heart I then both speak and write,
the wonder that my wit cannot endite.
SONNET. IIII.
NEw year forth looking out of Ianus gate,
Does seem to promise hope of new delight:
and bidding the old Adieu, his passed date
bids all old thoughts to die in dumpish spright.
And calling forth out of sad Winters night,
fresh love, that long has slept in cheerlesse bower:
wills him awake, and soon about him dight
his wanton wings and darts of deadly power.
For lusty spring now in his timely hour,
is ready to come forth him to receive:
and warnes the Earth with diverse colord flower,
to deck her self, and her fair mantle weaue.
Then you fair flower, in who^ fresh youth does rain,
prepare your self new love to entertain.
SONNET. V.
RVdely thou wrongest my dear hearts desire,
In finding fault with her too portly pride:
the thing which I do most in her admire,
is of the world unworthy most enuide.
For in those lofty looks is close implide,
scorn of base things, and sdeigne of foul dishonor:
thretning rash eyes which gaze on her so wide,
that loosely they ne dare to look upon her.
Such pride is praise, such portlinesse is honor,
that boldned innocence bears in her eyes:
and her fair countenance like a goodly banner,
spreds in defiaunce of all enemies.
Was never in this world ought worthy tried,
without some spark of such self-pleasing pride.
SONNET. VI.
BE naught dismayed that her unmoved mind,
does still persist in her rebellious pride:
such love not like to lusts of baser kind,
the harder won, the firmer will abide.
The duresull Oak, whose sap is not yet dride,
is long ere it conceive the kindling fire:
but when it once does burn, it does divide
great heat, and makes his flames to heaven aspire.
So hard it is to kindle new desire,
in gentle breast that shall endure for ever:
deep is the wound, that dints the parts entire
with chaste affects, that naught but death can sever.
Then think not long in taking little pain,
to knit the knot, that ever shall remain.
SONNET. VII.
Fair eyes, the myrrour of my mazed heart,
what wondrous virtue is contaynd in you
the which both life and death forth from you dart
into the object of your mighty view?
For when ye mildly look with lovely hew,
then is my soul with life and love inspired:
but when ye lowre, or look on me askew
then do I die, as one with lightning fyred.
But since that life is more then death desired,
look ever lovely, as becomes you best,
that your bright beams of my weak eyes admyred,
may kindle living fire within my breast.
Such life should be the honor of your light,
such death the sad ensample of your might.
SONNET. VIII.
MOre then most fair, full of the living fire,
Kindled above unto the maker near:
no eyes but joys, in which al powers conspire,
that to the world naught else be counted dear
Through your bright beams does not ye blinded guest,
shoot out his darts to base affections wound:
but Angels come to lead frail minds to rest
in chaste desires on heavenly beauty bound.
You frame my thoughts and fashion me within,
you stop my tongue, and teach my heart to speak,
you calm the storm that passion did begin,
strong through your cause, but by your virtue weak.
Dark is the world, where your light shined never;
well is he borne, that may behold you ever.
SONNET. IX.
LOng-while I sought to what I might compare
those powrefull eyes, which lighte^ my dark spright,
yet find I naught on earth to which I dare
resemble th'ymage of their goodly light.
Not to the Sun: for they do shine by night;
nor to the Moon: for they are changed never;
nor to the Stars: for they have purer sight;
nor to the fire: for they consume not ever;
Nor to the lightning: for they still persevere;
nor to the Diamond: for they are more tender;
nor unto Crystal: for naught may them sever;
nor unto glass: such baseness might offend her:
Then to the Maker self they likest be,
whose light does lighten all that here we see.
SONNET. X.
Unrighteous Lord of love what law is this,
That me thou make thus tormented be:
the whiles she lordeth in licentious bliss
of her freewill, scorning both thee and me.
See how the Tyranness does joy to see
the huge massacres which her eyes do make:
and humbled hearts brings captives unto thee,
that thou of them may mighty vengeance take.
But her proud heart do thou a little shake
and that high look, with which she does comptroll
all this worlds pride bow to a baser make,
and al her faults in thy black book enroll.
That I may laugh at her in equal sort,
as she does laugh at me and makes my pain her sport.
SONNET. XI.
Daily when I do seek and sew for peace,
And hostages do offer for my truth:
she cruel warrior does her self address,
to battle, and the weary war renew'th.
Ne will be moved with reason or with rewth,
to grant small respit to my restless toil:
but greedily her fell intent poursewth,
Of my poor life to make vnpitteid spoil.
Yet my poor life, all sorrows to assoyle,
I would her yield, her wrath to pacify:
but then she seeks with torment and turmoyle,
to force me live and will not let me die.
All pain has end and every war has peace,
but mine no price nor prayer may surcease.
SONNET. XII.
ONe day I sought with her hart-thrilling eyes,
to make a truce and terms to entertain:
all fearelesse then of so false enemies,
which sought me to entrap in treasons train.
So as I then disarmed did remain,
a wicked ambush which lay hidden long
in the close covert of her guilefull eyes,
thence breaking forth did thick about me throng.
Too feeble I to abide the brunt so strong,
was forced to yield my self into their hands:
who me captiuing straight with rigorous wrong,
have ever since me kept in cruel bands.
So Lady now to you I do complain,
against your eyes that justice I may gain.
SONNET. XIII.
IN that proud port, which her so goodly graceth,
whiles her fair face she reares up to the sky:
and to the ground her eye lids low embaseth,
most goodly temperature ye may descry,
Myld humblesse mixed with awful majesty,
for looking on the earth whence she was borne:
her mind remembers her mortality,
what so is fairest shall to earth return.
But that same lofty countenance seems to scorn
base thing, and think how she to heaven may clime:
treading down earth as loathsome and forlorn,
that hinders heavenly thoughts with drossy slime.
Yet lowly still vouchsafe to look on me,
such lowliness shall make you lofty be.
SONNET. XIIII.
Return again my forces late dismayed,
Unto the siege by you abandoned quite,
great shame it is to leave like one afraid,
so fair a piece for one repulse so light.
Gaynst such strong castles needs greater might,
then those small forts which ye were wont belay,
such haughty mynds enured to hardy fight,
disdain to yield unto the first assay.
Bring therefore all the forces that ye may,
and lay incessant battery to her heart,
playnts, prayers, vows, ruth, sorrow, and dismay,
those engines can the proudest love convert.
And if those fail fall down and die before her,
so dying live, and living do adore her.
SONNET. XV.
YE tradefull Merchants that with weary toil,
do seek most precious things to make your ga^^^
and both the Indias of their treasures spoil,
what needs you to seek so far in vain?
For lo my love does in her self contain
all this worlds riches that may far be found,
if Sapphires, lo her eyes be Sapphires plain,
if Rubies, lo her lips be Rubies sound:
If Pearls, her teeth be pearls both pure and round;
if Yuorie, her forhead yuory ween;
if Gold, her locks are finest gold on ground;
if silver, her fair hands are silver sheene,
But that which fairest is, but few behold,
her mind adornd with virtues manifold.
SONNET. XVI.
ONe day as I unwarily did gaze
on those fair eyes my loves immortal light:
the whiles my stonisht heart stood in amaze,
through sweet illusion of her looks delight.
I mote perceive how in her glauncing sight,
legions of loves with little wings did fly:
darting their deadly arrows fyry bright,
at every rash beholder passing by.
One of those archers closely I did spy,
aiming his arrow at my very heart:
when suddenly with twincle of her eye,
the Damzell broke his misintended dart.
Had she not so done, sure I had been slain,
yet as it was, I hardly escaped with pain.
SONNET. XVII.
THe glorious pourtraict of that Angels face,
Made to amaze weak men's confused skill:
and this worlds worthless glory to embase,
what pen, what pencill can express her fill?
For though he colors could deuize at will,
and eke his learned hand at pleasure guide:
least trembling it his wormanship should spill,
yet many wondrous things there are beside.
The sweet eye-glaunces, that like arrows glide,
the charming smiles, that rob sense from the heart:
the lovely pleasance and the lofty pride,
cannot expressed be by any art.
A greater craftesmans hand thereto does need,
that can express the life of things indeed.
SONNET. XVIII.
THe rolling wheel that runs often round,
The hardest steel in tract of time does tear:
and drizling drops that often do redound,
the firmest flint does in continuance wear.
Yet cannot I with many a dropping tear,
and long entreaty soften her hard heart:
that she will once vouchsafe my plaint to hear,
or look with pity on my payneful smart.
But when I plead, she bids me play my part,
and when I weep, she says tears are but water:
and when I sigh, she says I know the art,
and when I wail she turns her self to laughter.
So do I weep, and wayle, and plead in vain,
whiles she as steel and flint does still remain.
SONNET. XIX.
THe merry Cuckoo, messenger of Spring,
His trompet shrill has thrice already sounded:
that warnes al lovers wayt upon their king,
who now is coming forth with girl and crouned
With noise whereof the quyre of Byrds resounded
their anthemes sweet devized of loves praise,
that all the woods their echoes back rebounded
as if they knew the meaning of their lays.
But among them all, which did Loves honor raise
no word was heard of her that most it ought.
but she his precept proudly disobayes,
and does his idle message set at naught.
Therefore O love, unless she turn to thee
ere Cuckoo end, let her a rebel be.
SONNET. XX.
IN vain I seek and sew to her for grace,
and do m^ne humbled heart before her pour:
the whiles her foot she in my neck does place,
and tread my life down in the lowly flower.
And yet the Lion that is Lord of power,
and reigns over every beast in field:
in his most pride disdeigneth to devour
the silly lamb that to his might does yield.
But she more cruel and more saluage wild,
then either Lion or the L^onesse:
shames not to be with guiltless blood defylde,
but takes glor^ in her cruelnesse.
Fayrer then fairest let none ever say,
that ye were blooded in a yielded pray.
SONNET. XXI.
WAs it the work of nature or of Art?
which tempred so the featur^ of her face:
that pride and meekness mixed by equal part,
do both appear t'adorne her beauties grace.
For with mild pleas^nce, which does pride displace,
she to her loves does lookers eyes allure:
and with stern countenance back again does chase
their looser looks that stir up lusts impure,
With such strange terms her eyes she does inure,
that with one look she does my life dismay:
and with another does it straight re^ure,
her smile me draws, her frown me drives away.
Thus does she train and teach me with her looks,
such art of eyes I never read in books.
SONNET. XXII.
THis holy season fit to fast and pray,
Men to devotion ought to be inclynd:
therefore, I likewise on so holy day,
for my sweet Saint some service fit will find.
Her temple fair is built within my mind,
in which her glorious image placed is,
on which my thoughts do^ day and night attend
like sacred priests that never think amiss.
There I to her as the author of my bliss,
will build an altar to appease her ire:
and on the same my heart will sacrifise,
burning in flames of pure and chaste desire:
The which vouchsafe O goddess to accept,
amongst thy dearest relics to be kept.
SONNET. XXIII.
PEnelope for her Ulysses sake,
Deuiz'd a Web her wooers to deceive:
in which the work that she all day did make
the same at night she did again vnreaue,
Such subtle craft my Damzell does conceive,
th`importune suit of my desire to shonne:
for all that I in many days do weaue,
in one short hour I find by her undone.
So when I think to end that I begone,
I must begin and never bring to end:
for with one look she spils that long I sponne,
and with one word my whole years work does rend.
Such labor like the Spyders web I find,
whose fruitless work is broken with least wynd.
SONNET. XXIIII.
WHen I behold that beauties wonderment,
And rare perfection of each goodly part^
of natures skill the only complement,
I honor and admire the makers art.
But when I feel the bitter balefull smart,
which her fair eyes unawares do work in me:
that death out of their shiny beams do dart,
I think that I a new Pandora see.
Whom all the Gods in council did agree,
into this sinful world from heaven to send:
that she to wicked men a scourge should be,
for all their ^aults with which they did offend.
But since ye are my scourge I will entreat,
that for my faults ye will me gently beat.
SONNET. XXV.
HOw long shall this like dying life endure,
And know no end of her own mysery:
but wast and wear away in terms unsure,
twixt fear and hope depending doubtfully.
Yet better were attonce to let me die,
and show the last ensample of your pride:
then to torment me thus with cruelty,
to prove your power, which I too well have tried.
But yet if in your hardened breast ye hide,
a close intent at last to show me grace:
then all the woes and wrecks which I abide,
as means of bliss I gladly will embrace.
And wish that more and greater they might be,
that greater meede at last may turn to me.
SONNET. XXVI.
SWeet is the Rose, but grows upon a brere;
Sweet is the Iunipere, but sharp his bough;
sweet is the Eglantine, but pricketh nere;
sweet is the firbloome, but his branches rough.
Sweet is the Cypress, but his rynd is tough,
sweet is the nut, but bitter is his pill;
sweet is the broome-flowre, but yet sour enough^
and sweet is Moly, but his root is ill.
So every sweet with sour is tempred still,
that makes it be coueted the more:
for easy things that may be got at will,
most sorts of men do set but little store.
Why then should I accoumpt of little pain,
that endless pleasure shall unto me gain.
SONNET. XXVII.
Fair proud now tell me why should fair be proud,
Since all worlds glory is but dross unclean:
and in the shade of death it self shall shroud,
how ever now thereof ye little ween.
That goodly Idol now so gay beseene,
shall doffe her fleshes borowd fair attire:
and be forgot as it had never been,
that many now much worship and admire.
Ne any then shall after it inquire,
^e any mention shall thereof remain:
but what this verse, that never shall expyre,
shall to you purchase with her thankles pain.
Fair be no longer proud of that shall perish,
but that which shall you make immortal, cherish.
SONNET. XXVIII.
THe laurel leaf, which you this day do wear,
guies me great hope of your relenting mind:
for since it is the badg which I do bear,
ye bearing it do seem to me inclind:
The power thereof, which o^te in me I find,
let it likewise your gentle breast inspire
with sweet infusion, and put you in mind
of that proud maid, whom now those leaves attire
Proud Daphne scorning Phoebus lovely fire,
on the Thessalian shore from him did fly:
for which the gods in their reuengefull ire
did her transform into a laurel tree.
Then fly no more fair love from Phoebus chase,
but in your breast his leaf and love embrace.
SONNET. XXIX.
See how the stubborn damzell does deprave
my simple meaning with disdaynfull scorn:
and by the bay which I unto her gave,
accoumpts my self her captive quite forlorne^
The bay (quoth she) is of the victours borne,
yielded them by the vanquished as their meeds,
and they therewith do poets heads adorn,
to sing the glory of their famous deeds.
But since ^he will the conquest challeng needs,
let her accept me as her faithful thrall,
that her great triumph which my skill exceeds,
I may in trump of fame blaze over all.
Then would I deck her head with glorious bays,
and fill the world with her victorious praise.
SONNET. XXX.
MY love is like to yse, and I to fire;
how comes it then that this her cold so great
is not dissolved through my so hot desire,
but harder grows the more I her entreat?
Or how comes it that my exceeding heat
is not delayed by her heart frosen cold:
but that I burn much more in boiling sweat,
and feel my flames augmented mani^old?
Wh^t more miraculous thing may be told
that fire which all thing melts, should harden yse^
and yse which is congeald with ^encelesse cold,
should kindle fire by wonderful deuyse.
Such is the power of love in gentle mind,
that it can alter all the course of kind.
SONNET. XXXI.
Ah why has nature to so hard a heart,
given so goodly gifts of beauties grace?
whose pride depraues each other better part,
and all those precious ornaments deface.
Since to all other beasts of bloody race,
a dreadful countenance she given hath^
that with their terror all the rest may chace^
and warn to shun the danger of their wrath
But my proud one does work the greater s^ath,
through sweet allurement of her lovely hew:
that she the better may in bloody bath,
of such poor thralls her cruel hands embrew.
But did she know how ill these two accord,
such cruelty she would have soon abhord.
SONNET. XXXII.
The paynefull smith with force of fervent heat,
the hardest iron soon does mollify:
that with his heavy sledge he can it beat,
and fashion to what he it list apply.
Yet cannot all these flames in which I fry,
her heart more hard then iron soft awhit:
ne all the playnts and prayers with which I
do beat on th'anduyle of her stubberne wit:
But still the more she fervent sees my sit:
the more she frieseth in her wilful pride:
and harder grows the harder she is smit,
with all the pla^nts which to her be applyde.
What then remains but I to ashes burn,
and she to stones at length all frosen turn?
SONNET. XXXIII.
GReat wrong I do, I can it not deny,
to that most sacred Empress my dear dred,
not finishing her Queen of faery,
that mote enlarge her living praises dead:
But lodwick, this of grace to me aread:
do ye not thinck the accomplishment of it,
sufficient work for one man's simple head,
all were it as the rest but rudely wri^.
How then should I without another wit:
thinck ever to endure so taedious toil,
sins that this one is tossed with troublous ^it,
of a proud love, that does my spirit spoil.
Cease then, till she vouchsafe to grawnt me rest,
or lend you me another living breast.
SONNET. XXXIIII.
Like as a ship that through the Ocean wide,
by conduct of some star does make her way.
whenas a storm has dimd her trusty guide.
out of her course does wander far astray.
So I whose star, that wont with her bright ray,
me to direct, with clouds is ouercast,
do wander now in darkness and dismay,
through hidden pe^ils round about me plast^
Yet hope I well, that when this storm is past
my Helice the lodestar of my life
will shine again, and look on me at last,
with lovely light to clear my cloudy grief,
Till then I wander careful comfortless,
in secret sorrow and sad pensiveness.
SONNET. XXXV.
MY hungry eyes through greedy co^etize,
still to behold the object of their pain:
with no contentment can themselves suffize,
but having pine and having not complain.
For lacking it they cannot life sustain,
and having it they gaze on it the more:
in their amazement like Narcissus vain
whose eyes him starved: so plenty makes me poor
Yet are mine eyes so filled with the store
of that fair sight, that nothing else they brook,
but loathe the things which they did like before,
and can no more endure on them to look.
All this worlds glory seems vain to me,
and all their shows but shadows saving she.
SONNET. XXXVI.
TEll me when shall these weary woes have end,
Or shall their ruthlesse torment never cease:
but al my da^es in pining languor spend,
without hope of aswagement or release.
Is there no means for me to purchase peace,
or make agreement with her thrilling eyes:
but that their cruelty does still increace,
and daily more augment my miseryes.
But when ye have showed all extremityes,
then think how little glory ye have gained:
by slaying him, whose life though ye despise,
mote have your life in honor long maintained.
But by his death which some perhaps will moan,
ye shall condemned be of many a one.
SONNET. XXXVII.
WHat guyle is this, that those her golden tresses,
She does attire under a net of gold:
and with sl^ skill so cunningly them dresses,
that which is gold or hear, may scarce be told?
Is it that men's frail eyes, which gaze too bold,
she may entangle in that golden snare:
and being caught may craftily enfold,
their weaker hearts, which are not well aware?
Take heed therefore, mine eyes, how ye do ^tare
hence forth too rashly on that guilefull net,
in which if ever ye entrapped are,
out of her bands ye by no means shall get.
Fondness it were for any being free,
to covet fetters, though they golden be.
SONNET. XXXVIII.
A Rion, when through tempests cruel wrack,
He forth was thrown into the greedy seas:
through the sweet music which his harp did make
allu'rd a Dolphin him from death to ease.
But my rude music, which was wont to please
some dainty ears, cannot with any skill,
the dreadful tempest of her wrath appease,
nor move the Dolphin from her stubborn will,
But in her pride she does persevere still,
all careless how my life for her decayse:
yet with one word she can it save or spill,
to spill were pity, but to save were praise.
Chose rather to be praysd for doing good,
then to be blamed for spilling guiltless blood.
SONNET. XXXIX.
SWeet smile, the daughter of the Queen of love,
Expressing all thy mothers powrefull art:
with which she wonts to temper angry Jove,
when all the gods he threats with thundering dart.
Sweet is thy virtue as thy self sweet art,
for when on me thou shinedst late in sadness:
a melting pleasance ran through every part,
and me revived with heart robbing gladness.
Whylest rapt with joy resembling heavenly madness,
my soul was ravished quite as in a trance:
and feeling thence no more her sorrows sadness,
fed on the fullness of that cheerful glaunce.
^ore sweet than Nectar or Ambrosiall meat,
seemd every bit, which thenceforth I did eat.
SONNET. XL.
MArk when she smiles with amiable cheer,
And tell me whereto can ye lyken it:
when on each eyelid sweetly do appear,
an hundred Graces as in shade to sit.
Lykest it seems in my simple wit
unto the fair sunshine in summers day:
that when a dreadful storm away is flit,
through the broad world does spread his goodly ray
At sight whereof each bird that sits on spray,
and every beast that to his den was fled:
comes forth afresh out of their late dismay,
and to the light lift up their drouping head.
So my storm beaten heart likewise is cheared,
with that sunshine when cloudy looks are cleared.
SONNET. XLI.
IS it her nature or is it her will,
to be so cruel to an humbled foe:
if nature, then she may it mend with skill,
if will, then she at will may will forgo.
But if her nature and her will be so,
that she will plague the man that loves her most:
and take delight t'encrease a wretches woe,
then all her natures goodly gui^ts are lost.
And that same glorious beauties idle boast,
is but a bayt such wretches to beguile:
as being long in her loves tempest ^ost,
she means at last to make her piteous spoil.
O fairest fair let never it be named,
that so fair beauty was so fowly shamed.
SONNET. XLII.
THe love which me so cruelly tormenteth,
So pleasing is in my extremest pain:
that all the more my sorrow it augmenteth,
the more I love and do embrace my bane.
Ne do I wish (^or wishing were but vain)
to be acquit fro my continual smart:
but joy her thrall ^or ever to remayne^
and yield for pledge my poor captyued heart
The which that it from her may never start,
let her, if please her, bynd with adamant chain:
and from all wandering loves which mote peruart,
his safe assurance strongly it restrain.
Only let her abstain from cruelty,
and do me not before my time to die.
SONNET. XLIII.
SHall I then silent be or shall I speak?
And if I speak, her wrath renew I shall:
and if I silent be, my heart will break,
or choked be with oue^f^wing gall.
What tyranny is this both my heart to thrall,
and eke my tongue with proud restraint to tie?
that nether I may speak nor think at all,
but like a stupid stock in silence die.
Yet I my heart with silence secretly
will teach to speak, and my just cause to plead^
and eke mine eyes wi^h meek humilit^,
love learned letters to her eyes to read.
Which her deep wit, that true hearts thought can s^el,
will soon conceive, and learn to construe well.
SONNET. XLIIII.
WHen those renoumed noble Peers of Greece,
through stubborn pride amongst themselves did ia^
forgetful of the famous golden fleece,
then Orpheus with his harp their strife did bar.
But this continual cruel civil war,
the which my self against my self do make:
whilst my weak powers of passions warreid arre
no skill can stint nor reason can aslake.
But when in hand my tunelesse harp I take,
then do I more augment my foes despite:
and grief renew, and passions do awake,
to battle fresh against my self to fight.
Among whom the more I seek to settle peace,
the more I find their malice to increace.
SONNET. XLV.
Leave lady in your glass of crystal clean,
Your goodly self for evermore to view:
and in my self, my inward self I mean,
most lively like behold your semblant true.
Within my heart, though hardly it can show,
thing so divine to view of earthly eye:
the fair Idea of your celestial hew,
and every part remains immortally:
And were it not that through your cruelty,
with sorrow dimmed and deformd it were:
the goodly image of your visnomy,
clearer then crystal would therein appear.
But if your self in me ye plain will see,
remove the cause by which your fair beams darkened be.
SONNET. XLVI.
WHen my abodes prefixed time is spent,
My cruel fair straight bids me wend my way:
but then from heaven most hideous storms are sent
as willing me against her will to stay.
Whom then shall I or heaven or her obey,
the heavens know best what is the best for me^
but as she will, whose will my life does sway,
my lower heaven, so it perforce must be.
But ye high heuens, that all this sorrow see,
since all your tempests cannot hold me back:
aswage your storms, or else both you and she,
will both together me too sorely wrack.
Eno^gh it is for one man to sustain,
the ^tormes, which she alone on me does rain.
SONNET. XLVII.
TRust not the treason of those smyling looks,
until ye have their guyle^ull traynes well tryde^
for they are like but unto golden books,
that from the foolish since their bayts do hyde:
So she with flattring smyles weak hearts does guide,
unto her love and tempte to their decay,
whom being caught she kills with cruel pride,
and feeds at pleasure on the wretched pray:
Yet even whylst her bloody hands them sl^y^
her eyes look lovely and upon them smyle:
that they take pleasure in her cruel play,
and d^ing do them selves of pain beguyle.
O mighty charm which makes men love their bane,
and thinck they die with pleasure, live with pain.
SONNET. XLVIII.
INnocent paper whom too cruel hand,
Did make the matter to avenge her ire:
and e^e she could thy cause well understand,
did sacrifize unto the greedy fire.
Well worthy thou to have found better hyre,
then so bad end for heretics ordained:
yet heresy nor treason did conspire,
but plead thy masters cause unjustly payned.
Whom she all careless of his grief constrained
to utter forth th'anguish of his heart:
and would not hear, when he to her complained,
the piteous passion o^ his dying smart.
Yet live for ever, though against her will,
and speak her good, though she requite it ill.
SONNET. XLIX.
Fair cruel, why are ye so fierce and cruel?
Is it because your eyes have power to kill?
then know, that mercy is the mighti^^ jewel,
and greater glory think to save, then spill.
But i^ it be your pleasure and proud will,
to show the power of your imperious eyes^
then not on him that never thought you ill,
but bend your force against your enemies.
Let them ^eele the utmost of your crueltyes,
and kill, with looks as Cockatrices do:
but him that at your footstool humbled lies,
with merciful regard, give mercy too.
Such mercy shall you make admyred to be,
so shall you live by giving life to me.
SONNET. L.
LOng languishing in double malady,
of my hearts wound and of my bodies grief:
there came to me a leach that would apply
fit medicines for my bodies best relief.
Vain man (quod I) that have but little prie^e:
in deep discovery of the mynds disease,
is not the heart of all the body chief?
and rules the members as it self does please.
Then with some cordialls seek first to appease,
the inward languour of my wounded heart,
and then my body shall have shortly ease:
but such sweet cordialls pass Physicians art.
Then my l^ses Leach do you your skill reveal,
and with one salve both heart and body heal.
SONNET. LI.
Do I not see that fairest images
Of hardest Marble are o^ purpose made^
for that they should endure through many ages,
ne let their famous moniments to ^ade.
Why then do I, vntrainde in lovers trade,
her hardness blame which I should more commend
since never ought was excellent assayde,
which was not hard t'atchiue and bring to end
Ne ought so hard, but he that would attend,
mote soften it and to his will allu^e:
so do I hope her stubborn heart to bend,
and that it then more steadfast will endure.
Only my pains will be the more to get her,
but having her, my joy will be the greater.
SONNET. LII.
SO often as homeward I from her depart,
I go like one that having lost the field:
is prisoner led away with heavy ha^t,
despoyld of warlike arms and known shield.
So do I now my self a prisoner yield,
to sorrow and to solitary pain:
from presence o^ my dearest dear exylde,
long while alone in languor to remain.
There let no thought of joy or pleasure vain,
dare to approach, that may my solace breed:
but sudden dumps and drery sad disdain,
of all worlds gladness more my torment feed.
So I her absens will my penance make,
that of her presens I my meed may take.
SONNET. LIII.
THe Panther knowing that his spotted hyde,
Does please all beas^s but that his looks the^ ^ray:
within a bush his dre^dfull head does hide,
to let them gaze why lest he on them may pray.
Right so my cruel fair with me does play,
for with the goodly semblant of her h^w^
she does allure me to mine own decay,
and then no mercy will unto me show.
Great shame it is, thing so divine in view,
made for to be the worlds most ornament:
to make the bayte her gazers to embrew,
good shames to be to ill an instrument.
But mercy does with beauty best agree,
as in their maker ye them best may see.
SONNET. LIIII.
OF this worlds Theater in which we stay,
My love like the Spectator ydly sits
beholding me that all the pageants play,
disguysing diversely my troubled wits.
Sometimes I joy when glad occasion sits,
and mask in mirth like to a Comedy:
soon after when my joy to sorrow flits,
I wail and make my woes a Tragedy.
Yet she beholding me with constant eye,
delights not in my merth nor ^^es my smart^
but when I laugh she mocks, and when I cry
she laughes, and hardens evermore her heart.
What then ca^ move her? if nor merth nor moan,
she is no woman, but a senseless stone.
SONNET. LV.
SO often as I her beauty do behold,
And therewith do her cruelty compare:
I marvel of what substance was the mould
the which her made attonce so cruel fair.
Not earth; for her high thoghts more heavenly are,
not water; for her love does burn like fire:
not air; for she is not so light or rare,
not fire; for she does friese with ^aint desire.
Then needs another Element inquire
whereof she mote be made; that is the sky.
for to the heaven her haughty looks aspire:
and eke her mind is pure immortal hye.
Then since to heaven ye lykened are the best,
be like in mercy as in all the rest:
SONNET. LVI.
Fair ye be sure, but cruel and unkind,
As is a Tygre that with greediness
hunts after blood, when he by chance does find
a feeble beast, does felly him oppress.
Fair be ye sure but proud and pitiless,
as is a storm, that all things does prostrate:
finding a tree alone all comfortless,
beats on it strongly it to ruinate.
Fair be ye sure, but hard and obstinate,
as is a rock amidst the raging ^loods:
gaynst which a ship of succor desolate,
does suffer wreck both of her self and goods.
That ship, that tre^, and that same beast am I,
whom ye do wreck do ruin, and destroy.
SONNET. LVII.
SWeet warrior when shall I have peace with you?
High time it is, this war now ended were:
which I no longer can endure to ^ue,
ne your incesta^t bat^ry more to bear:
So weak my powers, so sore my wounds appear,
that wonder is how I should live a jot,
seeing my heart through launched every where
with thousand arrows, which your eyes have shot:
Yet shoot ye sharply still, and spare me not,
but glory think to make the^e cruel stoures,
ye cruel one, what glory can be got,
in slaying him that would live ^ladl^ yours?
Make peace therefor, and grant me timely grace.
that al my wounds will heal in little space.
SONNET. LVIII. By her that is most assured to her self.
Weak is th'a^surance that weak ^lesh reposeth,
In her own power and scorneth others aid:
that soonest ^als when as she most supposes,
her self assurd, and is of naught affrayd.
All flesh is frail, and all her strength vnstayd,
like a vain bubble blown up with air:
devouring time and changeful chance have prayed,
her glories pride that none may it repair.
Ne none so rich or wise, so strong or fair,
but fails trusting on his own assurance:
and he that stands on the highest stayre
fal^ lowest: for on earth naught has enduraunce.
Why then do ye proud fair, misdeeme so far,
that to your self ye most assured arre.
SONNET. LIX.
Thrice happy she, that is so well assured
Unto her self and settled so in heart:
that nether will for better be allured^
ne ^ea^d with worse to any chance to start^
But like a steady ship does strongly p^^t
the raging waves and ke^pes her course aright:
ne ought for tempest does from it depart,
ne ought for fayrer weathers ^alse delight.
Such self assurance need not fear the spite,
of grudging soes, ne favor seek o^ ^^iends:
but in the stay of her own steadfast might,
nether to one her self nor other bends.
Most happy she that most assured does rest,
but he most happy who such one loves best.
SONNET. LX.
THey that in course of heavenly spheres are skild,
To every planet point his sundry year:
in which her circles voyage is ^ul^ild,
as Mars in three ^core years does run his sphere
So since the winged God his planet clear,
began in me to move, one year is spent:
the which does longer unto me appear,
then al those forty which my li^e outwent.
Then by that count, which loue^s books invent,
the sphere o^ Cupid forty years contains:
which I have wasted in long languishment,
that seemd the longer for my greater pains.
But let my loves fair Planet short her ways
this year ensuing, or else short my days.
SONNET. LXI.
THe glorious image of the makers beauty,
My sovereign saint, the Idol of my thought,
dare not henceforth above the bounds of dewtie,
t'accuse of pride, or rashly blame for ought.
For being as she is divinely wrought,
and of the brood of Angels heavenly borne:
and with the crew of blessed Saints vpbrought,
each of which did her with their guilts adorn;
The bud of joy, the blossom of the morn,
the beam of light, whom mortal eyes admyre:
what reason is it then but she should scorn,
base things that to her love too bold aspire?
Such heavenly forms ought rather worshipped be,
then dare be loved by men of mean degree.
SONNET. LXII.
THe weary year his race now having run,
The new begins his compast course anew:
with show of morning mylde he has begun,
be^okening peace and plenty to ensew,
So let us, which this change of weather view,
change ^eke our mynds and former lives amend
the old years sins forepast let us eschew,
and fly the faults with which we did offend.
Then shall the new years joy forth freshly send,
into the glooming world his gladsome ray:
and all these storms which now his beauty blend,
shall turn to caulmes and tymely clear away.
So likewise love cheer you your heavy spright,
and change old years annoy to new delight.
SONNET. LXIII.
AFter long storms and tempests sad assay,
Which hardly I endured heretofore:
in dread of death and dangerous dismay,
with which my silly bark was tossed sore.
I do at length descry the happy shore,
in which I hope ere long for to arryue,
fair soil it seems from far and fraught with store
of all that dear and daynty is alive.
Most happy he that can at last atchyue,
the joyous safety of so sweet a rest:
whose least delight suffices to deprive,
remembrance of all pains which him oppressed.
All pains are nothing in respect of this,
all sorrows short that gain eternal bliss.
SONNET. LXIIII.
Coming to kiss her lyps, (such grace I found)
Me seemd I smelt a gardin of sweet flowers:
that dainty odours from them threw around
for damzels fit to deck their lovers bowres.
Her lips did smell like unto Gillyflowers,
her ruddy cheeks like unto Roses red:
her snowy brows like budded Bellamoures,
her lovely eyes like Pincks but newly spread,
Her goodly bosom like a Strawberry bed,
her neck like to a bounch of Cullambynes:
her breast like lillyes, ere their leaves be shed,
her nipples like yo^g blossomd Iessemynes,
Such ^ragrant flowers do give most odorous smell,
but her sweet odor did them all excel.
SONNET. LXV.
THe doubt which ye misdeeme, fair love, is vain
That sondly fear to loose your liberty,
when loosing one, two liberties ye gain,
and make him bond that bondage erst did fly.
Sweet be the bands, the which true love does tie,
without constraynt or dread of any ill:
the gentle bird feels no captivity
within her cage, but singes and feeds her fill.
There pride dare not approach, nor discord spill
the league twixt them, that loyal love has bound:
but simple truth and mutual good will,
seeks with sweet peace to sal^e each others wou^d
There faith does fearlesse dwell in brazen tower,
and spotless pleasure builds her sacred bower.
SONNET. LXVI.
TO all those happy blessings which ye have,
with plenteous hand by heaven upon you thrown:
this one disparagement they to you gave,
that ye your love lent to so mean a one.
Ye whose high worths surpassing paragon,
could not on earth have found one fit for mate,
ne but in heaven matchable to none,
wh^ did ye stoup unto so lowly state.
But ye thereby much greater glory gate,
then had ye sorted with a princes pere:
for now your light does more it self dilate,
and in my darkness greater does appear.
Yet since your light has once enlumind me,
with my reflex yours shall increased be.
SONNET. LXVII.
Like as a huntsman after weary chase,
Seeing the game from him escapt away:
sits down to rest him in some shady place,
with panting hounds beguiled of their pray.
So after long pursuit and vain assay,
when I all weary had the chase forsook,
the gentle dear returned the selfsame way,
thinking to quench her thirst at the next brook.
There she beholding me with mylder look,
sought not to fly, but fearelesse s^ill did bide:
till I in hand her yet half trembling took,
and with her own goodwill her fyrmely tide.
Strange thing me seemd to see a beast so w^ld,
so goodly won with her own will beguyld.
SONNET. LXVIII.
MOst glorious Lord of life that on this day,
Did make thy triumph over death and sin:
and having harrowd hell did bring away,
captivity thence captive us to win.
This joyous day, dear Lord, with joy begin,
and grant that we for whom tbou did dye
being with thy dear blood clean washed from sin,
may live for ever in felicity.
And that thy love we weighing worthily,
may likewise love thee for the same again:
and for thy sake that all like dear did buy,
with love may one another entertayne.
So let us love, dear love, like as we ought,
love is the lesson which the Lord us taught.
SONNET. LXIX.
THe famous warriors of the anticke world,
Used Trophies to ^rect in stately wize:
in which they would the records have enrold,
of their great deeds and valarous emprize.
What trophee then shall I most fit deuize,
in which I may record the memory
of my loves conquest, peerless beauties prise^
adorned with honor, love, and chastity.
Even this verse vowed to eternity,
shall be thereof immortal moniment:
and tell her praise to all posterity,
that may admire such worlds rare wonderment.
The happy purchase of my glorious spoil,
gotten at last with labor and long toil.
SONNET. LXX.
FResh spring the herald of loves mighty king,
In whose cote armor richly are displayed,
all sorts of flowers the which on earth do spring
in goodly colors gloriously arrayd.
Go to my love, where she is careless laid,
yet in her winters bower not well awake:
tell her the joyous time will not be staid
unless she do him by the forelock take.
Bid her therefore her self soon ready make,
to wayt on love amongst his lovely crew:
where every one that misseth then her make,
shall be by him amearst with penance dew.
Make have therefore sweet love, whilst it is prime^
for none can call again the passed time.
SONNET. LXXI.
I Joy to see how in your drawn work,
Your self unto the Be ye do compare;
and me unto the Spyder that does lurk,
in close awayt to catch her unaware.
Right so your self were caught in cunning snare
of a dear foe, and thralled to his love:
in whose straight bands ye now captiued are
so firmly, that ye never may remove.
But as your work is wouen all about,
with woodbynd flowers and fragrant Eglantine:
so sweet your prison you in time shall prove,
with many dear delights bedecked ^yne.
And all thensforth eternal peace shall see.
between the Spyder and the gentle Be.
SONNET. LXXII.
Often when my spirit does spread her bolder wings,
In mind to mount up to the purest sky:
it down is weighd with thought of earthly things
and clogd with burden of mortality,
Where when that sovereign beauty it does spy,
resembling heavens glory in her light:
drawn with sweet pleasures bayt, it back does fly,
and unto heaven forgets her former flight.
There my frail fancy fed with full delight,
does bath in bliss and mantleth most at ease:
ne thinks of other heaven, but how it might
her hearts desire with most contentment please.
Heart need not wish none other happiness,
but here on earth to have such heuens bliss.
SONNET. LXXIII.
BEing my self captyued here in care,
My heart, whom none with servile bands can tie:
but the fair tresses of your golden hair,
breaking his pri^on forth to you does fly.
Like as a byrd that in ones hand does spy
desired food, to it does make his slight:
even so my heart, that wont on your fair eye
to feed his fill, flies back unto your sight.
Do you him take, and in your bosom bright,
gently encage, that he may be your thrall:
perhaps he there may learn with rare delight,
to sing your name and praises over all.
That it hereafter may you not repent,
him lodging in your bosom to have lent.
SONNET. LXXIIII.
MOst happy letters framed by skillful trade,
with which that happy name was first de^ynd:
the which three times thrice happy has me made,
with gifts of body, fortune and of mind.
The first my being to me gave by kind,
from mothers womb deriu`d by dew descent,
the second is my sovereign Queen most kind,
that honor and large richesse to me lent.
The third my love, my lives last ornament,
by whom my spirit out of dust was raised:
to speak her pray^e and glory excellent,
of all alive most worthy to be praised.
Ye three Elizabeth's for ever live,
that three such graces did unto me give.
SONNET. LXXV.
ONe day I wrote her name upon the strand,
but came the waves and washed it a way:
again I wrote it with a second hand,
but came the tide, and made my pains his pray.
Vain man, said she, that do in vain assay,
a mortal thing so to immortalize.
for I my selue shall like to this decay,
and eek my name be wyped out lykewize.
Not so, (quod I) let baser things deuize,
to die in dust, but you shall live by fame:
my verse your virtues rare shall eternize,
and in the heuens write your glorious name.
Where whenas death shall all the world subdew,
our love shall live, and later life renew.
SONNET. LXXVI.
Fair bosom fraught with virtues richest tresure,
The neast of love, the lodging of delight:
the bower of bliss, the paradise of pleasure,
the sacred harbor o^ that heavenly spright.
How was I ravished with your lovely sight,
and my frail thoughts too rashly led astray?
whiles diuing deep through amorous insight,
on the sweet spoil of beauty they did pray.
And twixt her paps like early fruit in May,
whose harvest seemd to hasten now apace:
they loosely did their wanton wings display,
and there to rest themselves did boldly place.
Sweet thoughts I envy your so happy rest,
which often I wished, yet never was so blessed.
SONNET. LXXVII.
Was it a dream, or did I see it plain,
a goodly table of pure yvory:
all spread with iun^ats, fit to entertayne,
the greatest Prince with pompous roialty.
Among which there in a silver dish did ly,
two golden apples of vnualewd price:
far passing those which Hercules came by,
or those which Atalanta did entice.
Exceeding sweet, yet void of sinful vice,
That many sought yet none could ever taste,
sweet fruit of pleasure brought from paradise:
By love himself and in his garden plas^e.
Her breast that table was so richly spredd,
my thoughts the guests, which would thereon have fedd.
SONNET. LXXVIII.
Lackyng my love I go from place to place,
like a young fawn that late has lost the hynd:
and seek each where, where last I saw her face,
whose image ye^ I carry fresh in mind.
I seek the fields with her late footing ^ynd,
I seek her bower with her late presence decked,
yet nor in field nor bower I her can find:
yet field and bower are full of her aspect,
But when mine eyes I thereunto direct,
they ydly back return to me again,
and when I hope to see their true object,
I find my self but fed with fancies vain.
Cease then mine eyes, to seek her self to see,
and let my thoughts behold her self in me:
SONNET. LXXIX.
MEn call you fair, and you do credit it,
For that your self ye daily such do see:
but the true fair, that is the gent^e wit,
and virtuous mind is much more praysd of me.
For all the rest, how ever fair it be,
shall turn to naught and loose that glorious hew
but only that is permanent and free
from frail corruption, that does flesh en^ew.
That is true beauty: that does argue you
to be divine and borne o^ heavenly ^eed^
derived from that fair Spirit, from whom al true
and perfect beauty did at first proceed.
He only fair, and what he ^ayre has made,
all other fair like flowers untimely ^ade.
SONNET. LXXX.
AFter so long a race as I have run
Through Faery land, which those six books co^pile
give leave to rest me being half ^ordonne,
and gather to my self new breath awhile.
Then as a steed refreshed after toil,
out of my prison I will break anew:
and stou^ly will that second work assoyle,
with strong endeavor and attention dew.
Till then give leave to me in pleasant mew,
to sport my muse and sing my loves sweet praise:
the contemplation of whose heavenly hew,
my spirit to an higher pitch will raise.
But let her praises yet be low and mean,
fit for the handmayd of the Faery Queen.
SONNET. LXXXI.
Fair is my love, when her fair golden hears,
with the loose wynd ye wa^ing chance to mark:
fair when the rose in her red che^kes appears,
or in her eyes the fire of love does spark.
Fair when her breast like a rich laden ba^ke,
with precious merchandise she forth does lay:
fair when that cloud of pride, which o^t does dark
her goodly light with smiles she drives away.
But fairest she, when so she does display,
the gate with pearls and rub^es richly dight:
through which her words so wise do make their way
to bear the message of her gentle spright,
The rest be works of natures wonderment,
but this the work of hearts astonishment.
SONNET. LXXXII.
Joy of my life, full often for loving you
I bless my lot, that was so lucky placed:
but then the more your own mishap I rue,
that are so much by so mean love embased.
For had the equal heuens so much you graced
in this as in the rest, ye mote invent
some heavenly wit, whose verse could have enchased
your glorious name in golden moniment.
But since ye deignd so goodly to relent
to me your thrall, in whom is little worth,
that little that I am, shall all be spent,
in setting your immortal praises forth.
Whose lofty argument vplifting me,
shall lift you up unto an high degree.
SONNET. LXXXIII.
MY hungry eyes, through greedy coueti^e,
Still to behold the object of their pain:
with no contentment can themselves suffize,
but having pine, and having not complain
For lacking it, they cannot life sustain,
and seeing it, they gaze on it the more:
in their amazement like Narcissus vain
whose eyes him starved: so plenty makes me pore^
Yet are mine eyes so filled with the store
of that fair sight, that nothing else they brook:
but loath the things which they did like before,
and can no more endure on them to look.
All this worlds glory seems vain to me,
and all their shows but shadows saving she.
SONNET. LXXXIIII.
LEt not one spark of filthy lustful ^yre
break out, that may her sacred peace molest:
ne one light glance of sensual desire:
Attempt to work her gentle minds unrest.
But pure affections bred in spotless breast,
and modest thoughts breathd ^ro^ well te^pred sprites
go visit her in her chaste bower of rest,
accompanyde with angelick delights.
There fill your self with those most joyous sights,
the which my self could never yet attain:
but speak no word to her of these sad plights,
which her too constant stiffenesse does constrayn.
Only behold her rare perfection,
and bless your fortunes fair election.
SONNET. LXXXV.
THe world that cannot deem of worthy things,
when I do praise her, say I do but flatter:
so does the Cuckoo, when the Mauis sings,
begin his witless note apace to clatter^
But they that skill not of so heavenly matter,
all that they know not, envy or admyre,
rather then envy let them wonder at her,
but not to deem of her desert aspyre.
Deep in the closet of my parts entyre,
her worth is written with a golden quill:
that me with heavenly fury does inspire,
and my glad mouth with her sweet praises fill.
Which when as fame in her shrill trump shall thunder
let the world chose to envy or to wonder.
SONNET. LXXXVI.
Venomous tongue tipped with vile adders sting^
Of that self kind with which the Furies ^ell
their snaky heads do comb, from which a spring
of poisoned words and spiteful speeches well.
Let all the plagues and horrid pains of hell,
upon thee fall for thine accursed hyre:
that with false forged lies, which thou did tell,
in my true love did stir up coals of ire,
The sparks whereof let kindle thine own fire,
and catching hold on thine own wicked head
consume thee quite, that did with guile conspire
in my sweet peace such breaches to have bred.
Shame be thy meed, and mischief thy reward.
dew to thy self that it for me prepared.
SONNET. LXXXVII.
SInce I did leave the presence of my love,
Many long weary days I have outworne:
and many nights, that slowly seemd to move,
their sad protract from evening until morn.
For when as day the heaven does adorn,
I wish that night the noyous day would end:
and when as night has us of light forlorn,
I wish that day would shortly reascend.
Thus I the time with expectation spend,
and feign my grief with chaunges to beguile,
that further seems his term still to extend,
and makes every minute seem a mile.
So sorrow still does seem too long to last,
but joyous hours do fly away too fast.
SONNET: LXXXVIII.
SInce I have lackt the comfort of that light,
The which was wont to lead my thoughts astray:
I wander as in darkness of the night,
affrayd of every dangers least dismay.
Ne ought I see, though in the clearest day,
when others gaze upon their shadows vain:
but th`onely image of that heavenly ray,
whereof some glance does in mine eye remain.
Of which beholding th'Idae a plain,
through contemplation of my purest part:
with light thereof I do my self sustain,
and thereon feed my loue-affamisht heart.
But with such brightness why lest I fill my mind,
I starve my body and mine eyes do blind.
SONNET. LXXXIX.
Like as the Culuer on the bared bough,
Sits mourning for the absence of her mate:
and in her songs sends many a wishfull view,
for his return that seems to linger late.
So I alone now left disconsolate,
mourn to my self the absence of my love:
and wandering here and there all desolate,
seek with my playnts to match that mournful dove
Ne joy of ought that under heaven does houe,
can comfort me, but her own joyous sight:
whose sweet aspect both God and man can move,
in her unspotted pleasauns to delight.
Dark is my day, whiles her fair light I mis,
and dead my life that wants such lively blis.
IN youth before I waxed old.
The blind boy Venus baby,
For want of cunning made me bold,
In bitter hyue to grope ^or honny.
But when he saw me stung and cry,
He took his wings and away did fly.
As Diane hunted on a day,
She chaunst to come where Cupid lay,
his quiver by his head:
One of his sha^ts she stole away,
And one of hers did close convey,
into the others stead:
With that love wounded my loves heart,
but Diane beasts with Cupids dart.
I Saw in secret to my Dame,
How little Cupid humbly came:
and said to her All hayle my mother^
But when he saw me laugh, for shame^
His face with bash^ull blood did ^^ame,
not knowing Venus from the other^
Then never blush Cupid (quoth I)
for many have erred in this beauty^
Upon a day as love lay sweetly slumbring,
all in his mothers lap:
A gentle Be with his loud trumpet murmuring,
about him flew by hap.
Whereof when he was wakened with the noise,
and saw the beast so small:
What Is this (quoth he) that gives so great a voice,
that wakens men withal.
In angry wize he flies about,
and threatens all with courage stout.
TO whom his mother closely smiling said,
twixt earnest and twixt game:
See thou thy self likewise art little made,
if thou regard the same.
And yet thou su^^rest neither gods in sky,
nor men in earth to rest:
But when thou art disposed cruelly,
their sleep thou do molest.
Then either change thy cruelty,
or give like leave unto the fly.
NAthlesse the cruel boy not so content,
would needs the fly pursue:
And in his hand with heedlesse hardiment,
him caught for to subdue.
But when on it he hasty hand did lay,
the Be him stung therefore:
Now ou^ alas (he cryde) and welaway,
I wounded am full sore:
The fly that I so much did scorn,
has hurt me with his little horn.
Unto his mother straight he weeping came,
and of his grief complained:
Who could not chose but laugh at his fond game,
though sad to see him pained.
Think now (quod she) my son how great the smart
of those whom thou do wound:
Full many thou have pricked to the heart,
that pity never found:
Therefore henceforth some pity take,
when thou do spoil of lovers make.
SHe took him straight full pitiously lamenting,
and wrapped him in her smock:
She wrapped him softly, all the while repenting,
that he the fly did mock.
She dressed his wound and it embaulmed well
with s^lue of sovereign might:
And then she bathed him in a dainty well
the well of dear delight.
Who would not often be stung as this,
to be so bathed in Venus blis.
THe wanton boy was shortly well recured,
of that his malady:
But ^e soon after fresh again enured,
his former cruelty.
And since that time he wounded has my self
with his sharp dart of love:
And now forgets the cruel careless elfe,
his mothers heast to prove.
So now I languish till he please,
my pining anguish to appease.
FINIS.
Epithalamion.
YE learned sisters which have oftentimes
been to me ayding, others to adorn:
Whom ye thought worthy of your graceful rymes,
That even the greatest did not greatly scorn
To hear their names sung in your simple lays,
But ioyed in their praise.
And when ye list your own mishaps to mourn,
Which death, or love, or fortunes wreck did raise,
Your string could soon to sadder tenor turn,
And teach the woods and waters to lament
Your doleful dreriment.
Now lay those sorrowful complaints aside,
And having all your heads with girland crowned,
Help me mine own loves praises to resound,
Ne let the same of any be enuide,
So Orpheus did for his own bride,
So I unto my self alone will sing,
The woods shall to me answer and my Echo ring.
EArly before the worlds light giving lamp,
His golden beam upon the hills does spread,
Having dispersed the nights vncheare^ull dampe,
Do ye awake and with fresh lusty head,
Go to the bower of my beloved love,
My truest turtle dove
Bid her awake; for Hymen is awake,
And long since ready forth his mask to move,
With his bright Tead that flames with many a flake,
And many a bachelor to wait on him,
In their fresh garments trim.
Bid her awake therefore and soon her dight,
For ^o the wished day is come at last,
That shall for all the pains and sorrows past,
Pay to her usury of long delight,
And whylest she does her dight,
Do ye to her of joy and solace sing,
That all the woods may answer and your echo ring.
BRing with you all the Nymphs that you can hear
both of the rivers and the forests green:
And of the sea that neighbors to her near,
Al with gay girlands goodly well beseene.
And let them also with them bring in hand,
Another gay girland
For my fair love of lillyes and of roses,
Bound true love wize with a blew silk riband.
And let them make great store of brida^e poses,
And let them eeke bring store of other f^owers
To deck the bridale bowers.
And let the ground whereas her foot shall tread,
For fear the stones her tender foot should wrong
Be strewed with fragrant flowers all along,
And diapred like the discolored mead.
Which done, do at her chamber door awayt,
For she will waken strayt,
The whiles do ye this song unto her sing,
The woods shall to you answer and your Echo ring.
YE Nymphs of Mulla which with careful heed,
The silver scaly trouts do tend full well,
and greedy pikes which use therein to feed,
(Those trouts and pikes all others do excel)
And ye likewise which keep the rushy lake,
Where none do fishes take.
Bynd up the locks the which hang scatterd light,
And in his waters which your mirror make,
Behold your faces as the ^hristall bright,
That when you come whereas my love does lie,
No blemish she may spy.
And eke ye lightfoot mayds which keep the door,
That on the ho^^y mountain use to tower,
And the wild wolves which seek them to devour,
With your steel darts do chase fro coming near
Be also present here,
To help to deck her and to help to sing,
That all the woods may answer and your echo ring.
WAke now my love, awake; for it is time,
The Rosy Morn long since left Tithones bed,
All ready to her silver coche to clyme,
And Phoebus gins to show his glorious head.
Hark how the cheerful birds do chaunt their lays
And carroll of loves praise.
The merry Lark her mattins sings alo^t,
The thrush replies, the Mauis de^^ant plays,
The Ouzell shrills, the Ruddock warbles soft,
So goodly all agree with sweet consent,
To this days merriment.
Ah my dear love why do ye sleep thus long,
When meeter were tha^ ye should now awake,
T'awayt the coming of your joyous make,
And hearken to the birds love learned song,
The deawy leaves among.
For they of joy and pleasance to you sing,
That all the woods them answer and their echo ring^
MY love is now awake out of her dream,
and her fair eyes like stars that dimmed were
With darksome cloud, now show their goodly beams
More bright then Hesperus his head does rere.
Come now ye damzels, daughters of delight,
Help quickly her to dight,
But first come ye fair hours which were begot
In Jove's sweet paradise, of Day and Night,
Which do the seasons of the year allot,
And all that ever in this world is fair
Do make and still repair.
And ye three handmayds of the Cyprian Queen,
The which do still adorn her beauties pride,
Help to addorne my beautifullest bride
And as ye her array, still throw between
Some graces to be seen,
And as ye use to Venus, to her sing,
The whiles the woods shall answer and your echo ring
NOw is my love all ready forth to come,
Let all the virgins therefore well away^,
And ye fresh boys that tend upon her groom
Prepare your selves; for he is coming strayt.
Set all your things in seemly good array
Fit for so joyful day,
The ioyfulst day that ever sun did see
Fair Sun, show forth thy favorable ray,
And let thy lifull heat not fervent be
For fear of burning her sunshyny face,
Her beauty to disgrace.
O fairest Phoebus, father of the Muse,
If ever I did honor thee aright,
Or sing the thing, that mote thy mind delight,
Do not thy servants simple boon refuse,
But let this day let this one day be mine,
Let all the rest be thine.
Then I thy sovereign praises loud will sing,
That all the woods shall answer and their echo ring.
Hark how the Minstrels gin to shrill aloud,
Their merry Music that resounds from far,
The pipe, the tabor, and the trembling Crowd,
That well agree withouten breach or iar.
But most of all the Damzels do delight,
When they their tymbrels smite,
And thereunto do dance and carrol sweet,
That all the senses they do ravish quite,
The whiles the bo^es run up and down the street,
Crying aloud with strong confused noyce,
As if it were one voice.
Hymen ^o Hymen, Hymen they do shout,
That even to the heavens their s^outing shrill
Does reach, and all the firmament does fill,
To which the people standing all about,
As in approuance do thereto applaud
And loud advance her la^d,
And e^ermore they Hymen Hymen sing,
that all the woods them answer and their echo ring.
Lo where she comes along with portly pace,
Like Phoebe from her chamber of the East,
Arysing forth to run her mighty race,
Clad all in white, that seems a virgin best.
So well it her beseemes that ye would ween
Some angel she had been.
Her long loose yellow locks like golden wyre,
Sprinkled with perle, and perling flowers a tweene,
Do l^ke a golden mantle her attire,
And being crowned with a girland green,
Seem like some maiden Queen,
Her modest eyes abashed to behold
So many gazers, as on her do ^tare,
Upon the lowly ground affixed are.
Ne dare lift up her countenance too bold,
But blush to hear her praises sung so loud,
So far from being proud.
Nathlesse do ye still loud her praises sing,
That all the woods may answer and your echo ring.
TEll me ye merchants daughters did ye see
So fair a creature in your town before,
So sweet, so lovely, and so mild as she,
Adornd with beautyes grace and virtues store,
Her goodly eyes like Sapphires shining bright,
Her forehead yuory white,
Her cheeks like apples which the sun has rudded,
Her lips like cherryes charming men to byte,
Her breast like to a bowl of cream vncrudded,
Her paps like lyllies budded,
Her snowie neck l^ke to a marble tower,
And all her body like a palace fair,
Ascending up with many a stately stayre,
To honors seat and chastities sweet bower.
Why stand ye still ye virgins in amaze,
Upon her so to gaze,
Whiles ye forget your former lay to sing,
To which the woods did answer and your echo ring
But if ye saw that which no eyes can see,
The inward beauty of her lively spright,
Garnisht with heavenly gifts of high degre^,
Much more then would ye wonder at that ^ight,
And stand astonished like to those which ^^d
Medusaes mazeful head.
There dwells sweet love and constant chasti^y,
Unspotted faith and comely womanhood^
Regard of honor and mild modesty,
There virtue raynes as Queen in royal throne,
And gives laws alone.
The which the base affections do obey,
And yield their services unto her will,
Ne thought of thing uncomely ever may
Thereto approach to tempt her mind to ill.
Had ye once seen these her celestial threasures,
And unrevealed pleasures^
Then would ye wonder and her praises sing,
That all the woods should answer and your echo ring.
OPen the temple gates unto my love,
Open them wide that she may enter in,
And all the posts adorn as does behoue,
And all the pillours deck with girlands trim,
For to recyue this Saint with honor dew,
That comes in to you,
With trembling steps and humble reverence,
She comes in, before the almighty's view,
Of her ye virgins learn obedience,
When so ^e come into those holy places,
To humble your proud faces
Bring her up to the high altar that she may,
The sacred ceremonies there partake,
The which do endless ma^rimony make,
And let the roaring Organs loudly play;
The praises of the Lord in lively notes,
The whiles with hollow throats.
The Choristers the joyous Antheme sing,
That all the woods may answer and their echo ring
Behold whiles she before the altar stands
Hearing the holy priest that to her speaks
And blesses her with his two happy hands,
How the red roses flush up in her cheeks,
And the pure snow with goodly vermill stayne,
Like crimsin did in grain,
That even The Angels which continually^
About the sacred Altar do remain,
Forget their service and about her fly,
Often peeping in her face that seems more fair,
The more they on it stare.
But her sad eyes still fastened on the ground,
Are governed with goodly modesty,
That suffers not one look to glaunce awry,
Which may let in a little thought vnsownd,
Why blush ye love to give to me your hand^
The pledge of all our band,
Sing ye sweet Angels Alleluya sing,
That all the woods may answer and your echo ring
NOw al is done; bring home the bride again,
bring home the triumph of our victory,
Bring home with you the glory of her gain,
With ioyance bring her and with iollity.
Never had man more joyful day then this,
Whom heaven would heap with blis.
Make feast therefore now all this live long day,
This day for ever to me holy is,
Pour out the wine without restraint or stay,
Pour not by cups, but by the belly full,
Pour out to all that wull,
And sprinkle all the posts and walls with wine,
That they may sweat, and drunken be withal.
Crown ye God Bacchus with a coronall,
And Hymen also crown with wreathes of vine,
And let the Graces dance unto the rest;
For the^ can do it best:
The whiles the maidens do their carroll sing,
To which the woods shall answer and their echo ring.
RIng ye the bells, ye young men of the town,
And leave your wonted labors for this day:
This day is holy; do ye write it down,
that ye for ^uer it remember may.
This day the sun is in his chiefest hight,
With Barnaby the bright,
From whence declining daily by degrees,
He somewhat loses of his heat and light,
When once the Crab behind his back he sees.
But for this time it ill ordained was,
To chose the longest day in all the year,
And shortest night, when longest fitter wear:
Yet never day so long, but late would pass.
Ring ye the bells, to make it wear away,
And bonefiers make all day,
And dance about them, and about them sing:
that all the woods may answer, and your echo ring.
AH when will this long weary day have end,
and lend me leave to come unto my love?
How slovvly do the hours their numbers spend?
How slowly does sad Time his feathers move?
Have thee O fairest Planet to thy home
Within the Western foam:
Thy tired steedes long since have need of rest.
Long though it be, at last I see it gloome,
And the bright evening star with golden creast
Appear out of the East.
Fair child of beauty, glorious lamp of love
That all the host of heaven in ranks do lead,
And guydest lovers through the nights dread,
How chearefully thou look from above,
And seemst to laugh atweene thy twinkling light
As ioying in the sight
Of these glad many which for joy do sing,
That all the woods them answer and their echo ring.
Now cease ye damsels your delights forepast;
Enough is it, that all the day was youres:
Now day is done, and night is nighing fast:
Now bring the Bryde into the brydall boures.
Now night is come, now soon her disaray,
And in her bed her lay;
Lay her in lillies and in violets,
And silken courteins over her display,
And odourd sheets, and Arras couerlets,
Behold how goodly my fair love does ly
In proud humility;
Like unto Maia, when as Jove her took,
In Tempe, lying on the flowery gras,
Twixt sleep and wake, after she weary was,
With bathing in the Acidalian brook
Now it is night, ye damsels may be gone,
And leave my love alone,
And leave likewise your former lay to sing:
The woods no more shall answer, nor your echo ring
NOw welcome night, thou night so long expected,
that long days labor do at last defray,
And all my cares, which cruel love collected,
Have sumd in one, and cancelled for aye:
Spread thy broad wing over my love and me,
that no man may us see,
And in thy sable mantle us enwrap,
From fear of perrill and foul horror free.
Let no false treason seek us to entrap,
Nor any dread disquiet once annoy
the safety of our joy:
But let the night be calm and quietsome,
Without tempestuous storms or sad afray:
Like as when Jove with fair Al^mena lay,
When he begot the great Tirynthian groom:
Or like as when he with thy self did lie,
And begot Majesty.
And let the mayds and yongmen cease to sing:
Ne let the woods them answer, nor their echo ring.
LEt no lamenting cries, nor doleful tears,
Be heard all night within nor yet without:
Ne let false whispers breeding hidden fears,
Break gentle sleep with mi^conceiued dout.
Let no deluding dreams, nor dread^ul ^ights
Make sudden sad affrights;
Ne let house fyres, nor lightnings helpelesse harmes^
Ne let the Ponke, no^ other evil sprights,
Ne let mischiuous witches with their charms,
Ne let hob Goblins, names whose sense we see not,
Fray us with things that be not.
Let not the shriech Oule, nor the Storke be heard:
Nor the night Raven that still deadly ^els,
Nor damned ghosts called up with mighty spells,
Nor griesly vultures make us once a^feard:
Ne let th`unpleasant Quyre of F^ogs still croking
Make us to wish their choking.
Let none of these their drery accents sing,
Ne let the woods them answer, nor their echo ring.
But let still Silence true night watches keep,
That sacred peace may in assurance rain,
And tymely sleep, when it is time to sleep,
May ponre his limbs forth on your pleasant plain,
The whiles an hundred little winged loves,
Like diverse fethered doves,
Shall fly and flutter round about your bed,
And in the secret dark, that none reproues,
Their pretty stealthes shall work, and snares shall spread
To filch away sweet snatches of delight,
Conceald through covert night.
Ye sons of Venus, play your sports at will,
For greedy pleasure, careless of your toys,
Thinks more upon her paradise of joys,
Then what ye do, albe it good or ill.
All night therefore attend your merry play,
For it will soon be day:
Now none does hinder you, that say or sing,
Ne will the woods now answer, nor your Echo ring^
WHo is the same, which at my window peepes?
Or whose is that fair face, that shi^es so bright,
Is it not Cinthia, she that never sleeps,
But walks about high heaven all the night?
O fairest goddess, do thou not envy
My love with me to spy:
For thou likewise did love, though now unthought,
And for a fleece of woll, which privily,
The Latmian shephard once unto thee brought,
His pleasures with thee wrought.
Therefore to us be favorable now;
And since of wemens labors thou have charge,
And generation goodly do enlarge,
Incline they will to effect our wishfull^ ow,
And the chaste womb inform with timely seed,
That may our comfort breed:
Till which we cease our hopeful hap to sing,
Ne let the woods us answer, nor our Echo ring.
ANd thou great Juno, which with awful might
the laws of wedlock still do patronize,
And the religion of the faith first plight
With sacred rites have taught to solemnize:
and ^eke for comfort often called art
Of women in their smart,
Eternally bind thou this lovely band,
And all thy blessings unto us impart.
And thou glad Genius, in whose gentle hand,
The bridale bower and geniall bed remain,
Without blemish or stain,
And the sweet pleasures of their loves delight.
With secret aid do succor and supply,
Till they bring forth the fruitful progeny,
Send us the timely fruit of this same night.
And thou fair Hebe, and thou Hymen free,
Grant that it may so be.
Til which we cease your further praise to sing,
Ne any woods shall answer, nor your Echo ring.
ANd ye high heavens, the temple of the gods,
In which a thousand torches flaming bright
Do burn, that to us wretched earthly clods:
In dreadful darkness lend desired light;
And all ye powers which in the same remain,
More then we men can feign,
Pour out your blessing on us plentiously,
And happy influence upon us rain,
That we may raise a large posterity,
Which from the earth, which they may long possess,
With lasting happiness,
Up to your haughty palaces may mount,
And for the guerdon of their glorious merit
May heavenly tabernacles there inherit,
Of blessed Saints for to increase the count.
So let us rest, sweet love, in hope of this,
And cease till then our tymely joys to sing,
The woods no more us answer, nor our echo ring.
SOng made in lieu of many ornaments,
With which my love should duly have been dect,
Which cutting off through hasty accidents,
Ye would not stay your dew time to expect,
But promised both to recompens,
Be unto her a goodly ornament,
And for short time an endless moniment.
FINIS
Imprinted by P. S. for William Ponsonby.


