De non temerandis Ecclesiis. A TRACT OF THE RIGHTS AND RESPECT DVE Unto
Churches. Written to a Gentleman, who having an Appropriate Parsonage, employed
the Church to profane uses, and left the Parishioners uncertainly provided of
divine service, in a parish near there adjoining.

The second Edition enlarged with an Appendix.

By Sr. HENRY SPELMAN Knight.

AT LONDON Imprinted by JOHN BEALE, and are to be sold by William Welby. 1616.

DEO and ECCLESIAE.
ACT. 28. 24. Some were persuaded with the things that were spoken, and some
believed not.

The Printer to the READER.
THis small Tract, now above two years past, was by me printed for that
worthy Knight the Author thereof, with no intent to have it published: and
being hitherto by me suppressed from reprinting here at home; I find it to be
of late time printed in Scotland (contrary both to the Authors and my
expectation) and Dedicated by another man to the Bishops and Clergy there, and
so made more public, being of it self private, then was first intended: which
(I suppose) had the Author known, or once misdoubted the sequel, instead of
De non temerandis Ecclesiis, he would have studied another Title, De non
temerandis Scriptis alienis: that his writings might not be impropriated, when
Benefices are made proper. Wherefore finding many st^ps in (...) from his
copy, I have (as well in the right of the Author as of my self to whom the
right of the sole Printing belonged) caused it to be reprinted. And though at
the time of the putting it to the Press, I could not con^erre with the Author,
he being then in the Country, yet has it pleased him since his coming home,
to add something more unto it, as his leisure would permit him; which I have
annexed to the end thereof. And thus have I attempted to make a private work
public, lest the faults of other men, should unjustly he cast upon him, that
deserved so well in so rare an Argument.

Farewell.
To the Reader.
ALL the vessels of the Kings house, are not gold, or, silver, or for uses of
Honor. Some be common stuff, and for mean services: yet profitable. Of the
first sort, I am sure this Tract is not. Whether of the other or no; I leave
that to thy judgment. To deal plainly; my self have no great opinion of it;
as finding mine own imperfections and writing it only upon a private occasion
to a private friend, without curious observation of matter or method. But having
also written a greater work (much of the same Argument) and intending to
publish, or suppress it, as I see cause: I thought it not unfit (upon some
encouragement) to send this forth (like a Pinnesse or Post of Advice) to make a
discovery of the Coast, before I adventure my greater Ship. If I receive good
advertisement, I shall grow the bolder. Howsoever, take this I pray thee, as it
is: and let my zeal to the cause, excuse me in meddling with matters beyond my
strength.

H. S.

A Letter, showing the occasion of this Treatise.
To the worshipful his most loving uncle, FR: SA. etc.
MY good Uncle, the speeches that past casually between us at our last
parting, have run often since in my mind; and so (perhaps) have they done in
yours. You complained (as God would have it) that you were much crossed in the
building you were in hand with, upon a piece of gleabe of your Appropriate
Parsonage at Congham. I answered, that I thought God was not pleased with it,
insomuch as it tended to the defrauding of the Church, adding (amongst some
other words) that I held it utterly unlawful to keep Appropriate Parsonages
from the Church, etc.

But our talk proceeding, I perceived that as God had always his portion in
your heart, so in this, though it concerned your profit, you seemed tractable.
It much rejoiced me, and therefore apprehending the occasion, I will be bold
to add a continuance to that happy motion: (so I trust, both you and I, shall
have cause to term it) and besides, to give you some tribute of the love and
duty I long have ought you. Therefore (good uncle) as your heart has happily
conceived these blessed sparks, so in the name and blessing of God, cherish and
inflame them. No doubt they are kindled from heaven, like the fire of the
Altar, and are sent unto you from God himself, to be a light to you in your
old days (when your bodily eyes fail you) to guide your feet into the way of
peace, that is, the way and place from whence they came. So always I pray for
you, and rest,

Westmin. Aug. 17. 1613. Your loving and faithful Nephew, HENRY SPELMAN.

Errata.
Page 1 ^. line 5. read, all his goods. p. 60. 1. r. concur. p. 124 l. 11. r.
Therefore he that enlarged the Terms of the Law (first set forth by John
Rassall) also. p* 145. l. 14. r. supple. p. 178, ^. 8. 1. (...) p. 175. l. 21.
r. Kings Edition.

De non temerandis ECCLESIIS.
OF THE Rights and respect due unto the Church.
IN So Much as the rights and Duties that belong to our Churches are in effect
contained under the name of a Rectory or Parsonage: I will first define, what I
conceive a Rectory or Parsonage to be, according to the usual form and manner
thereof.

A Rectory or Parsonage, A Rectory what it is.
is a Plowd. Comment in Quare Impedit per Grendo^, etc.
Spiritual living, composed of Land, Tithe, and other Oblatio est omne quod
exhibetur in cultu Dei, Tho. Aq. 22. q. 85. 3. 3. etc. and Urban in his epist.
Tome 1. Council. And lands are so termed, Ezekiel. 45. 1. and Tithes, Numb: 18. 24.
So also the Canonists and Ciuilians expound them, Council. Aurel. ca. 7. Burcha.
lib. 3. ca. 129. and 143. Et Lex. Iurid. in verb. oblatio.
Oblations of the people, Leuit. 27. 28.
separate or dedicate to God in any Congregation, for the Touching divine
worship and works of charity.
service of his Church there, and for the maintenance of the Governor or
Minister thereof, to whose charge the same is committed.

By this definition it appears, that the ordinary living or reuenew of a
Parsonage, is of 3 sorts: the one in Land, commonly called the Glebe: another
in Tithe, which is a set and regular part of our goods rendered to God. the
third, in other offerings and oblations bestowed upon God and his Church, by the
people, either in such arbitrable proportion as their own devotion moves
them, or as the laws or customs of particular places do require them.

2 Though I inuert order a little, Tithes how due.
I will first speak of Tithes, because it is Gods ancient demain, and the
nobler part of this his inheritance, founded primar^ly, upon the Law of
nature, (as the other be also after their manner.) For the Law of Nature
teaches us that God is to be honored: and that the honor due unto him,
cannot be performed without Ministers, nor the Ministers attend their
function without maintenance. And therefore seeing God is the supreme Lord and
possessor of all, Genesis 14. 19.
and gives all things unto us that we are maintained with, it is our duty,
both in point of Justice and Gratuity, to render something back again unto
him, as acknowledging this his supremacy and bounty; as honoring him for his
goodness; as a testimony of the worship, love, and service we owe him; and
lastly, as a means whereby these duties and services may be performed to him.
This, I say, the very Law of Nature teaches us to do: and this the Law of
GOD requires also at our hands: but what the set portion of our goods should
be, that thus we ought to render back unto God, I cannot say the Law of Yet
there be diverse natural reasons that commend this number (for this purpose)
above other.
Nature has determined that. But the wisdom of all the Nations of the World,
the practice of all Ages, the example of the Patriarchs Genesis 14. 20.
ABRAHAM and Genesis 28. 22.
JACOB, the Leuitticus 27. 30. and 32. Deuteronomy. 12. 6, and 11. Mallachy 3. 10.
approbation and commandment of Almighty GOD himself, and the constant
Declared by the Fathers and Counsels.
resolution of his CHVRCH universally, has taught and prescribed us to render
unto him the Tenth part: and that this Tenth part or Tithe, being thus assigned
unto him, leaves now to be of the nature of the other nine parts (which are
given us for our worldly necessities) and becomes as a thing dedicate and
appropriate unto God. For it is said, Leuit. 27. 30. All the tithe of the land,
both of the seed of the ground, and of the fruit of the trees, is the Lords:
yea more then so, It is holy unto the Lord. And again (verse 32.) Every Tithe
of Bullock, and Sheep, and of all that goes under the rod, the tenth shall
be holy unto the Lord. He says, holy unto the Lord; not that they were like
the sanctified things of the Temple, which none might touch but the Anointed
Priests) but Holy and separate from the use and injury of secular persons, and
to be disposed only, to and for the peculiar service and peculiar Servants of
GOD. And therefore in the 28. verse, it is said, to be separate from the common
use, because it is separate, and set apart unto the Lord.

3 But some happily will say, Tithes originally not Leuiticall.
that this use of Tithing rises out of the Leuiticall Law, and so ended with
it.

I answer, that it was received and practiced by Abraham, and Jacob voweth to
give tithes Genesis 28. 22. And Joseph shows he performs his vow. Antiquit.
lib. 1. cap. 27.
Jacob diverse hundred years before it came to the Levites. For it is said that
Abraham gave tithe to Melchisedeck, Genesis 14. 20. And that Leuy himself paid
tithe also in the loins of Abraham, Heb. 7. 9. Melchisedecke was the image of
CHRST, and his Church; Abraham of the congregation of the Faithful. Therefore
though Leuy received tithes afterward, by a particular grant from GOD, for the
time: yet now he paid them generally with the congregation, in the loins of
Abram unto the Priesthood of Christ, here personated by Melchisedeck: which
being perpetual, and an image of this of the Gospel, may well note unto us,
that this duty of Tithe, ought also to be perpetual. And therefore Hom. 35.
in Genesis
Chrysostom says: that Abraham herein was OUR tutor: not the tutor of the
Jews. And in so much as Abraham paid it not to a Priest that offered a
Leuiticall Sacrifice of Bullocks and Goats: but to him that gave the Elements
of the Sacrament of the Gospel, The Scripture only mentions Bread and wine
to be given by Melchisedeck to Abraham: But Josephus shows, that he gave him
also diverse other rich gifts. Antiquit. lib. 1. cap. 18.
bread and wine: it may also well intimate unto us, to what kind of Priest we
are to pay our tithes: namely, to him that ministers unto us the Sacrament of
bread and wine, which are only those of the Gospel, and not the Leuiricall
Priests. So that our tithe paid in this kind, cannot be said Leuiticall: as
also for that the Leuitical tithes, were only of things Leuit. 37. 30, and 3^.
renewing and increasing: whereas Abraham and Jacob paid them of all: as if
they had followed the commandment of the Apostle; Let him that is taught in
the Word, make him that has taught him part taker of (...).
AL. Gal* 6. 6.

God also requires this duty of tithe by his own mouth, as of old belonging
unto him, before the Levites were called to the service of the Tabernacle: and
before they were named in Scripture. For they are not named till Exodus. 38.
21. And it is said in Exodus 22. 29. Thine bundance of thy liquor shall thou
not keep back: meaning Tithes and first fruits, and therefore Jerome doubts
not so to translate it; Thy Tithes and first Fruits shall thou not keep back.
And in this manner of speech, the word Keep back, shows that it was a thing
formerlie due unto GOD: for we cannot say, that any thing is kept back, or
withheld that was not due before. Therefore we find no original
commondement of giving tithe unto GOD: but upon the first mentioning of them in
Leuiticus, they are positiuely declared to be His, as a part of His Crown,
and ancient demaine; for it is there said, Cap. 27. 30. All the tithe of the
Land is the Lords. And Moses commands not the people a new thing: but
declares the Right that of old belonged to GOD: namely, that All the tithes
of the land was his.

Other phrases of Scripture do confirm this; for afterward when tithes came
to be assigned to the Levites: God does not say, The children of Israel shall
give their tithes to the Levites* but he says, Behold I have given them to the
Levites. Number. 18. 21, 24, and 26.
And continuing this his claim unto them, against those that many hundred
years after disseised him of them: he complains, Malachy. 3. 8. That they
that withheld their tyths from the Levites, spoiled him himself.

But having handled this argument more largely in a greater work: I will hear
close it up with opposing against these kinds of Adversaries, not only the
reverend authority of of those ancient and most honorable Pillars of the
Church. SS. Ambros. in Sermon. quadrages.
Ambrose, August. in Sermon. de temp. 1^9. and alias.
Augustine, Hieron. in Mala. 3.
Hierome, and Chrysostom. in Epist. ad Heb. Hom. 12. and Hom. 35. in. Genesis
Chysostome, (who though they run violently with Saint Paul, against such
ceremonies, as they conceived to to be Leuiticall; yet when they come to speak
of Tithes, admit, maintain, and command the use thereof:) But also the
resolution of many ancient Roman. Council. 4. Aurelian. 1. Tarracon. sub Horm.
Mediomatricis. toletanum Agrippin. cap. 6. Hispalens. Mont^s. concus. 2.
Valentinum sub Leone 4 Rothomag. cap 3. Cauall^n cap. ^8. Maguntin. cap. 10.
Counsels and a multitude of other Origin, Tertullian, Cyprian, Gregory, etc.
Fathers and Doctors of the Church in their seu^rall ages: all of them
concurring in opinion, that Tithes belong justly unto GOD; and many of them
commanding all men even upon peril of their souls not to withholde them:
which Argument S. Augustine himself pathetically maintains, See this Sermon
in the end of this book.
in a particular Sermon of his to this purpose. And though it be a great
question among the learned, whether they be du^ in queta part, iure diuino
(which requires a larger discourse) yet I never read of many that impugned
them absolutely. Glaber. Hist. lib. 2* ca. 11.
Lieutardus, who lived about 1000 years after Christ, taught the payment of
them to be superfluous and idle, and then growing desperate, drowned himself,
as it were to give us a badge of this Doctrine.

4 Touching oblations and offerings. Of Oblations and offerings.
The Fathers under Urban. Epist. circiter Anno. Christi 227.
this name accounted all things, that were given or dedicated to the service of
God. And in the first ages of Christian religion (after the great persecutions)
the Church by this means began so to abound in riches, that the good Emperors
Constantine and Valentinian made laws that rich men which were able to support
the charges of the Commonwealth: should not be admitted into religious houses*
because their poss^ssions and goods were thereby a mortized.
themselves, were constrained to make laws (not unlike our statutes of
Mortemaine) to restrain the excess thereof: for fear of impouerishing their
temporal estate In those days, many Churches had Treasuries for keeping these
oblations (as the Storehouses at Jerusalem, appointed by 2 Chronicles. 31. 11.
Hezechias, for the Temple) but the succeeding Ages, contracted them into
Chests: and in these later times, the Parsons pocket may well enough contain
them. I shall not need. therefore, to spend many words in a small matter: for
all the Oblations now in use, are in effect the two-peny Easter Offerings, and a
few other such like: which because the owners of Appropriate Parsonages shall
not ignorantly convert unto their own benefit: I will show them why they were
paid, and why they have them.

Saint Paul ordained in the churches of Galatia and Corinth, that every one
upon the Lords day should yield somewhat to God for the Saints. 1, Cor. 16. ^*

^ But this (being once a weeek) came too thick and too often about. Therefore
in Tertullian in Apologetico.
Tertullians time the use was to do it monthly, and (at last) at pleasure. But
it was ever the ancient use of the Primitive Church (as appears by Iustinius
in Apol. 2. Hist. Ecles.
Justin and Cyprian) that al^ that come to the holy Communion, did according to
their abilities, offer something of their substance to God, for charitable uses
and maintenance of the Ministers. Therefore Sermon 1, de Eleemosymis.
Cyprian sharply taxes a rich Matron, that received the Communion, and offered
nothing. Locuples and dives and dominicum celebrare te credis, quae He calls
the treasury Corban, of that at the Temple of Jerusalem.
Corban omnino non respicis etc. What? (says he) art thou able and rich? and
do thou think that thou celebratest the Lords Supper, which bring nothing
to the Treasury? So ( Irenaeus says) Noui Testamenti nouam docuit ( filz.
Christ^us) oblationem: quam Ecclesia ab Apostolis accipiens in vniuerso mundo
offert Deo: ei qui alimenta nobis prestat. primitias suorum muncrum in nouo
testamento.
That it was the use of the Church through the world in his time, and received
from the Apostles; to offer something of the blessings that they lived by, as
the first fruits thereof, to him that gave these things unto them. Which Vide
Zanchium lib. 1. de culm Dei externo.
Zanchius understands to be meant of offerings at the Communion: given to
holy uses, and for relief of the poor of the Church: commending it for an
excellent custom, and complaining that it is now discontinued. But to this
end, and in imitation hereof, are our Easter and Communion offerings (as also
those, at, and for Christnings, Burials, etc. which I will not now speak
further of) at this day made, and therefore let Proprietaries consider with
what conscience they can swallow and digest them.

5 Touching the land, Of Glebe Land, and houses belonging to Parsonages
glebe, and howses, belonging to Parsonages (which I would have called Gods
fixed inheritance, but that I see it is moveable:) I cannot say that they are
Gods ancient demaines, in the same form that tithes are, and as our Clergy
enioieth them, but the warrant and ground thereof, rises out of the word of
God, who not only gave us a president thereof, when he appointed Cities for
the Levites to dwell in, with a convenient circuit of fields for the maintenance
of their Cattle, Number. 35. 2, etc. but commanded also the Children of Israel
(and in them all the Nations of the world:) that in division of their land,
they should offer an oblation to the Lord, an holy portion of the Land for the
Priest to dwell on, and to build the house of GOD upon: Ezeck 45. 1, and 4. So
that the houses and lands that our Ancestors have dedicated to God in this
manner, for the Churches and Ministers of this time: are now also his right and
just inheritance, as well as those which the Israelites assigned for the house
of God, and Levites of that time* and comes upon the same reason and in lieu
thereof. But because it is uncertain when and how they were brought into the
Church, I will say something touching that point.

In the time of the Apostles the use was (as appears Acts 2. 45. and Acts 4.
34, and 35.) to sell their lands, How lands came to the Churches.
and bring the money only, to the Apostles. For the Church being then in
persecution, and the Apostles not to remain in any particular place, but to
wander all over the world, for preaching the Gospel: they could not possess
immovable inheritances: and therefore received only the money they were sold
for, distributing it as occasion served. But after when the church obtained a
little rest, and began to be settled: It appears by the Epistles of Pius and
Urban who lived about the year of Christ 230. that the Church of Rome had then
begu^ to retain lands in this manner upon this reason, and it may well be, for
that Origin and Eusebius show, that Churches had then possessions.
it found much casualty in pecuniary contributions, and chused therefore rather
to retain the Lands themselves, given for the maintenance of Gods Priests and
Ministers: then (by suffering the same to be sold) to furnish the time present
with abundance, and leave the future time to hazard and uncertainty. Hereupon
the Fathers in the Edicta Constantini and Lucinij Impp. Eus. lib. 10. ca. 5.
Primitive Church, as well before Constantine (as appears by his own Edicts,
and by Origin speaks of rents of the Church: Hom. 31 in Mat.
Origin Eusebius of an house belonging to the Church of Antioche that Paulus
Samosatenus in the time of Aurelianus the Emperor (about 30 years before
Constantine) wrongfully invaded: Lib. 7. cap. 24.
Eusebius, and the Epistles of and
Pius, and Read the note (a) next afote.
Urban) as after: began to accept and retain the lands thus given, and to
leave them over to their successors for a perpetual Dowry of the Church. And
this upon experience was found to be so godly and worthy a course, that it not
only received the applause of all succeeding ages: But commends for ever
unto us their temperance, in desiring no more then for present necessity, their
zeal in providing for posterity, and their great wisdom, (or rather,
Prophetical spirit) which fore-sawe so long before hand that, devotion though
it were (...) at one time hot and fervent, yet, at another it might be cold
enough: and therefore when time served, they would by this means provide that
the Church for ever, should have of her own, to maintain her self wi^hall.
Upon this ensued many godly prouisio^s for endowment of Churches, and for
annexing their livings so unto them, as neither the variety of time, nor the
impiety of man (if it were possible) should ever have divorced them; as
appears by a multitude of ancient Councels, Canons, Statutes, and decrees of
the Synod. Roman. sub Symacho. 103. Episcoporu^ circiter An. Christ. 503. tota
contra inuasores Ecclesiaru^. Council. Aurelianens. 4. Ann. 543. c. 19. and 34.
Conc. Meldeus. ca. 5. Burch. lib. 11. cap. 16. Council. Gangrens. cap. 8. Bur.
lib. 11. cap. 20. Council. Mogunt. cap. 3. 6. 7. and plurima alia.
Church, See the two edicts of Constantine and Licinius Empp. Eusebius. lib. 10.
cap. 5. And the laws of Constant: Theodos: Just: Carol: Magn: and many other.
Emperors, and To pass over foreign Princes, our own in former times have
almost successively confirmed them.
Princes, to that purpose. Therefore whilst the world burned so with that
sacred fire of devotion, toward the advancement of the glory of God: that
every man desired to sanctify his hand, in the building of Churches, lest such
holy monuments for want of due maintenance, should (in process of time) become,
either conte^ptible, or unprofitable. It was at length ordained, in Si quis in
agro suo, aut habet, aut postulat habore dioecefim primum and terras ei deputet
sufficienter, and clericos: qui ibidem sua officia impleant, vt sacratis locis
reuerentia condigna tribuatur. Aur. Conc. c. 23. in Conc. Tom. 2. vbi nota quod
dioecesis accipitur pro liberate condendi oratoria vel Ecclesias, itaque in
argume^to huius capituli oratorium exponitur.
Aurel. Council. 4. (An. 545.) cap. 33. And Tom. council. 1.
Council. Valentin. (An. 855.) cap. 9. That, whosoever builded a Church, should
assign unto it a Coloniam vestitam.
Ploughland, furnished for the maintenance of the Parson thereof. By virtue of
these Councels (as I take it) were the Founders of Churches in France first
compelled to assure Livings to those Churches. And it was also provided by the
third Council of Council. Tolet. 3. cap. 15.
Tolledo in Spain, that no Bishop might consecrate any Church, till sufficient
maintenance (which Chrysostom. hom 18. in Acta.
Chrysostom calls the Dowry of the Bride) were assigned to it.

But because these were foreign, and Provincial Councels, not General: they
bound not our Country, otherwise then by doctrine and example. Therefore it was
here decreed afterward, to the same effect in a Syn. Land. ca. 16. Antiq.
Britan. ca. 34.
Synod at London under Anselme Archbishop of Canterbury, Anno Domini 1105. H.
1. 3. And though the Laws of our Church began then first (as far as I yet
can find) to constrain our Countrymen to give Endowments to the Churches that
they builded; yet we were taught before (by the Custom and Example of our
precedent Ancestors, as well, as by our duty, out of the word of God, to do
the same* as appears by many Presidents, whereof I will only allege one,
(but above others, that most famous) of Alias Adulphus:
ETHELWULPHVS King of West-Saxony, who (in the year of our Lord 855) as
I^gulf. in Hist. Croil.
Ingulphus Saxo, and Sim. Dumelm. cita. Antiquit. Brit. cap. 27
Simeon Dumelmens. report, by the advice and agreement of all his Bishops and
Nobility: Gave, not only the tithe of the goods, but the Deciviam mansionem
vbi mininum sit.
tenth part of the Land through his Kingdom for ever, to God and the Churches,
free from all secular services, taxations, and impositions whatsoever. In which
kind of religious magnificence, as our succeeding Kings have also abounded: so
have they from As appears in their several laws, and namely 15 times in
Edw. 3. reign.
time to time, as well by Parliament Laws, as by their Royal Charters,
confirmed these and other the Rights of the Church, with many solemn See the
Stat. of 25. Edw. 1. in Rastals Abridgment tit. Confirmat. 3. And Sententia
lata sup^r Chartas. And Pupilla ocult par. 5. c. 22.
vows and impreceations against all that should ever attempt to violate the
same. Therefore if these things had not bin primarily due unto God by the rule
of his word, yet are they now His, and separate from us, by the voluntary gift
and dedication of our ancient Kings and Predecessors: as was the Nelis. 10. 32.
tribute of a third part of a shekell, which Nehemiah and the Jews, out of
their free bounty, couenanted yearly to give unto God for the service of his
house. For, as Saint Peter Acts. 5. 4.
says to Ananias: Whilst these things remained, they appertained unto us, and
were in our own power* but now, when we have not only vowed them, but
delivered them over into the hands and possession of Almighty God (and that,
not for superstitious and idle orders, but merely for the maintenance of his
public divine worship, and the Ministers thereof (they are not now arbitrable,
nor to be revoked by us, to the detriment of the Church.

6 Churches being erected and endowed: Churches and their livings dedicate to
God.
they and their livings, were (as I say) dedicated unto God. First, by the
solemn vow and oblation of the Founders: then by the solemn act of the
Bishop, who to separate these things from secular and profane employments,
not only ratified the vow and oblation of the Patron or Founders: but
consecrated also the Church it self: using therein great devotion, many
blessings, prayers, works of charity, and some Ceremony, for sanctifying the
same to divine uses. Therefore also have the ancient See the 6. Syn. Romans of
103 Bishops (above 1000 years since) wholly against violaters of Churches and
Church-rights. And see many other to this purpose. Burchar. lib. 11.
Councels added many fearful curses against all such as should either violate
it, or the Rights thereof.

This consecration, Master Demonst. Problem. tit. Templum sect. 3.
Perkins calls a Dedication, but confesses it to have been in use in this
manner, about the year of Christ 300. (which is within the time of the
Primitive Church) only he admits not, that it was then performed with
Ceremony and the sign of the Cross; which here I will not stand upon, nor
to show the greater antiquity thereof, (though I think it may well be
proved.) In Epist. ad Constant. Imp.
For Athanasius being in those days accused by the Arians, of ministering the
Communion in a Church not consecrated, excused himself to have done it upon
necessity. And Histor. suae lib. 1. c. 30. and Sozom. lib. 3. cap. 25. Niceph.
lib. 8. cap. 50. Hist. Triper. li 3. fol. 331*
Theodoret reports, that Constantine (then likewise) commanded, all those
that were at the Council of Fyrus, should come to Jerusalem.
Aelia: and that others should be assembled from all parts, for (...). i.
consecrare.
Consecration of the Churches, builded by him. Which shows it to be so
notorious and general an use at that time, and to have such universal
approbation; as it could not, but have a root also from elder ages, though
there cannot be many presidents found thereof, for that the Christians being
then in persecution, might hardly build, or dedicate any Churches, but were
constrained to use private houses, and solitary places for their assemblies.
Yet, even those houses, had (as it seems) some consecration, for they were
most commonly called Eusebius. (...) orat. de laudib. Constant.
aedes sacrae, Holy houses, and have left that name, (to this day) amongst us,
for our Churches, as a testimony of their sanctification, whereof I shall speak
more anon. Ibideus.
* Eusebius also says: that insomuch as the Holy houses and Temples of that
time, were thus Dedicated and Consecrated unto God, the universal Lord of all:
therefore they received his name, and were called in Greek (...), (in Lattin,
Dominica) the Lords houses: Which name, says he, was not imporsed. upon them
by man: but by himself only, that is Lord of all. Of this word (...), comes
the Saxon word Cyric or Kyrk: and (by adding a double aspiration to it) our
usual word Church or Church, as it were to put us ever in mind, whose these
Houses are: namely, the Lords houses: like that, which JACOB dedicating unto
GOD, called ( Bethel:) that is, Genesis 28. 22.
the house of God.

But both Church and Church-liuings were thus solemnly delivered into Gods
possession; and therefore all ages, Councels and Fathers (that ever I yet have
met with) account them holy and inviolable things. And hereupon they are
termed, Chrysostom. hom. 18. in Act. Council. Mogunt. ca. 7.
Patrimonium Christi, Dos Ecclesiae, Dos sponsae Christi, and Sacrata
possessio, or Praedium sanctum. For, Every thing that a man does separate unto
the Lord from the common use, whether it be man, or beast, or Land of his
Inheritance, it is Holy to the Lord: Leuit. 27. 28. And in what sort I
understand the word Holy, I have before declared.

7 As then the Law of Nature, Holy rights and Temples how respected by Heathens.
primarily taught all Nations in the world to give these things unto God* so
the very same Law, also taught them that it was sacrilege and impiety to pull
them back again: yea, the very heathen, counted the things thus severed unto
their gods: to be Sancta and inuiolanda. And Saint Augustine expounds,
Sanctum illud esse, quod violare nefas est. It is execrable wickedness, to
violate that that is holy. Genesis 47. 22.
Pharo would not abridge the Priests of their diet, or land: no not in the
great famine. The very Barbarous Nations of the world, even by the instinct of
nature, abhorred this impiety Diodorus Siculus notes of the Gauls, Biblioth.
hist. lib. 5.
that though they were a people, above all others most covetous of gold: yet
having abundance thereof, scattered in all parts of their Temples, to the
honor of their gods: none was found so wicked amongst them, as to meddle with
any of it. I could allege a multitude of Heathen stories to this purpose. But
I will not weaue the woollen yearne of the Gentiles, into the fine linen
garments of the Christians; I mean, I will not mingle profane arguments, in a
discourse of Christian piety For the sheep that are of the fold of Christ, are
tied only to hear his voice, and to follow that, John 10. 3.
which if they do not, they are thereby known to be Goats, and not of his
fold.

8 The cause why I touched upon this one heathen Example, How fearful a
thing it is to violate the Church.
is to aggrauate the manifold sins of us Christians, in this point. For if they
that knew not God, were so zealous of the glory of their Idols: how much more
is it to our condemnation, if we that know him, do less regard him? If it
go hard with Tyrus and Sydon in the day of judgment that sinned ignorantly;
how much harder will it be with Corasin and Bethsaida that sin presumptuously:
Especially with Capernaum that despises her Lord God and Master, Jesus Christ
him. self? What is to despise him; if to rob him of his honor, be not
despise him? Or what is to rob him of honor, if to take from him the things
given him for maintenance thereof, be not to rob him? Therefore when the
children of Israel withheld their tithes and offerings from the Levites, he
cries out in Malachy 3. 8. That himself was robbed and spoiled: and was so
highly offended therewith, that he cursed the whole Nation for it. And to make
this sin appear the more monstrous, he conuinceth the offenders therein: not
only to be violaters of his Legal ordinances, but even of the very law of
Nature, written in the heart of every man. For, says he, Will any man spoil
his gods? As if he should say: Can such a man be found as will, or dares
commit that sin, that all the Nations of the world, even by the instinct of
nature, account to be so horrible and impious? To spoil his gods: what his
own gods? Some were found, that now and then adventured to spoil the gods of
other Nations (yet not without punishment) but few or none that I read of
(till these latter days) that spoiled their own gods, in apparent and ouert
manner, as the Lawyers term it. I count it not ouert and apparent, when we do
as Ananias and Saphira did: pinch and detract from God, somewhat of that we
vowed to give: Nor, when we do as the children of Israel here did; withhold
that which we ought to pay out of our own goods (yet both these were heinous
sinners, and dreadfully punished.) But I call it ouert and apparent, when we
throw our selves into a more dangerous sin, by inuading openly the devotions
of other men, and taking that from God and from his Church, 2. Chron. 24. verse.
7.
(as Athalia did) which we never gave unto it, even the lands and livings
thereof: yea, the Churches themselves.

8 Doubtless we have much to fear in this point: David's zeal for the house of
God.
For as it is a transcendent sin; so David laboring to match it with a
transcendent punishment, bestows a whole Psalm, ( viz. the This Psalm is
alleged to this purpose by Lucius (who was martyred about An. Chr. 255.) in
his epistle to the Bishops of Gallia and Spain. Tom. Council. 1.
83.) in inueying particularly against these kind of sinners* such (expressly)
as would take to themselves the houses of God in possession; for that only is
the very center of the Psalm, and therein do all the lines and proiections of
the Prophets inuectiues, incur. First he makes a flat opposition between
God and them: and therefore calls them his enemies. Then he describes the
nature of these kind of enemies: namely, that they are murmuring enemies, as
grudging, and envying at the prosperity of the Church: Malicious enemies: as
hating, or hurting the service of God. Proud enemies, as lifting up their heads
against God: ver. 2. Crafty enemies; as imagining how to beguile the Church.
Conspiring enemies; as taking Counsel together against Gods secret ones (as
the Prophet calls them) that is, Gods servants and Ministers: ver. 3. And
lastly, Confederate enemies: as co^bining them selves one by example of
another, to persevere in their course of wronging and violating the Church:
verse. 5. Yet for all this, those against whom the Prophet thus enueigheth, did
not that they desired* They discovered their malicious purpose by word of
mouth, saying: Let us take to our selves the houses of God in possession. But
they only said it, they did it not. Their will was good, but their power
failed. Our will and power have both prevailed: for we have got the houses of
God into our possession: His Churches, his lands, his offerings, his holy
rights. We have gotten them, and led them away captive, bound in cheines of
iron: that is, so conveyed and assured unto us, by Deed, by Fine, by Act of
Parliament, as if they never should return again unto the Church. But hear
what David says to those of his time. Mark how he prays for them. Mark what
strange and exquisite punishments he designeth to them: and that in as many
several all sorts, as there are several branches in this kind of sin.

First, he prays, that God would deal with them, as he did with the
Madianites: verse. 9. That is, that as Geaeon by Trumpets and Lamps, struck
such a terror in the night time, into the hearts of the Madianites, that the
whole army fell into confusion, drew their swords one upon another, were
discomfited and 120 thousand of them slain. So that God by his trumpets, the
Preachers of his word, by his Lamps, which is, the light of the Gospel, would
confound in like manner, the enemies and spoilers of his Church, that sleep in
the night of their sin: And that he would make them like Oreb, and Zeb, like
Zeba and Salmana: verse 11. All which were strangely overthrown, died violent
deaths, and being glorious Princes of their nations, became like the filthy
and loathsome Dung of the earth: verse. 10. And Judges ^. 25. and 8. 21.

But does the Prophet stay here? no, he goes on with them: O my God, says he,
make them like a wheel. verse. 13. that is, wavering and unstable in their
actions: so as they may never bring their purposes to an end. Yea, make them
abject and contemptible; like the chafe that the wind scatters from the face
of the earth: verse. 13. Well, is he now satisfied? no. All this does but whet
his spirits to sharper imprecations. He now desires that the very floudgates
of Gods wrath may be broken open upon them; and that the tempest of his
indignation may rage at full against them: now he cries out to God to consume
them without mercy, yea and that in two terrible manners. One naturally, As the
fire burns up the wood. The other miraculously, As the flame censumeth the
mountains: verse. 14. Persecute them even so, (says he) with thy tempest, and
make them afraid with thy storm. Make their faces ashamed, O Lord, that they
may seek thy name. Let them be confounded and vexed ever more and more, let
them be put to shame and perish: verse. 15, 16, 17. How should the wit of man
discover and prosecute a sin in more vehement and horrible manner? Or, what
shall make us to abstain from such haughty sins? if all this prevail not.
Well, if to take the houses of God into possession, be thus? take them that
will for me.

9 You see how David in this his sacred fury, The zeal of our Savior to the
house of God.
was admirably carried against this sin. Well therefore might he say: And of
the parts of the Temple.
The zeal of thine house has eaten me up: Psalm. 69. 9. Yet, he spoke it not
of himself alone: but in the person also of our Savior Jesus Christ; who in
prosecution of David's zeal, did that in this case; that he never did at any
time else in all his life. In all other cases he showed himself like the
Pascall Lamb, that every body did eat and deuour^ at pleasure; and like the
sheep that was dumb before the shearer, even when his very life was taken from
him. But when he saw the golden fleece to be taken from the house of God: that
is, when he saw the Church his beloved spouse, deprived and spoiled of the
honor, reverence, duty and ornament, that belonged to her: Then, as David
did, he grows into a sacred fury; he leaves the mildness of the Pascall
Lamb, and takes upon him the fierceness of the Lion of Judah. Then he
begins to bestir him, and to lay about him. He whippeth out them that
profaned it; drives out their sheep and their oxen, though they were for the
sacrifice: and overthrows the table of the money changers: Mat. 21. 12
John 2. 14. Mar. 11. 17.
He would by no means endure such trumtrumpery Luke. 19. 45.
to be in his Fathers house, nor his Fathers house to made an house of
Merchandise: but, much less then, that merchandise should be made of his
Fathers house it self. O fearful and most inhumane sin, horresco referrens.

But ere I depart from this place of Scripture; let me note one thing more out
of it, for the greater reverence of Churches: that although our Lord be here
said, to have cast these things out of the Temple; yet, in truth, they were not
in the Temple it self, but in the outward court or yard thereof. For within
the inward parts of the Temple, (namely, the first, and second Tabernacles) did
no man enter, but the Leuite Priests: Number. 18. 5.
and of them also, Ebr. 9. 2, 3, 4, 5, etc.
none into the second Tabernacle, but the High Priest. Therefore, although our
Savior Christ, were a Priest for ever after the order of Melchisedeck: yet
because he was not a Priest of Leuy: but of the Tribe of Juda (of which Tribe
Moses spoke nothing touching the Priesthood: Heb. 7. 14.) I take it, that
Christ came to fulfill the Law, and not to break it. Therefore (doubtless) he
observed the rules thereof, and the quality of his Tribe.
he never came within these parts of the Temple: nor where the sacrifice was,
but freque^ted only See the form of the Temple in Arias Montaiu: Antiquitat.
Iudaic. lib. Aricl. and in the Geneua Bible, 1. King. cap. 6. and mark well
both it, and the notes upon it; for I find them (above others) most agreeable
to the Scriptures, and rely not upon the figure of the Temple in Adricomues,
without good examination; for I perceive he has misplaced somethings therein.
Atrium populi, the outward court from the Temple. For into this only, the Sea
the note (a) among the notes aforesaid.
people resorted: to worship, pray, and hear the word of God expounded, not
pressing further toward the Temple: and in the midst whereof (the 2. Chron.
6. 13.
brazen stage which Solomon prayed upon) was erected. Yet, this very place,
this court, or outward yard, would not our Savior permit to be profaned;
neither with market matters, nor with carrying so much as a burden or vessel
through it: Mark. 11. 16: For though it were not so Leuetically holy, as the
Temple: yet it was dedicated to God, with the Temple: And taken often in the
new Testament, for the Temple: as in the places before alleged: And Acts 3. 2,
3. By which reason the very Churchyards themselves (being Dedicated with the
Churches, and the principal soil thereof: Stat. Ne Rectores prosternant
arbores in Cimiterio.
as an old Statute witnesses) seem also to have in them a certain kind of
Sanctification: and are not therefore to be abused to secular and base
employments: as not only the Ancient Fathers, by the Canons of the Church: but
the present Laws of the Land, have well provided for them.

10 But some will say, that the sanctification of the Temple was Leuiticall,
More of that matter: and how far the sanctification of the Temple is abo.
and therefore abolished, and not to be applied to our Churches. I answer,
the Temple was sanctified lished: or remains to our Churches. unto three
functions; which also had three several places assigned to them. The first,
belonged to the Divine presence; and had the custody of y^ Holiest types
thereof; the Oracle, the Arc, the Mercy-seat, etc. and was therefore called
Sanctum Sanctorum, or the Holiest of all. The second, was for ceremonial
worship and atonement: namely, by sacrifice, oblations, and other Leuiticall
rites: the place thereof being the the Sanctuary, (wherein were the Holy
vessels) and the Court of Priests, wherein the Altar of burnt sacrifice did
stand. The third, was for simple worship, prayer, and doctrine (without any
pomp or ceremony:) and the place of this, was the outward Court, (called, 1.
Chr. 4. 9. and 6. 12.
Atrium populi, and Acts 31. 1.
Salomons porich;) which therefore had in it no Ceremonial implement at all.

The two first of these functions, with the places belonging to them; were
indeed particularly appropriate to the Law. For, they were Ceremonial,
Mystical, Secret, Leuiticall, Judicial, and Temporall-Ceremoniall, as
celebrated with much worldly pomp. Mystical, as figurating some spiritual
things. Secret; as either performed behind the Veil or Curtain: or else
sequestered and romote from the people. Leuiticall; as committed only to the
administration; of that Tribe* Judicial; as ordained only for the salvation
of that people. And Temporal; as instituted only for a season, and not to
continue. But the Sanctification, of the third function, and of the place
thereto appointed, was directly contrary in all the points alleged to the
former two. First (as I said before) it was for simple worship, Prayer, and
Doctrine which were there to be performed and delivered in all sincerity,
without any ceremony or ceremonial implement used therein. Secondly, there was
no matter of mystery therein to be seen* but whatsoever was mystical in the
Law, or the Prophets, was there expounded. Thirdly, nothing there, was hidden
or secret from the people, but acted wholly without the Veil, and publicly
for every man. Fourthly, it was not appropriate to the Levites, but common
alike to all the Tribes. Fifthly, not ordained for the Jews particularly, but
for all Nations in general. And lastly, not to endure for a time, (as those
other two of the Law) but to continue for ever: even after the Gentiles were
called as well as the Jews: that is, during the time of the Gospel, as well
as the Law. Therefore, says God, by Isaias the Prophet, cap. 56. 7. My house
shall be called an house of Prayer, to all Nations. He said not, an House of
Sacrifice to all Nations: for the Sacrifice ended, before the calling of the
Gentiles, and so they could have no part thereof. Nor an House of prayer for
the Jews only, for then had the Gentiles (when they were called) been
likewise excluded. But an House of prayer to all Nations, that is, Jews and
Gentiles indifferently: which therefore, must have relation to the times of the
Gospel. And consequently, the sanctification of that house, and of that
function, is also a sanctification of the Churches of the Gospel.

We read not therefore, that Christ reformed any thing in the other two
functions of the Temple; for they were now, as at an end. But because this
third function was for ever to continue to his Church: therefore he purges it
of that that profaned it; restores it (as he did marriage) to the original
sanctity: And that the future world (which was the time of the Gospel) might
better observe it, then the precedent, and time of the Law had done; he
reports, and confirms the decree, whereby it was sanctified: It is written,
says he, (as producing the record and words of the foundation) My house shall
be called an house of prayer to all people. He says, My House, as excluding
all other, from having any property therein; for, God will be Ioynt-tenant
with no man. And it shall be, An house of prayer for all people: that is,
public forever; not private, nor appropriate to any* nor a den of thieves;
that is, no place of Merchandise, or secular business, as Saint I^rome
expounds it. It must not be an Impropriation; no man can, or may hold it in
that kind.

The time also when our Savior pronounced these words is much to the purpose
as it seems to me. For it was after he had turned out the oxen and doves;
that is, the things for the Sacrifice. As though, he thereby taught us, that
when the Sacrificall function of the Temple was ended: yet the sanctification
thereof, to be an house of prayer, for ever remained.

11 This doctrine of our Savior, Saint Paul maintains the reverence of the
Church.
is continued unto us by Saint Paul: who, seeing the Corinthians to profane the
Church with eating and drinking in it* though much good might follow thereby,
(being orderly done) as the increasing of amity, and the relief of the poor;
yet because it was against the reverence of the place: he not only reproves
them for it, demanding if they had not houses to eat and drink in at home, but
skaring them also (by showing the danger they were falling into) he speaks
to them as with admiration: Despise ye the Church of God? 1 Cor. 11. 12.
As if he should say, is your religion now come unto that? or is that your
Religion, To despise the place that God has sanctified unto himself; by
making it, as Saint Jerome says, Triclineum epularum, Coment. in 1. Cor. 11.
a banqueting house. God wondered in Malachy, that any should spoil their
gods. And the holy Ghost here wondereth, that any should despise the material
Church: for so Saint Jerome expounds it. Thus both of them wonder at one and
the same thing: that any man should be so irreligious, as to profane the
reverence due unto God, and that that is his.

12 So precise therefore were the Ancient Fathers in this point, The zeal of
some of the Fathers to the Church. Sermon. de temp. tom. 10. 21^
that, that meek Saint of God, Saint Augustine, would by no means endure that
any should use clamors, or da^cing within the vi^^ of the Church. Yea, he
terms them, Miserable and wretched men that did it And denounces against
them, that If such came Christians to the Church, they went Pagans home. But
when the Church it self came to be abused! Oh, how Saint Ambrose takes it,
even against the Emperor himself, great Valentinian that required it for an
Arian: O (says he) let him ask that is mine, Ad Marcellinam sororem: Epist.
33.
my lands, my goods, and whatsoever I possess, I will not deny them; yet are
they not mine, but belong to the poor. Verum ea quae diuina sunt, etc. says
he, but those things that are Gods, are not subject to the authority of the
Emperor. If my lands (I say) be desired, enter them a Gods name; if my body, I
will carry it him; if he will have me to prison, yea, unto death, it pleases
me well, I will not defend my self with multitude of people, neither will I
fly to the Altar, desiring my life, but with all my heart will die for the
Altars. And after, in speaking of the impious Soldiers: In fine eiusdem Epist.
O that God (says he) would turn their hands from violating the Church, and
then let them turn all their weapons upon me, and take their fill of my
blood. And many such excellent speeches he has for the sanctity of the Church,
and of the reverence due unto it, in his Oration, De Basilicis tradendis.

My purpose is to be short; I will not therefore now enter any further into
the authorities of the Fathers: or meddle with the Councels and ancient Canons
of the Church which abound so in this kind of zeal, and have established it
(against the Eustathians, M^ssalians, and Fraticelli, Heretics which contemned
Churches.
heretics: and all other the enemies thereof) with so many examples,
admonitions, exhortations, precepts, threatenings, curses, and excommunications:
as it requires a book alone to repeat them.

13 It seems a small thing to dance in the Churchyard, Sacrilege not to be
suffered in the least things.
or to eat and drink in the Church. But sanctification (says Jerome speaking
on this matter) consists also even in the small things. Coment. in 2. Cor.
11. 22. tom. 9.
Therefore Ecclesiasticus advises us, Eccles. 25. 27.
that we give not the water passage, no not in a little. For he that oponeth
the waters but a little, knows not how great a breach they will make at
length. So is it to make an entrance into sin, or to break the reverence of
holy things in trifles.

Therefore God punished severely the petty offenders in this kind: not Corah
only and his company, that invaded the high function of the Priesthood: but
even him that gathered the sticks on the Sabath day: Numb. 15. 34. And poor
Vzzah himself (whom David so much lamented) that did, as it were, but stay the
Arc from shaking, (2. Sam. 6. 6. and 1. Chron. 13. 9.) and yet died for it,
because his hand was not sanctified to that purpose.

14 I conclude this point with the saying of Solomon, An admonition to them
that meddle with holy things.
Pro. 20. 25. (and let al men consider it:) It is a snare for a man to devour
that which is sanctified, and after the Vows, to enquire. A Snare has three
properties. First, to catch suddenly. Secondly, to hold surely. Thirdly, to
destroy certainly. So was Vzza taken ere he was aware: he did but touch the
Arc, and presently he was caught. King Vzziah did but meddle with the
incense, and presently the Leprosy was on his face: 2. Chron. 26. 19. Jeroboam
did but stretch out his hand against the Prophet, and presently it withered: 1.
King. 13. 4. And as a man falls suddenly into it: so is it as hard to get
out. Vzza died in it presently. Vzziah languished in it all his life, and then
died in it also, Corah, Dathan, and Abiram, were no sooner caught in this
snare, but it held them so surely, as when all Israel else fled and escaped;
they, and their companions (most miserable men) were detained in it, to their
notorious destruction.

I might here take just occasion to remember what has happened to many in
this Kingdom, that became unfortunate after they meddled with Churches, and
Church-liuings. But I will run into no particularities. Let those men, and
those families, which are unfortunate (as we term them) consider, whether
themselves, their Fathers, or some of their Ancestors, have not been fettered
in this snare.

And let the Proprietaries of Parsonages also well consider these things. For,
if Vzza died, that did but touch the Arc to save it: what shall become of them
that stretch out their hands against Churches to destroy them? If the
stickegatherer was stoned, for so small a profanation of the Sabbath; what
shall they look for, that by destroying the Churches, destroy also the Sabbath
it self, (in a manner) as taking away the place appointed to the public
sanctification thereof. And if Corah, Dathan and Abiram, offended so hainously,
in meddling with the things of the Leuiticall Priesthood, though they employed
them to the service of God: what have they to fear, that usurp the things of
the Gospel, and pervert the^ wholly to their own use, from the service of God?
Yea, that pollute his Churches and houses of prayer to servile and base
offices: leaving the Parishioners vncertenly provided of divine service, to the
destruction both of the Priesthood it self, and of the service of God in
general.

15 But they will comfort themselves with this: A surmise answered.
that though the Churches be sanctified to some purpose, yet the sanctity
thereof differs from Leuiticall sanctification: and that God does not now kill
any from heaven, for profaning the things of the Gospel, as he did then, for
profaning the things of the law* I answer: The sanctity in deed of the one,
differs from the sanctity of the other. For the Leuiticall things were
sanctified by the hand of man, to be matter of Ceremony; but the churches of
the Gospel, are sanctified by our Savior himself, to be houses of prayer. Not
that prayer is to be used only in these places but that these places are only
to be used for prayer. And we must not presume that God sleeps because he
punishes not (now as he did of old) the co^temners of his worship* For as the
law consisted in visible and temporal things, so the punishments therein, were
for the most part visible and temporal. But the Gospel concerns things
invisible and eternal, and therefore the punishments assigned therein, are for
the most part, invisible and eternal.

16 They have also another comfort, Another surmise answered.
and that is, that though these things were once Spiritual, now they are made
temporal by the Laws of Dissolution; and especially, by the Stat. of 32. H.
8. cap. 7. It is true that those Statutes apply diverse Law-termes unto these
things that properly belong to temporal inheritances: and that the Statute of
32. H. 8. has made them demandable by original Writs, and has given certain
real actions, and other courses for recovering and conueying of them in
Temporal Courts: because Laymen could not in former times have sued for
things of this nature in any Court of the Kingdom. But this proves not the
things themselves to be therefore temporal, Dissero non assero.
(no more then that an English man is a Frenchman, because he saileth in a
French bottom.) For upon the same reason; the Statute gives also other
actions (for recovering of tithes and offerings withholden, etc.) in the Courts
spiritual. They then that out of the one part of the Statute will have them
temporal, are by the other part in forced to confess them still Spiritual,
and so to make them like a Centaure: prolem biformem. It were very hard (in my
understanding) to ground a point of so great consequence, upon subtlety of
words, and ambiguous implications, without any express letter of Law to that
purpose, especially, to make the Houses and offerings of God, temporal
Inheritances. But I see it is a Law question in my Lord Term. Pas. An. 7. Edw.
6. Assise fol. 83. b.
Dier, whether tithes be made Lay or Temporal by any words in those Statutes.
And therefore I must leave this point to my Masters of the Law, who have the
key of this knowledge only in their own custody. Yet I think I may be so
bold, as to say thus much out of their own Doct. and Stud. cap. 6.
books, that a Statute, directly against the Law of God, is void. If then
Tithes be things spiritual, and due de iure diuino, as many great See Aug.
Ser. 219. de Temp. Hostiens. and most Canonists. Council. Montisc. 2. cap. 50.
Council. Mogunt cap. 38. alias 10, etc.
Clarks, Doctors, Fathers, some Councels, and (that ever honorable Judge and
Oracle of Law) my Lord Coke himself in the second part of his Dismes font
chooses spiritual, and due de iure diuino. Le Euesque de Winch. case fol. 45.
Reports affirm them to be: I cannot see how humane laws should make them
Temporal. Of the same nature therefore that originally they were of, of the same
nature do I still hold them to continue: for mane^te subiecto, manet
co^secratio, manet dedicatio. Time, Place, and Persons, do not change them, as
I take it, in this case. Nescio quo fato sit; vt eodem t^mporis periodo (viz.
an. 68) post ereptas per Nabuc and H. 8. res templorum: stirps vtris que regia
extincta sit, imperium sublatum, and ad alia^ gentem deuolutum. Vlterius igitur
speremus. Cyrum nostrum Iacobum regem (qui sceptra dissidentia. compescuit)
restitutionis etiam munus aliquando aggressurum.
Nabuchodonozor took the holy vessels of the Temple, he carried them to
Babylon, he kept them there all his life, and at last left them to his ^onne
and grandchildren: but all this while, the vessels still remained holy. Yea,
though they were comne into the hands of those that were not tied to the
ceremonies of the law, and at length into the hands of them that had them by a
lawful succession from their Fathers and Grandfathers: yet as soon as they
began to abuse them to profane uses; that very night Balshazzer himself
died for it, the line of Nabuchodonozor (that took them from the Temple) was
extinct, and the Kingdom translated to another Nation: Dan. 5. 2.

17 Happily also, Lay Approprietaties comfort themselves, A third surmise
answered.
that they may hold these things by example of Colleges, Deanes and Chapters,
Bishops of the land, and of diverse of our late Kings and Princes. Before I
speak to this point, I take it by protestation, that I have no heart to make
an Apology for it. For I wish that every man might drink the water of his own
well, eat the milk of his own flock, and live by the fruit of his own
vineyard. I mean, that every member might attract no other nutriment, but that
which is proper to it self. Yet are they greatly deceived, that draw any iuce
of encouragement from these examples. For all these are either the Seminaries
of the Church, or the Husbandmen of the Church, or the Fathers and Nurses of
the Church: all de familia Ecclesiae, and consequently, belonging to the care
of the Church, and ought therefore to be sustained by it: for Saint Paul says.
He that provides not for his own, and namely for them of his household, he
denies the faith, and is worse then an Infidel: 1. Tim. 5. 8. Al Church
revenues were at first paid to Bishops, and by them distributed to the Priests,
poor, etc. after the Bishops were to have a fourth part of all tithes. Per
Council. Aurelian. Mogunt. Tribur. Hanet: etc. Et per Conc. Tarracon. the third
part.
Therefore before the Statutes of suppression of Abbeys, those that were not
merely Ecclesiastical persons, yet if they were mixed, or had ecclesiastical
jurisdiction, they might by the Laws of the Land, participate Ecclesiastical
livings, and Plowd. in Quare impper Grend. L. Coke Report. part. 5. fol. 15.
Tithes particularly. And this seems to take some ground out of the word of
God. For the provincial Levites (as I may term them) whom 1. Chr. 26. 30. and
32.
David severed from the Temple, and placed abroad in the country to be Rulers
of the people, in matters pertaining to God, and the Kings business, (that is,
Spiritually and Temporally:) had their portions of tithes notwithstanding, as
well as the other Levites that ministered in the Temple. Now, that the King is
See Plowden in Quar. Imp. per Grendon. Et Lo. Coke de Iure Regis Eccles. part 5.
Persona mixta, endowed as well with Ecclesiastical authority, as with
temporal: is not only a sollid position of the common Law of the Land, but
confirmed unto us by the continual practice of our ancient Kings, ever since,
and before the Conquest, even in hottest times of popish feruency. For this
cause at their coronations, they are not only crowned with the Diadem of the
Kingdom, and girt with the sword of Justice, to signify their Temporal
authority, but are anointed also with the Reges sacro oleo vncti, sunt
spiritualis iurisdictionis capaces 33. Ed. 3. tit. Aid de Roy 103. Ex Dom.
Coke Repor. part. 5.
oil of Priesthood, and clothed, Stola Sacer dotali, and vest Dalmatia est
vestis, qua modo vtuntur omnes diaconi ex cons^etudine in s^lennitatibus. vt
70. distin. de ieiun^o. Antiquitus tamen, sieve concessione Papae, nec
Episcopis, nec Diaconis licebat vti hac vest. Distinct. 23. cap. Omnes filius.
Prateus.
Dalmatica, to demo^strate this their Ecclesiastical jurisdiction, whereby the
King is said in the Law to be Supremus Ordinarius, and in regard thereof,
amongst other Ecclesiastical rights, and prerogatives belonging unto him, is
to have all the 22 Edw. 3. lib. Assis. plac. 75. L. Coke par. 5. fol. 15. a.
Tithes (through the Kingdom) in places that are out of any Parish, for some
such there be, and namely, diverse As Inglewood, etc. vt patet an. 18. Edw. 1.
inter petitiones coram du^o Rege ad Parliamentum.
Forests. But for all this: O! that his Majesty would be pleased to remember
Syon in this point.

18 I grow too tedious, yet before I close up this discourse, The danger that
Proprietaries of Parsonages stand in.
let me say one thing more to the Aproprietaries of Churches, that happily,
they hitherto have not dreamed of. And that is, that by having these
Parsonages, they are charged with Cure of souls, and make themselves subject
to the burden that lies so heavily upon the head of every Minister: to see
the service of God performed, the people instructed, and the poor relieved.
For to these three ends and the maintenance of Ministers, were Parsonages
instituted, as not only the Canons of the Church, but the books of the Law,
and particularly the Statutes of 15. R. 2. cap. 6. And 4. H. 4. ca. 12. do
manifestly testify. And no man may have them but to these purposes, neither
were they oth^rwise in the hands of Monastical persons, nor otherwise given to
the king by the statute of dissolution, then See the extent of these words in
L. Coke, part. 2. fol. 49. And note also that Parsonages appropriate, are not
mentioned in that Statute of 27. H 8. and the word ( tithes) there seems to
be meant of tithes belonging to the bodies of the Monasteries* not of Parsonage
tithes. ideo quare how the King had them before the Statute of 31. Regni sui.
in as large and ample manner, as the governors of th^se Religious houses had
them, nor by him conveyed otherwise to the subjects. For, Nemo potest plus
iuris in aliam transfer, quam ipse habet: No man may grant a greater right
unto another, then he has himself. And therefore, go where they will,
transeunt cum onere, they carry their charge with them. Upon these reasons
Proprietaries are still said to be Parson impersonee.
Parsons of their Churches, and upon the matter, are as the Incumbents For the
monastical persons and Prioresses themselves that could not perform the divine
service, were notwithstanding the Incumbents of their Churches: and lay
Approptietaries claiming under their right, ought also to be subject to the
same burdens.
thereof, and the Churches by reason of this their incumbencie, are full and
not void. For otherwise the There is yet no express law made to take away the
Bishops jurisdictions over Churches appropriate, (that I can find.) Ideo
quaere how it extends.
Bishop might collate, or the King present a Clarke (as to other Churches) as
it seems by the arguments of the Judges in the case between Grendon and the
Bishop of Lincoln in Mr Plowdens Coment. where it is also showed, that the
Incumbencie is a See Dier Trin. 36. H. 8. fol. 58. pl. 8.
spiritual function, and ought not to be conferred upon any but spiritual
persons, and such as may themselves do the divine Service, and minister the
Sacraments. Therefore, Dier, L. Chief Justice of the Common Pleas, there said,
that it was an horrible thing, when these Appropriations were made to
Prioresses and houses of Nuns, because that (although they were religious
persons, yet they could not minister the Sacraments and divine Service.
Implying by this speech of his, that it was much more horrible for Laymen to
hold them, that neither could do these holy rites, nor were so much as
spiritual persons to give them color ^or holding of spiritual things.
Therefore Seriant Terms of the Law in verbo Appropriation.
Rastal, also terms it a Wicked thing, complaining (in his time) that it
continued so long, to the Hind^r^nce (he says) of learning, the impouerishing
of the Ministry, and to the infamy of the Gospel, and professors thereof.

My Lord Coke also in the second part of his Reports, Leuesque de Winchesters
case, fol. 44 b.
says, that it is recorded in History, that there were (amongst other) two
grievous persecutions, the one, under Dioclesian; the other under Julian, named
the Apostata: for it is recorded, that the Diocles. vide Eusebius. hist. ecclis.
lib 7. cap. 3. Niceph. l. 7. cap. 3.
one of them intending to have rooted out all the Professors and Preachers of
the word of God, Occidit omnes Presbyteros. But this notwithstanding, Religion
flourished for Sanguis Martyrum est semen Ecclesiae: The blood of the Martyrs
is the seed of the Church; and this was a cruel and grievous persecution: but
the persecution under the Iuli. vide Theod. hist. lib. 3. cap. 6. and Niceph.
lib. 10 cap. 5
other, was more grievous and dangerous, Quia (as the History says) ipse
occidit presbyrerium. He destroyed the very order of Priesthood. For he robbed
the Church, and spoiled spiritual persons of their revenues, and took all
things from them whereof they should live. And upon this, in short time, insued
great ignorance of true religion, and the service of God, and thereby great
decay of Christian profession. For none will apply themselves or their sons, or
any other that they have in charge, to the study of Divinity, when after long
and painful study, they shall have nothing whereupon to live. Thus far my
Lord Coke.

I allege these Legal authorities, and leave Divinity, because the
Approprietaries of Parsonages (which shield themselves under the target of the
Law) may see the opinion of the great Lawyers of our own time and Religion,
and what the books of the Law have of this matter, to the end, that we should
not hang our consciences upon so dangerous a pin, nor put too great
confidence in the equity of Laws, which we daily see, are full of
imperfection, often amended, often altered, and often repealed. O how
lamentable then is the case of a poor Proprietary, that dying, thinks of no
other account, but of that touching his Lay vocation, and then coming before
the judgment seat of Almighty God, must answer also for this It is said in my
L. Dier in the case of a common person, that the service or a cure is a
spiritual administration, and cannot be leased, and that the service is not
issuing ou^ of the personage, but annexed unto the person. 36. H. 8. fol. 58. b.
pla. 8.
spiritual function. First why he meddled with it, not being called unto it.
Then, why ( Proprietaries which have Vicars endowed, think themselves thereby
discharged: but though the Vicar be the Parsons deputy to do the divine
Service, yet a superior care thereof rests still upon the Parson himsel^e,
and the surplusage of the profits belongs to the poor, as appears by the
whole body of Fathers, Doctors, Counsels, etc.
meddling with it) he did not the duty that belonged unto it, in seeing the
Church carefully served, the Minister thereof sufficiently mainetained, and
the poor of the Parish faithfully relieved. This I say, is the use whereto
Parsonages were given, and of this use we had notice before we purchased them:
and therefore, (not only by the laws of God and the Church, but by the Law
of the Land, and the rules of the Chancery, at this day observed in other
cases) we ought only to hold them to this use, and no other.

19 It is not then a work of bounty and benevolence to restore these
appropriations to the Church, That it is not benevolence but duty to restore
Church. livings.
but of duty and necessity so to do. It is a work of duty to give that unto
God that is Gods, Mat. 22. 2. And it is a work of necessity toward the
obtaining remission of these sins. Ad Mace donium Epist. 54. tom. 2.
For Saint Augustine says, Non remittetur peccatum, nisi restituatur ablatum
cum restitut potest: The sin shall not be forgiven, without restoring of that
which is taken away, if it may be restored.

It is duty, justice, and necessity, to give them back unto God. For if Judas
(who was the first president of this sin) were a thief, Job. 12. 6.
as the Holy Ghost terms him, for imbeasiling that which was committed unto
him for the maintenance of Christ and his Disciples, that is of the Church: by
the same reason, must it also be the every to withhold these things which were
given for the maintenance of the Church and Ministers of Christ. And herein it
is a degree above that sin of Judas, as robbery is above theft: for Judas
only detained the money (delivered unto him) closely and secretly; but we and
our fathers, have invaded Church-liuings, and taken them (as it were by
assault) even from the sacred body and person of the Church.

It is a great sin to steal from our Neighbor; much greater (euer^
sacrilege) to steal from God. If it were so heinous a fact in Ananias to
withholde part of his own goods, which he pretended he would give unto God,
how much more is it in us, presumptuously to reaue that from God, that others
have already dedicated and delivered unto him. Pro. 28. 24.
Solomon says; He that robs his Father and his Mother, and says, it is no
sin, is the companion of [a murderer, or] him that destroieth. But he that
purloineth the things of God, robs his Father, and he that purloineth the
things of the Church, robs his mother. And therefore that man is a companion
of the destroier.

The Synod. ^. Romans 218. Epis^ o^. An 50^. Co^c. Val. An. 855. ca. 9. Con. Romans
100. Episc. Anno 1063 Conc. Romans 5. Anno 10^8. Conc. Pa^en^. An. 1. 88. Conc.
Ox^n. Gene. Ang. Anno 1222.
fathers, the Doctors, many great Councels, and ancient Laws of the Church,
command, that things taken from the Church, should be restored. And the Church
by her A strange change: the Israelites gave their own goods so abundantly to
the service of God, that Moses was forced to restrain them by proclamation:
Exodus, 6. ^. but now nothing can move us to give God that which is his already.
^ Preachers and Ministers continually entreats, urges, and requires all
men to do it. They therefore that do it not, they refuse to hear the Church:
And then our Saour Christ, by his own mouth, denounces them Qui sub. nomine
sidelium, agunt operai^ fidelium. Hieron. ibid.
to be as Heathens and Publicans, that is, excommunicate and profane persons.
If he refuses (says our Savior) to hear the Church also, let him be unto
thee as a heathen man, and a public in. Mat. 18. 17.

It is a fearful thing not to hear the We think the Church does not command
it till we make a parliament law for it, but the law is made already by Christ
himself.
Church, but much more, not to hear Christ himself. Christ has given us a
perpetual Law and Commandment, touching things belonging to God: That we
should give them to God. If we break this Law, we break a greater Law then
that of the Medes and the Dan. 6. 15.
Persians: and therefore mark what the holy Ghost concludes upon us; Every
person that shall not hear this Prophet (Christ Jesus) shall be destroyed out
of the people. Act. 3. 23.

20 To conclude then, The conclusion.
as the Philistims made have to send home the 1. Sa. 5. 11*
Ark of God; and the Egyptians to rid themselves of the Ex. 12. 31
people of God: so let us ply our selves to render unto God his Lands and
Possessions with all speed. Otherwise, as he struck the Philistims with Emrods
secretly, and the Egyptians with manifold scourges openly; so only himself
knows, what he has determined against us.

And thus I end, with the saying of the blessed Saint Cypryan, Nec teneri iam,
Cypr. Ser. 5. de laps. in fine.
nec amari Patrimonium debet, quo quis and deceptus, and victus est. We must
now neither hold that Patrimony, or living, (no) nor so much as take pleasure
therein, whereby a man is entrapped and brought to destruction. And with that
other of the noble Saint Augustine; Lib. de Her. ^it. per Isid.
With what face can thou expect an inheritance from Christ in Heaven, that
defraudest Christ in thy inheritance here on Earth? Therefore

Give unto Caesar the things that are Caesar's, Mar. 12. 17
and unto God the things that are Gods.

An Epilogue.
PArdon me good Reader, though I have neither satisfied thee, nor my self, in
this little discourse. It is hard to bring a great vessel into a small creek,
an argument of many heads and branches, of much weight, variety and difficulty,
into a few pages. It may be thou think the volume big enough for the
success that Books of this nature are like to have. I reject not thy
judgment, yet would I not have others thereby discouraged from pursuing this
cause: for though Peter fished all night and got nothing, 10. vlt. verse. 3.
yet he made a great draught unlooked for) in the morning. He that directed
that net, give a blessing to all our labors. For my own part (if I catch but
one fish) I shall think mine well bestowed. Howsoever, it shall content me,
and I thank God for it, that he has girded me with so much strength as to
strike one stroke (though a weak one) in his battle, and to cast one stone
(though a small one) against the adversaries of his Church.

Some will say, I have used too much salt and vinegar in this discourse; and
that I have bent the great Altillery of Gods judgments and threatenings, upon a
piece of too light importance. I would the consciences of men were such, as
oil and butter might supply them. But I see they are for the most part
ouergrowne with so hard a carnosity, as it requires strong and potent
corasiues to make an entrance into them. A Preacher may shake them now and then
with a Sermon, Act. 24. 26.
as Paul did Faelix: but when the thunder and lightning are ceased, they are
(like Pharaoh) still where they were. Yea some have conscientas cauteriatas, ^.
Tim. 4. 2^
as the Apostle terms them, censciences ^eared with an hot iron: so
stupefied, that dead Lazarus may be raised, before they can be moved. But God
knows the heart of man, and brings water out of the hard rock; therefore
though I have spoken this (as being jealous of the cause,) yet in charity I
will hope better even of the hardest of them. Only let no man think it a
light sin, to keep open the passage whereby the Psalm. 80. 13.
wild bore (of Barbarism) enters the Lords vineyard, and whereby God is
deprived of the honor due to his name. Psalm. 96.


Now at the parting, it may be thou desire to know what success this my
labor had with the Gentleman to whom I sent i^. In truth neither that I
desired, nor that which I promised unto my self. For (so it pleased Go^) that
even the very day, the messenger brought it into Norfolk, August 16. 1613.
the party died. Otherwise I well l^oped, not to have shot this arrow in vain.
But because it then missed the mark at which it was sent, (and many thought
not fit to loose it;) I have now let it fly again at random with some notes
and alterations, as the difference between private and public things
requires: but still desiring that I might further have showed my mind in many
passages hereof, (and particularly touching tithes in quoto, and such
Parsonages as have Vicarage^ well endowed) which without making it almost a new
work, I could not do; and therefore resting upon thy curieous interpretation,
I leave it to thee, (for this time) as it is.

A SERMON OF St. Augustines touching rendering of Tithes.
The occasion of this Sermon or Homily, was ministered unto him by the time of
the year, it being the 12. Sunday after Trinity, that is about the beginning
of Harvest. The Scripture that he sits unto it, is the 18. of Luke. Where
the Pharesie boasts of his precise justice in payment of Tithes. It is the
219. Sermon de Tenipore: extant in the tenth Tome of his works, and there
extituled: De reddendis decimis.

BY the mercy of Christ ( most beloved brethren:) the days are now at hand,
wherein we are to reap the f^uits of the earth* and therefore giving thanks to
God that bestows them, let us be mindful to offer, or rather to render
back unto him the tithes thereof. Decret 16. Quae. 1. cap. Decima.
For God, that vouchsafes to give us the whole, Where you may see a great part
of this Sermon cited for Augustines.
vouchsafes also to require back again the tenth, not for his own, but for
our benefit doubtless. For so has he promised by his Prophet, saying: Mala.
3. 10.
Bring all the Tithe into my Barnes, that there may be meat in my house; and
try me, says the Lord, in this point, if I open not the windows of heaven
unto you, and give you fruit without measure. Lo, we have proved how Tithes
are more profitable unto us, then to God. O foolish men! What hurt does God
command, that he should not deserve to be heard? For he says thus: Exodus 2^.
^9.
The first fruits of thy treshing floor, and of thy Wine Press thou shall not
delay to offer unto me. If it be a sin, to delay the giving: how much worse
is it, 16 Quae. 1. ca. decima. Prou. 3. 9.
not to give at all? And again, he says, Honor thy Lord thy God with thy
just labors, and offer unto him of the fruits of thy righteousness, that thy
barnes may be filled with wheat, and thy presses abound with wine. Thou do
not this, for God a mercy, that by and by shall receive it again with manifold
increase. Perhaps thou will ask, who shall have profit by that, which God
receives, to give presently back again? And also thou will ask, who shall
have profit by that which is given to the poor? If thou beleeuest, thy self
shall have profit by it, but if thou doubtest, then thou have lost it.

Tithes ( dear Brethren) are a tribute due unto the needy s^ules. Give
therefore this tribute unto the poor, offer this sacrifice unto the Priests.
If thou have no Tithes of earthly fruits: yet whatsoever the Husbandman has,
whatsoever Ar^ sustaineth thee, it is Gods, and he requires Tithe, out of
whatsoever thou live by: whether it be Warfare, or Traffike, or any other
Trade, give him the tithe. Some things we must pay for the ground we live on,
and something for the use of our life it self. Yield it therefore unto him ( O
man) in regard of that which thou possessest: yield it (I say) unto him,
because he has given thee thy birth: for thus says the Lord: Exo. 30. 12
Every man shall give the redemption of his soul, and there shall not be
amongst them any diseases or mishaps. Behold, thou have in the holy Scriptures
the cautions of the Lord, upon which he has promised thee, that if thou give
him thy Tith, thou shall not only receive abundance of fruits, but health
also of body. Thy barnes (says he) shall be filled with wheat, Pro. 3. 10.
and thy presses shall abound with wine, and there shall be in them, neither
diseases nor mishaps. Seeing then, by payment of Tithes, thou may gain to
thy self, both earthly and heavenly rewards: why do thou defraude thy self
of both these blessings together? Hear therefore, 16. Quae. 1^ ca. Decima.
( O thou zeale-lesse mortality) Thou know, that all things that thou use
are the Lords, and can thou find in thy heart, to lend him (that made all
things) nothing back of his own? The Lord God needs not any thing, neither
demands he a reward of thee, but honor; he urges thee not to render any
thing that is thine, and not his. It pleases him to require the first fruits,
and the Tithes of thy goods, and can thou deny them, ( O covetous wretch?)
What would thou do, if he took all the nine parts to himself, and left
thee the tenth only? And this in truth he does, when by withholding his
blessing of rain, the drought makes thy thirsty Harvest to wither away: and
when thy fruit, and thy vineyard, are stricken with hail, or blasted with
frost, where now is the plenty that thou so couetously did reckon upon? The
nine parts are taken from thee, because thou would not give him the Tenth.
That remains only, that thou refusest to give, though the Lord required it.
For this is a most just course, that the Lord holds, 16. Quae. 1. ca. decimae.
If thou will not give him the tenth, he will turn thee to the tenth. For it
is written, says the Lord, Insomuch as the Tithe of your ground, the first
fruits of your Land; are with you: I have seen it, but you thought to deceive
me: havoc and spoil shall be in your Treasury, and in your houses. Thus
thou shall give that to the unmerciful Soldier, which thou would not give
to the Priest.

The Lord almighty also says: Turn unto me, that I may open unto you the
windows of Heaven, Mal. 3. 10.
and that I may pour down my blessing upon you; and I will not destory the
fruit of your Land, neither shall the vines of your field [or the trees of your
orchards] wither away, [or be blasted] and all nations shall say, that you are
a blessed people. God is always ready to give his blessings. But the
perverseness of man always hinders him. For he would have God give him all
things, and he will offer unto God nothing, of that whereof himself seems to
be the owner. This place is cited as out of Augustine Cons. Triburies. ca. 13.
An. 895 and before that in council. Mogunt. pri. c. 8 An. 874.
What if God should say? The man that I made, is mine; the ground that thou
tillest, is mine; the seed that thou sowest, is mine; the cattle that thou
weariest in thy work are mine; the showers, the rain, and the gentle winds
are mine; the heat of the Sun, is mine; and since all the Elements whereby
thou live, are mine; thou that lendest only thy hand, deseruest only the
tithe, or tenth part. Yet because Almighty God does mercifully feed us, he
bestows upon the labourer a most liberal reward for his pains, and
reserving only the Tenth part unto himself, has forgiven us all the rest.

Ungrateful and perfidious deceiuer, I speak to thee in the word of the Lord.
Behold the year is now ended: give unto the Lord (that gives the rain) his
reward. Redeem thy self, O Man, whilst thou live. Redeem thou thy self
whilst thou may. Redeem thy self (I say) whilst thou have wherewith in
thy hands. Redeem thy self, lest it greedy death prevent thee, thou then lose
both life and reward together. Thou have no reason, to commit this matter over
to thy wife, who happily will have another husband. Neither have thou (O woman)
any reason to leave this to thy husband, for his mind is on another wife. It
is in vain, to tie thy Parents, or thy kinsfolk, to have care hereof: no man
after thy death, surely shall redeem thee, because in thy life, thou would
not redeem thy self. Now then, cast the burden of covetousness from thy
shoulders, despise that cruel Lady, who pressing thee down with her
intolerable yoke, suffers thee not to receive the yoke of Christ For as
the yoke of covetousness, presses men down unto hell, so the yoke of
Christ raises men up unto heaven. 16. Quae 1. ca. decimae.
For tithes are required as a debt, and he that will not give them, inuadeth
an other man's goods. And let him lock to it, for how many men soever die for
hunger in the place where he lives (not paying his tithes) of the murdering
of so many men, shall he appear guilty before the tribunal seat of the
eternal Judge, because he kept that back to his own use, that was committed
to him by the Lord for the Poor.

He therefore that either desires to gain a reward, or to Pr^mereri.
obtain a remission of his sins, let him pay his tithe, and be careful to
give alms to the poor, out of the other nine parts: but so notwithstanding,
that whatsoever remains over and above moderate diet, and convenient
apparel, be not bestowed in riot and carnal pleasure, but laid up in the
treasury of Heaven, by way of Alms to the poor. For whatsoever God has
given us more then we have need of, he has not given it unto us
particularly, but has committed it over unto us to be distributed unto
others: which if we dispose not accordingly, we spoil and rob them thereof.
Thus far S. Augustine.

ERasmus in a general censure of these Sermons de Tempore, notes many of them
not to be Saint Augustines: so also does Master Perkins, and diverse other
learned men, who having examined them all all particularly, and with great
aduisement, rejecting those that appeared to be adulterat or suspected, admit
this notwithstanding as undoubted. And although Bellarmine seems to make a
little question of it, yet he concludes it to be, without doubt, an
excellent work: and either Forte non est Augustini iste sermo tamen insignis
est sine dubio and antiqui alicuius atris, nam inde tanquam ex Augustino multa
sunt adscripta in Decret. 16. q 1. Bellarm lib. de clericis cap. 25.
Saint Augustines own, or some other ancient Fathers. But he says, that many
things are cited out of it as out of Augustine in Decret. 16. qo 1. And to
clear the matter further, I find that some parts hereof are alleged under
the name of Augustine, in Council. Triburiens. (which was in the year of our
Lord 895) cap. 13. And twenty year before that also, in Council. Moguntin. 1.
cap. 8. So that Antiquity it self, and diverse Councels, accept it for
Augustines.

I will not recite a great discourse to the effect of this Sermon amongst the
works of Augustine in the Treatise De rectitudine Christian religionis;
because Erasmus judges that Treatise not to be Augustines. Yet seems it
likewise to be some excellent man's, and of great antiquity. But if thou would
hear more what Augustine says unto thee of this matter, take this for a
farewell; Homil 48. ex lib. 50. Ham* com. 10.
Maiores nostri ideo copijs omnibus abundabant, quia Deo decimus dabant, and
Caesuri censum reddebant: modo autem quia descessit deuotio Dei, accessit
indictio fisci. Noluimus partiri cum Deo decimas, modo autem totum tollitur.
Hoc tollit siscus, quod non accipit Christus.

An Appendix by the Author.
I Have been often solicited within these two years, both to reimprint this
little Treatise, and also to publish a greater work much of the same Argument.
Some especial reasons have made me unwilling to do either. Not that I do,
aut clypeum abijcere, aut causam deserere: But I find my arm too feeble for
so great an attempt* and in matters of such weight and consequence, a better
opportunity is to be expected, then is yet afforded. I desire therefore not to
be hastened herein, though he that published my Book in Scotland (out of his
zeal to the cause) takes that for one of his Motives. In his Epist.
Dodicat^ry.
When I did first let it go forth: I did it only in covert manner: not
thinking it worthy of the broad eye of the World, nor holding it fit to have
that which was done in a corner, preached upon the house top: or that which
passed privately between me and my friend, to fly (in this sort, at once) to
both the Poles of the Monarchy. Hereupon I hitherto by entreaty with held it
from a reimpression: But I being in the Country: and It being now to me as
^lius emancipatus, and out of my power: the Printer has taken advantage of his
liberty, and in my absence printed it again with the former infirmities

I wish, since it must needs be thus: that I had over run it with a new hand:
as well to explane it in some things, as to help and fortify it in other. For
the Argument has many adversaries, not of the Laity only: but amongst the
Churchmen themselves. All are not pleased with this form of Tithes
Maintenance: other are not satisfied how it is due. Some also conceive
Scriptures in this manner, some in that: and where one is best pleased, there
another finds most exception. Thus he that comes upon the Stage, is the
Object and Subject of every man's opinion. Yet must I herein confess my self
beholden unto many: for I understand this small Essay has given them good
liking*

To satisfy all I labor not: but to the worthier sort I would perform what I
could. Being therefore informed (about a year almost since) that some
particular Divines of learning and judgment, (conceiving well of my Book,)
supposed that I had departed from the ancient and modern interpreters in
applying the 12. verse of the 83. Psalm. Only to the sanctified things of the
Jews which (they said) was spoken of all their houses and Cities in general.
I did then unto them (as I thought it fit) reddere rationem and fidei and
facti. And in like manner (because the book goes forth again upon a new
adventure, and may encounter with the like objections,) I held it now as
necessary to add something unto it in that point being so material Yet must I
signify unto you, that they which took that exception, accounted both my
argument and whole discourse the stronger (notwithstanding) Ex consequente: as
namely, that if it were so heinous a sin to invade the temporal things of
the Jews, much more must it needs be to invade the spiritual. So that no
man is either freed or cased by this suggestion, but rather the more ensnared
and overwhelmed. Nevertheless (I understand) that which follows, has
cleared this point unto them: and I hope so shall it also do^ unto others
(which separate not themselves from our Church) if cause require.

I Am not ignorant that many modern and some Ancient Interpreters understand
the body of the 83 Psalm, of the taking of the houses and cites of the Jews
in general, not only of the Temple and Synagogues, nor only of the Cities of
the Levites: for the very historical texture of the Psalm discouers as much.
But that branch of it, where on (...) I fastened my anchor, and where I chiefly
insisted, namely the 12 verse, touching the taking of the houses of God in
possession, (which indeed is the center of the Psalm: what interpretation
soever it receives) most of them interpret it primarily and positiuely for the
Temple (...). Holy things, then per translationem for Jerusalem, and by
consequence, for all Judea, (and the people of God) in respect that they were
there planted.

For though we following Genebr^d, Calvin and Arias Montanus, translate it
literally, Take the houses of God in possession; yet the Septuagints and
Greeks interpret it (...): And Hierome in the Latin Vulgar accordingly*
Sanctuarium Dei: in his other translation called Haebraeica veritas, (which
also agrees with that elder, cited by Lucius in the primer ages of the Church)
Pulchritudine^^ Dei: Pelican, electissima: all of them by such denominations,
as are most proper to the Temple and holy things. And therefore the Church in
all former ages and for the most part yet also beyond the Seas, even in the
reformed parts of Germany, retains that interpretation of Sanctuarium Dei, as
best agreeing with the intent of the Hebrew, which Hierome in the Preface to
his translation professes confidently (by many witnesses) that he has changed
in nothing.

I allege all this, but to (...), that by what variety of words soever, the
translators express the original Hebrew, yet they all concu^re with this as
the Fountain and st^n^ard; that prima intention, it (...) the holy things,
though in ^ecun^d it be carried unto temporal.

Our selves also in our own English translation, understand the houses of God,
for places dedicated to the service of God. And therefore in the 9. verse of
the 74. Psalm, where our Church-Psalter says, burnt up all the houses of God
in the land: the Geneua and the Kings addition report it, burnt up all the
Synagogues of God in the Land. So likewise in the 1. verse of the 84. Psalm. The
dwellings of God are expressly spoken of his Tabernacles, and holy habitations,
not of his Temporal.

Yet do I not deny; but (as I say) Secunda intention, the words Sanctuarium,
or Houses of God, in the 83. Psalm are truly carried to all Judea and the
people of God, howbeit Hierome notes expressly no such matter upon it: neither
could Augustine find it in the litterall or historical sense of the text: and
therefore he deduceth it to the people of God by way of Tropology, using the
metaphor of Saint Paul. 1. Cor. 3. Sanctuarium: (says he) Templum dei sanctum
est: quod estis vos. And Lyra accordingly, Sanctuarium: id est (says he)
Jerusalem, in qua erat templum dei: and per consequens: terram Judea, cuius
metropolis erat Jerusalem.

Arnobius likewise of the Ancient, takes it first for the Temple and holy
vessel: then extensiuely, for the people and Land of Israel. As for Cyprian,
Origin, Tertullian, Ambrose, Chrysostom, Gregory, they meddle not with it,
that I can find, nor Hierome otherwise then as I have mentioned.

But admit that at this day most do expound it for the Temporalties of the
Jews, as well as for their Leuiticall and Sanctified things: What does this
contradict my application of this Psalm against Spoilers of Churches? or
wherein is my error? I affirm the Genus upon one of the membra diuidentia,
and they upon both. I upon one not exclusive, and they upon both copulative.
Do not they then themselves affirm my assertion? Let Schoolmen be Judges.
Yea do they not justify and enforce it? For if God loves the gates of Syon,
more then all the dwellings of Jacob, Psalm. 87. 2. that is, the outward and
petty things of his Church, more then a^l the stately temporalties of his Lay
people, yea, if he loves Jacob but for Sion, that is, the People but for the
Church: then Ex necessario to consequente, when the Prophet denounces such
heavy things against them, that menaced Gods, Lay people, and their
possessions, how much the rather, does he it against such as with greater fury
and impiety afflict his more peculiar and chosen servants, his Clergy, his
Levites, his first borne? Against these I say, that forbear not to violate the
things more dear unto him: His Temple, his Oracle, his holy mysteries, that
is, things belonging to his honor and divine service, things and means,
ordained to the propagation of his blessed word? For this is the consequence of
destroying our Churches: this kills the bird in the shel: and to a person
offending in this nature, wrote I my Book.

By like reason, it may also be said; that this Psalm was framed against
Heathens and Infidels, (which in open hostility assailed the Church and people
of God with fire and sword) not against such as be our own brethren, and of
the family of the Church, though (in some sort) they do injury unto it. I
answer that the Ammonites and Moabites were also of the kindred of Israel:
yea, the Edomites, and Ismalites, of the lineage of Abraham, as well as the
Israelites themselves: yet when they joined with them that sought the
destruction of the Church; the curses of the Pr^prophet went as freely and as
fiercely against them as the rest. So if our Church be spoiled by her brethren,
her children, or kindred, the sentence is all one against them, as against
Heathen and Infidels, yea, and that also more justly and deservedly by the
judgment of the Prophet, who accounts the treachery of a familiar friend
much more intolerable then the violence of an open Enemy. Psalm. 55. 12.

But say I have erred (which indeed is too common with me though it be
humanum) and does the more easily befall me, having saluted the School of
Divinity, only a long and a limine: I am therefore ready with Augustine to
put it amongst my retractations, if there be cause why? yet (as he said of
Romulus)

Sed tamen errore^ quo tu^atur habet. For I am not the Author of this
exposition, neither is it my own weapon but borrowed, and put into my hand by
others of elder time. I confess that as they which go to battle, whet their
swords, and bend their bows: so I sharpened both the edge and the point of it
to my purpose. For all spirits are not cast out by ordinary power, nor all
humors persuaded by ordinary reason. Knowing therefore what was necessary in
particular for the party to whom I wrote, I applied my self, and my pen to that
particular necessity: yet, not with Zidkiah to seduce him by untruths, 1 R. 2^
17.
but as a faithful Michaiah to leave nothing untold that belonged to his
danger.

See then what I have to defend my self withal, both of ancient and later
fathers and Doctrs^ of the church: the first application (as I take it) that
ever was made of this Psalm, was (only to the purpose I allege it) by ^ucius
a devout Bishop of Rome, in the bloody age of the primitive Church, about 225.
years after Christ: of whom (to let pass Cyprian) Bale, Epist. l. 3.
a man of our own, Epist. 1^.
gives this testimony; That he was a faithful servant in the Lords house, --
and enriched his Church with healthful doctrine, and afterward being purified
in the Lambs blood, he pierced the heavenly Paradise, being put to death at
Valentinians commandment, Anno 255. This Lucius (as I noted in the margent of
my Book, See (...) page 60.
page 39.) in an Epistle of his to the Bishops of Gallia and Spain: having
determined many things touching the Church, and somewhat also against spoilers
and defrauders thereof (concluding them by the example of Judas to be thieues
and sacrilegious persons) he proceeds with them in this manner: De talibus,
id est (says he) qui facultates Ecclesiae rapiunt, fraudant, and auferunt:
Dominus comminans omnibus per prophetam loquitur dicens: Deus ne taceas tibi:
ne sileas, etc. Reciting the whole 83. Psalm every word, as you may see. Tom.
1. Council: of Binn^us edition. pa. 180. col. 2.

I took this reverend Father and great Doctor of the Church, living in the
purity of religion, in the times of persecution, and so near the ages of the
Apostles, to be a faithful direction to my pen. Yet, lest he should seem
like a Sparrow alone on the house top, I will show you the opinion of others in
the after ages.

Petrus Damianus a Cardinal, whilst that title was rather a name of Ministry
then of Dignity, and long before it became mounted and purpurate, a star of
his time, now almost 600. years old, understands this Psalm also of Church
possessions, and dignities, and out of it does vehemently confute the Chaplains
of Duke Gothi^red, which held it no s^mony to buy Bishoprics and Priests
places, so they paid nothing for the imposition of hands (an opinion too common
at this day) and he applies against them the interpretation of the names of
the Heathen Princes there mentioned, and concludes them to be haereditario
quodam iure Sanctuarij possessores, as you may see in his Speculo Mor. l. 5.
Ep. 13. ad Capellan. Gothif.

Rupertus who flourished about 500. years since; expounds it contra omnes
Ecclesiae hosts, falsos Christianos, haereticos, etc.

Great Hugo Cardinali^, the first Postillator of the Bible, (who flourished
Anno 1240. a little also, before that order was distinguished with the Horse
and Red Hat, and a man to whom all the Preachers of Christendom are more
beholden, then many of them are aware: for much of that good iuce that
sweetneth the expositions they read, dropped from his pen, though now like
rivers falling into other channels, it has lost his name) in his worthy
Comment upon the Psalter, applies the words, haereditate possideamus
sanctuarium dei, against those that ambitiously seek Church-liuings and
dignities, dispiersing the curses of this Psalm, as well among the great men
of the Clergy as them of the Laity, which by threatening or favor obtain
Ecclesiastical promotions: and particularly against such men of the Church, as
confer Prebends and dignities upon their Nephews and kindred, building (as
he says) Sion in (their) blood, and Jerusalem in in^quity. Neither spares he
the Popes themselves, but charge them also that they possess Gods Sanctuary,
by way of inheritance, in that they keep the succession of the Papacy among
such as be only of the Roman nation. And much more to this purpose, which
were here too long to recite: but (concluding that the Prophet has leuelled at
them all in this Psalm) he says, De omnibus istis sequitur: Deus meus pone
eos vt retam, etc.

Ioannes Vitalis, who lived above 300. years since, (and for his fame, and
learning, was also called to be a Cardinal, ere that this dignity was yet at
the highest pitch) vehemently enceth this Psalm against the Great men that
prey upon the Church, applying the interpretation of the names therein
mentioned very bitterly unto them. And says further, that they possess the
Sanctuary of God by inheritance, which enter into it unworthily, or in
succession to their uncles, nephews, and parents, and they also which give
Benefices in that manner, wasting thereby as it were Christ's hereditary
patrimony; with much more to this effect, Speculo moral: tit. Principes
saeculares. fol. 229. d.

Nicolaus de Lyra, who flourished about the same time; our own countryman,
(though of Jewish Parents) a star also in that age, of the first magnitude,
for his learning; and exquisit above all in the Hebrew, (it being his mother
tongue, and eleborate by him) whose judgment I the rather esteem, for that
Luther loved him, and preferred him above all Interpreters, as Luther himself
testifies in the 2. and 9. chap. of Genesis. He (I say, as before I have
noted) expounds it: first, and properly for the Temple (under which I
understand all things dedicated unto God) then for Jerusalem, because (says
he) the Temple was there: and lastly by consequence (for that is his own word)
for the Land of Judea, whose chief City Jerusalem was. So that he makes the
Temple and things belonging to God, to be the maine part whereat the Prophet
aims, and the City and Country to follow, but by inference and implication.

Come to the later Writers, Genebrard notes upon Sanctuarium dei; that the
Hebrew word is, Habitacula, and for the postill, faith; Generaliter de diuinis
omnibus templis, vrbibus locis and oppidis populi dei. So that if he had been
questioned further; how he understood Habitacula, specialiter, it is then like
he would have answered, de diuinis omnibus templis tantum: that is, only of
Churches. But be it as it is, he sets them in the first place, as the proper
signification, and the rest in cons^quence, as analogicall, according to
Augustine and our Countryman Ly^anus.

As for Luther, he expounds not this Psalm himself, that I can find; but
you see what he attributes to Lyras judgment.

Pelican a great Hebritian, translateth it Possideamus nobis alectissima dei,
and expounds it in like manner as before, Templum ciuitatem vasa populum dei.

Pomeranus interprets it of them that did seek to make themselves Lords and
heirs of the Temple.

To conclude, because the newest things are most acceptable with many. The last
man that has written upon the Psalter, Lorinus a Jesuit, (and therefore I will
not press his authority) yet to do him right, very well esteemed amongst
great Clarks of our own Church for much good learning (though in matters of
controversy, full enough of Romish leuin) recites somewhat more briefly the
former interpretations of Petrus Damianus, Hugo Cardinalis and John Vitalis,
and approving those their applications, puts them still on into the world,
as truly consonant to the tenor of the Psalm, which notwithstanding I doubt
not has also many other expositions, as herbs have usually diverse virtues and
operations. But thus the eldest and newest expositors are wholly for me, many
also (and of the best of the^) of the middle ages, none that I know against me.
For although Musculus, Bucer, Calvin, Marlorat, Mollerus, expound this Psalm
historically of the Country and Nation of the Jews, yet when then apply it to
the Church of Christ (as otherwise there were no use of it) they make that
application by way of figure and analogy; And then is there no cause to raise
an antithesis, or contrariety between them and me. For to reconcile the
matter, S. Jerome in his entrance into the exposition of this Psalm, tells
us, that we may expound it figuratively of the Church (which I understand in
matters of action, government, doctrine) or historically of the people of the
Jews and nations about them. And though Calvin himself pursues for the most
part the historical interpretation, yet when he comes to the 12. verse, he
faith; I terum accusat profanos homines sacrilegij, quod praedateria licentia
inuolant in ipsam dei haereditatem.

Thus much, and too much touching this point. As it is said in the end of the
Machabees: If I have done well and as the story required, it is the thing that
I desired: but if I have spoken slenderly and barely, it is that I could. Let
no man therefore rely upon me, but learn of them that are bound to teach; For
the Priest slips should preserve knowledge, and they should seek the law at his
mouth: for he is the messenger of the Lord of Hosts. Mal. 2. ^

Other things there be, wherein I would willingly have enlarged my self a
little: but as Popilius in Liuy discribing a circle about Antiochus enforced
him to answer before he stepped out of it. So the Printer (having printed al to
the last sheet before I knew it) restrains me, ad articulum temporis, within
which accordingly I must needs end.


