The sale of Salt.

OR The seasoning of Souls. Namely such, as for whom the Chapmen here do
come, and whom the Author, which takes the name of a Salter, is willing, what
in him lies, to season with the Salt of the Word, leaving the success to the
Lord, without whose blessing in such works we can do nothing.

Written by John Spicer, Minister of the word of God at Leckhamsteed in the
County of Buckingham.

MARK, 9.50. Have Salt in your selves, and have peace one with another. COLOS.
4.6. Let your speeches be gracious always, and powdered with Salt, that you may
know how to answer every man. LONDON, Printed by Nicholas Oaks, and are to be
sold at the sign of the Crown in Paul's Churchyard, 1611.

To the right Worshipful Knights, Sir Anthony Greeneway my very good Patron,
Sir Francis Cheyney, and Sir Richard Ingoldsby, three of his Majesty's Justices
for the Peace in the County of Buckingham, I. S. wishes continuance of God his
blessings in this life, and afterward everlasting rest and joy, through Jesus
our Savior.
ALbeit (right worshipful) Much reading (as wise Solomon says) is a
weariness of the flesh: Ecclesiastes 12* 12,
yet it is daily seen, that as many men's mouths love to taste of diverse
dishes, so many men's minds take delight in reading diverse Books: especially
if they find that they fit their humors. For some can away with no pen, but
that which is dipped in gall: Other some like only of such pens as are dipped in
honey. Some love that which tastes sour: some that which tastes sweet. Some
in reading seek for profit, some for pleasure, and some for both; So that he
labors in vain, that shall study to please all. What profit (with delight)
the reader shall find here (I mean the unlearned reader, not the learned)
when he has read it over he shall see: and as he finds, so let him report:
always remembering that men have their infirmities, and that God only is wise.
And because it is the part of us that are Ministers, to do what in us lies to
season men's souls with the Salt of the word, I was bold to take the name of a
Salter, and with such Salt as I found in the Lords Storehouse, to show my
self willing to season (through Gods help) such as shall stand in need
hereof. I could wish with all my heart, that such as want any of this kind of
salt would go themselves to the pits, and places from whence I had it. But for
that some are ^^ke to sick Patients, which not being ^^ble to go themselves to
the Apothe^aries for Purges or Cordials, or what else they want, take them at
the hands of the Physician: I have taken some pains to provide, and have in a
^eadinesse to serve such Chapmen as shall come unto me for themselves or their
friends; and I trust it shall do them good, if they will suffer themselves to
be seasoned with it. And because there be many which being terrified by
Jesuits and others, refuse to come to our Churches; and some, which though
they do come, yet cannot away with some Rites and Ceremonies that are yet in
use here: I have in the end of this Sale set down a familiar and charitable
conference with both sorts. As for the more learned sort of Recusants, if that
which is written by those Reverend and Learned Men now gone to God, B. Jewel,
Doctor Fulke, Master Nowel, and others, will not satisfy them, I know not
what to say to them, but leave them to the Lord, who orders and disposes all
things in Heaven and Earth to his own glory.

And now to end; I beseech your Worships, since some (unknown to me I protest)
have brought these my poor labors to the Press, be not offended with me
for placing you in the forefront of them: but (like Courteous Knights) defend
them, not with your keen Swords, but with your kind words.

At Leckhamsteed, Nouemb. 9. 1611. Your worships ready to do you what good I
may, so long as the Lord shall lend life, John Spicer.

The Contents of this Book.
OF the Atheist, Page 1. 2. The Recusants, and some others that set light by
the Kings laws, P. 43. ^. Such as either talk or sleep in Sermon time, Page
71. ^. 5 The Shepherd that is lame on both Legs. Page 80 ^. A certain
dim-sighted Salter, and his bad Pay-maister. Page 109 ^. One that lends for
use, Page 155 ^. Such whose zeal is more in show then in substance: Page 157
^. One that thinks the wicked never prosper here. Page 172 ^0. The slothful,
Page 177 ^1. One that is careless in becoming Surety. Page 181 ^2. One that is
more curious in cleansing the outside then the inside. Page 196 ^3. One whose
heart is al upon his riches thinking that Corn is never dear enough. Page 199
14. A Youth that haunteth Harlots Houses. Page 203 15. A negligent Servant.
Page 208 16. A Traitor, Page 213 17. A Witch-monger. Page 218 18. Two that be
ever iarring, whom the Salter leaves to their own Minister: and other, who
not only labor to make them friends, but also to satisfy them in those
matters they stick at Page 220.
The sale of Salt.
The first Chapman.
WHAT have you there my friend?

Salter: Sir I have here sundry sorts of seasoning salt.


Chap. From whence comes it?


Salt. From the sacred salt pits.


Chap. Is it that which is called Canonical?


Salt. Yes.


Chap. I would have such as is fit to season some, whose speeches and behavior
are such, as give occasion to many to suspect, that either they think there is
no God, or if there be, that he regards not what is done among men.


Salt. A learned man in a preface of his makes mention of a wicked wretch
which promised to show how the Apostles and Evangelists have mis-applied
certain places of the old Testament, ^un. in praefat. ^nte parallel.
no doubt but Satan seeing him, and such like, to stand in their own
conceits, thought them fit instruments for him to continue a distasting of all
spiritual things in such as set their affections on things that be earthly,
but if such fellows, and the men you speak of, repent not, it will be easier
in the day of judgment for Diagoras, Epicurus, and Protagoras then for them,
because they saw not that light which these saw, or might have seen if they
had not shut their eyes against the Sun of righteousness.


Chap. Friend Salter, I am persuaded there is none so stony-hearted, but our
God, when he will, can make him a child of Abraham. The Lord uses means to
convert such as he will save, therefore let me have some such Salt as you
think fit to season these, whose state as yet is very fearful.


Salt. Assure your self that they which think there is no God care little for
any salt, or whatsoever is said to come from his sacred fountains.


Chap. How shall these then and others that scoff at all religious exercises
be seasoned?


Salt. I know not, for if they believe not the holy Scriptures to be Gods
word, it is to be feared least through his judgments they be so witless, and
so wayward, that they acknowledge not heaven, earth, and the sea, with the
things therein contained to be his works: so that if neither his most holy
word, which we may and ought to hear with our ears, nor his most wonderful
and most glorious works, part whereof we see with our eyes: if these I say will
not ^eason them, they must for ought I know remain unsavory still.

Alphonsus the tenth King of Spain spoke foolishly of God his works: Phill.
of Mor. of the trueness of Christian Religion. chap. 11. Rodericke of Toledo
in his 4. b. c. 6.
yet he was not so foolish to say there was no God.


Chap. Why, what said he?


Salt. He said, as some write, that if he had been with God at the creation of
the world, it should have been much better ordered then it is, but God punished
him for so saying.


Chap. I have not heard these men find any fault with the ordering of the
world, but they think there be many things set down which are not likely to be
true; Genesis 3.1.
as that the Serpent should speak to Eve, Number. 22.28
the Ass should speak to Balaam, Jonas 1.17
that Jonas should ^iue in the belly of a fish, that men's bodies should be the
torments of eternal fire, Iud. ver. 7.
and never die, but live still in them with pain.


Salt. The Emperor Julian also thought that some talking of the Serpent, a
strange thing, which is no more, says the aforesaid Phillip, but that the
devil spoke by the Serpent, and what is there herein says he, that befell not
daily among the Gentiles? devils, to deceive men, spoke to them from out of
Images. The feend of Dodan spoke out of an Oak: Philostratus says, that an
Elm spoke to Apollonius of Thyaney. A river says Porphyrius saluted
Pithagoras. Julian himself and his Philosopher Maximus heard the devil speak
in diverse voices, and in diverse manners.


Chap. Do none of the ancient Fathers write of the Serpents talking with Eve?


Salt. Yes I remember Saint Augustine says, Lib. 2. de genesi. contra. Manich.
ca. 14.
that the Serpent signfieth ye Devil, which surely was not simple, for in that
he is said to be more wise then all the beasts, figurate insinuatur ei^s
versutia, his subtilty is figuratively insinuated, and a little after he says,
Neither is it to be maruailed how he could speak to the woman, when she was
in Paradise and he was not, neither was she in Paradise, secundum locum,
according to the place, but rather according to ^he love of blessedness, or if
there were ^uch a place, which might be called Paradise ^n the which Adam and
the woman dwelled ^orporally, ought we to understand the ^omming of the Devil
also to be bodily? no ^erily, but spiritually, as the Apostle says, ^ecundum
principem potestatis aeris huius, Ephe. 2.2. (...).
spiritus qui nunc operatur in filijs affiden^iae, according to the Prince of
the power of this air, of the spirit which now wor^eth in the children of
diffidence, or as some ^ranslate it, disobedience: did he then (says Saint
Augustine) appear unto them visibly, no verily, sed miris modis per
cogitati^nes suggerit quicquid potest, But in a marvelous manner by thoughts
he suggesteth whatsoever he can, the which suggestions they do resist which
truly say yt which ye Apostle says, 2. Cor. 2.18 Aerasmus and the vulgar
Editition joined with him translate (...) cogitationes thoughts.
Non enim ignoramus astuti^s eius, for we are not ignorant of his wi^es for how
came he to Judas, when he perswa^ed him to betray (Dominum) the Lord his
Master? was he seen of him in places, or ^yhis eyes? but even as it is said
he entered unto his heart, so does Saint Austin write ^o show the meaning of
Saint Luke, Luc. 22.3.
which ^aith Satan entered into judgment.


Chap. It seems then that by Saint Austins words, and by the places of holy
Scripture which he cites, that by the Serpents talking with Eve, he
understands the suggestions and entisings of the devil.


Salt. True, and in the same 14 chapter he says, that even now that is wrought
in every one of us when we fall into sin, which was then done in those
three, the serpent, the woman, and the man: for first there is a suggestion,
either by thought or by the sense of the body, either by seeing, or touching or
hearing, or by tasting, or smelling, after the which suggestion, if our lust or
desire be not moved to sin, the subtle or crafty enterprises of the Serpent
shall be excluded, but if our lust be moved or stirred, now the woman, as it
were, is persuaded, but sometime reason (viriliter) manfully bridleth and
restrains lust being stirred, which when it is done, we slide not into sin,
but with some wrestling we are crowned. But if reason consent and decree that
to be done which lust moves unto, then man is driven out from all blessed
life, as it were from Paradise, for now sin is imputed though the deed follow
not, quoniam reatenetur in consensione conscientia, because the conscience is
held guilty in consenting.


Chap. So, enough of that matter: now since there be no more Chapmen yet come, I
pray you ere you deliver the Canonical Salt, tell me what that Father says of
Balaam and the Ass.


Salt. Touching that he says that Balaam was carried away with such a greedy
desire, Quast. super Nume. q. 50.
vt nec tanti monstri miraculo terreretur, that he was not terrified with so
monstrous and strange a miracle, but answered the Ass as if he spoke to a
man, whereas God did not turn asinae animam in naturam rationalem, the
sensitive part of the Ass into a reasonable nature, but made that to sound
from her which pleased him, perhaps prefiguring this, 1. Cor. 2.
that God would choose the foolish things of the world to confound the wise:
for that spiritual and true Israel, hoc est, promissionis filijs; that is to
say the sons of promise.


Chap. But what says he of Jonas his being alive in the Whales belly?


Salt. Augustine in the last of the six questions against the pagans, Aug. de
se^. quest. con. paganos expos. quaest. 6. ad Deo gratias.
who made themselves great sport in laughing at that which is written of his
being three days in the Whales belly, and of the Gourd, he says that either
all the divine miracles are not to be believed, or else there is no cause why
this should not, and for that he knew Jonas to be a figure of Christ, he
affirms that we should not believe in Christ himself, if the faith of
Christians should fear ye scoffs of Pagans, Io. 11.35.44 Mat. 12.40. Acts
10.40
and he adds that he much maruaileth that since his friend made no question
of the rising again of Lazarus the fourth day, or of Christ himself the third
day, he would count that which is written of Jonas a matter so incredible, as
if it were more easy for a dead man to be raised out of his grave, then for a
living man to be preserved, in tam vasto ventre belluae, in that so large a
belly of ye Whale, then omitting to show how huge certain sea-beasts are
judged to be, by such as have experience, he says a man might guess by those
ribs (which being fastened in a public place in Carthage were known to the
people) how many men the belly of that fi^h might contain, and also how wide
that mouth might gape which was as a gate to such a den.


Chap. What more?


Salt. A little after he says that if it should be said that Apuleius
Madaurensis, or Apollonius Tyaneus, (whom laudibly they name wise men and
Philosophers) had done that which is written of Jonas, they would not have made
such a laughing, though the devils also do many things like to the holy
Angels, not in truth, but in show, not by wisdom, but by plain deceit.


Chap. What are the last words Saint Austine uses in answering that question
touching Jonas


Salt. Quod autem latuerit, sine salutis dispendio tolerandum.


Chap. So now I see you had not this at the second hand: But what says he to
those that cannot be persuaded, that the bodies of the damned should always
be in torments and never dye?


Salt. First he says, that those unbelievers, De ciuitate Dei, li 21. (...)
will not have us to refer this to the power of the Almighty, but require us
to persuade them by some example: unto whom if we shall answer, that there
be some living creatures corruptible, because mortal, which yet live in the
midest of the fire, and some kind of worms found in ye breaking forth of hot
waters, which no man can touch without some pain, the worms not only being
there without hurt, but not able to be out of it: either they will not believe
if we cannot show it, or if we be able to set the things themselves before
their eyes, or bring forth fit witnesses, they will say this is not a fit
example for the matter in question, because these creatures live not always,
besides this, they live and grow without pain in that heat, as being
agreeable to their nature: as if (says Saint Austin) it were not more
incredible they should be lively and grow there, then not be tormented. It is a
miraculous thing to feel pain in fire and yet live, but it is more maruailous
to live in fire, and not to feel pain: if this then be believed, why not that
also? In the 3 chapter of that book^ he labors to prove that, Aug. de
ciuit. dei l. 21. c 3.
Dolor is not, necessarium argumentem futurae mortis, that is to say.

It does not follow necessarily,
That all that feels pain should die.
And he gives an instance in the soul: the soul (says he) is grieved with
the body in that place where it is pained, and it is grieved it self alone,
though it be in the body, being it self sad for some cause invisible, the
body being safe and sound. It is grieved and pained also, non in corpore
constituta not being in the body, for the rich man (says he) being in hell,
was grieved and pained, when he said, I am tormented in this flame, Aug. de
ciuit. dei l. 21. c. 4.
In the next chapter the same Father shows of the Salamander that lives in
the fire, and of certain hills in Sicilia well known, which continued a very
long time burning, and yet were not consumed in his time: For (says he)
integri perseuerant, they continue whole, and these (says he) are fit
witnesses, that not every thing which burns is consumed. In the same fourth
chap. he speaks of Peacocks flesh, which after long keeping (as he had
tried) did not putrify though somewhat shrunk, and of chafe keeping snow, and
ripening apples: to omit other things, he comes at last to the Loadstone,
unto which he himself saw an iron ring put and there stay, and so a second
ring put to the first, a third to the second, and a fourth to the third, one
ring sticking (though not linked) to another, through the virtue of the same
stone,


Chap. Does he write any thing else of that stone in that Chapter?


Salt. Yes, he says that one (whom there he calls brother and fellow Bishop)
told him yt he saw one hold the Loadstone under silver, upon the which silver
was put iron which moved too and fro, as he that held ye stone under the silver
moved his hand, the silver that was betwixt the Loadstone and the iron moving
no whit at all, he says also that he has read, that if the Adamant be set
near to the Loadstone, then the Loadstone does not draw iron, De ciuitate dei,
li. 21. c. 5.
and that if it has plucked any iron to it before, it lets it go when the
Adamant appears. In the 5. chapter he speaks of the salt of Agrigentum in
Cicilie, which melts in fire and cracketh in water: of a spring amongst the
Garamantes yt is so cold in the day time yt it cannot be drunk and so hot in
the night that it cannot be touched: of a stone in Arcadia called Asbeston,
which being once set thorougly on fire cannot be quenched, of another stone
called Selenites whose inward witness increases and decreaseth with ye the
Moon, of Mares in Capadocia which conceive by the wind, and of Island in India
called Tilon, the trees whereof never loose their leaves: these with others he
sets down, to show that the same divine power, that gave such properties to
these things, can also bring to pass that men shall be in pain al ways and
never dye, and that their flesh shall ever burn and never consume.


Chap. I know not what reckoning the men I named will make of these things
which you have mentioned, but I much marvel they will serve no God at all;
since all the heathen, for the most part (as I have heard) worship either one
God or other, either the Sun, Moon and stars, or fire, or water, or the
earth, or some other thing which did good to man, and was not made by man.


Salt. They did so, and therefore how wise soever your men think themselves to
be, yet those other which took that which did give them light, either by day
or night or did heat them or cool them, or yield any fruit unto them, and
was not made by man, to be some God, that is some divine power worthy of
worship, were in my judgment wiser then the Atheist: For though they failed in
this, that they stayed in the creatures, worshipping them and searching no
further for the Creator, that is invisible, as if one that comes into a mill,
and finding no man there but his grist grownd in his sack, should put of his
cap, make a leg, and thank the mill, and so take up his sack and go his
way, never thinking on the mil-wright that made the mil, or on the miller that
set it on work, though I say these erred, worshipping ye creatures in steed of
the Creator: yet in my simple judgment he that reasons thus: these things
do me good and were not made by men, therefore they are Gods, does reason more
wisely then he, that says Sun, Moon and stars keep their course, give us
light; the fire does heat me, the rain helps my corn and grass to grow:
these are not Gods, therefore there is no mighty power that works by them.
How say thou Chapman does not the first reason more wisely then the latter?


Chap. The reason of the first seems to have more force then the latter, yet
I may not grant it to be wiser, unless the first were wise, but I cannot grant
the former to be wise, unless I would therewithal grant that there is
wisdom in worshipping the works in steed of the worke-maister: but I have no
more reason to grant that, then to yield to the Atheist, that religion sprang
from policy, for if that were true the inuentors of it should be called fainers
or liars.


Salt, Lactantius, De^lra dei cap. 10. versus finem.
an ancient and learned writer, says that opinion is false, by which men
think that religion was instituted by wise men, terroris and metus gratia To
keep men in awe as the vulgar Atheist speaks.
for terror and fear sake, through which the ignorant might abstain from
sin, which if it were true (says he) then are we derided by ancient
wisemen, who if they forged Religion to deceive us and all mankind, they were
not wise, because a lie is not found in a wiseman, but how wise soever they
were, how came they by so great felicity in lying, that not only they decei^ed
the unlearned, but Socrates also and Plato, and so easily deluded Pithagoras,
Zeno, and Aristotle, the Authors of the greatest sects.


Chap. Howsoever others might feign, Lact. de falsa Religione c. 4.
I do not think the Prophets were such,


Salt. To have a will to feign any lie (says the aforesaid Author) belongs
to them which be still raking of riches and ga^ing for gain, Ibid paulo ante.
which things without doubt there far from those holy men, * which set forth
one God, and being guided by the spirit of the same God spoke one thing: who
not only had no gain (says he toward the end of the same Chapter) but
torments and death, and he adds this reason: for the precepts of justice are
bitter to the vicious and bad-liuers, and therefore after they had cruelly
tormented such as reproved and spoke against their sins, they killed them.


Chap. What if any Pagan should say to us, that profess the Christian
Religion, you Christians have fained that which you have set forth, and to the
end men might more be moved to give credit, you do with one consent write,
that all those things were foretold long before?


Salt. Saint Augustine upon the 8. (...) John says, Tract. 45.
that against such Pagan enemies ye should so say, we have have the testimonies
of other enemies, proferimus codices a Iudaeis, we bring forth books from the
Jews. and we answer, both they and you ar^ enemies to our faith, therefore
are they dispearsed amongst ye nations, yt we may convince one enemy by
another. Let ye book o^ Esaias be brought forth by ye Jews, let us se^ if I do
not read there. Isay 53.7.
He is brought, a^^ sheep to the slaughter. Chap. 53.


Chap. Are there none that write o^ this one God but the Prophets and other
holy men, named in the Scriptures?


Salt. You forget your self, you told m^ you would have Canonical Salt for
your Atheist, why then do you ask for other? belike you mean to give him a
preparatiue before you give him a quick purge: whom do you mean? The Fathers
that wrote after ye Apostles time or some other among the heathen before Christ
his incarnation? if you mean these last-named, then know you that Lactantius
sets down some speeches of Trismegistus, De fall. relig. ca. 6.
and the Sibylls touching one God.


Chap. What was that Trismegistus and those Sibylls?


Salt. Cicero brings in Cotta disputing against the Stoics touching
religions, and the varieties of the opinions which are wont to be concerning
the Gods, there were (says Cotta) five Mercuries whereof the first was he that
slew Argus, and so fled into Egypt, and delivered unto them laws and letters:
This man the Egyptians call Thoth, Some of our Prognost. say they call July
Thoth. Prog. 1610.
of whom the first month of their year, that is September, is named, etc.
This man being furnished of all kind of learning was for his great knowledge
sur-named Trismegistus, thrice greatest, as some with us by such as dedicate
books to them, are called thrice Noble, thrice virtuous etc.


Chap. Well, what says that great learned man?


Salt. (...), etc. But God is one, Lact. de falls. relig. ca. 6. Lact de ver^
sap. ca. 6.
and one needs no name, (and again says he): (...), etc. The Lord and
Creator of all things, whom we think good to call God, etc.


Chap. Now to the Sibylls, what were they? and what say they?


Salt. Varro, who (as Lactantius says) was as learned a man as ever lived
among the Greeks and Lattines, De fall. relig. ca. 6.
affirms that ye Sibylline books or works that bear the name of Sibilla
were not made of one Sibylla, but were so called because all Prophetesses in
time of old were called Sibylls, either from the name of one Sibyll that was at
Delphis, or for the denouncing the counsel of the gods: For in Arolikes
speech they call the gods (...) not (...) and counsel, not (...), but (...).
Now there were ten of these Sibylls, whereof the fifth was Erythraea. she in
the verses that were brought to Rome has these words, (...).

One God which alone passing all magnitude uncreated. These Sibylls have
written many things touching our Savior Christ his miracles, sufferings,
resurrection, and coming to judgment, as is to be seen in the said
Lactantius, out of whom Saint Augustine cites many speeches of the said
Sibylls, especially of Erythraea, the first letters of whose Greek verses
touching Christ his coming to judgment, make these words in Lattin. Jesus
Christus Dei filius saluator, Jesus Christ the Son of God our Savior.


Chap. Have you read these words in S. Augustine? or do you find them in
Phillip of Morney his book,


Salt. What if I had read it in any of his books, will you not give as much
credit unto him as unto me, which in all respects am far inferior unto him;
but the truth is I have read it my self in Saint Augustine his 18 book and 23
chapter of the City of God, the first word of which chap-chapter is eodem, and
the last word scripserunt.


Chap. Are the verses you spoke of set down in that Chapter.


Salt Yes, in Lattine, Iudicij signum, etc.


Chap. I would I had them in English,


Salt. If you will have them Englished in the best manner, you must crave it at
the hands of some other, but if you will see the sense as I have given it after
the plain fashion, thus it is.

The earth it self shall sweat through fear,
To show that judgment does draw near,
The eternal king from heaven shall come,
In flesh to judge at day of dome.
Faithful and faithless then shall see,
The glorious God, and Saints set free:
When earth untilled shall briars bear,
The^ souls with flesh, that Judge shall hear
Reijcient simulactra viri cunctam quoque gazam.
Exuret terras ignis, pontu^que polu^que: inquirens, etc.
Then shall men cast false Gods away,
With treasures rich and jewels gay:
The earth shall burn with fiery flame,
That shall search sea and heavenly frame.
The doors of dreadful devils then,
Shall broken be in sight of men.
The bodies of Saints in light shall shine,
When wicked men in flame shall whine.
Things done in secret and by night,
Shall then be known and brought to light
Then men shall cry alas and woe.
And wayling gnash their teeth also.
The Sun and Moon shall loose their light,
The heavens dissolve, no star in sight.
The hills shall down, the valleys rise,
Each thing made even in wondrous wise.
The course of all things then shall stay,
The earth sore crushed shall quite decay.
The fountains then shall dry be found,
And Trumpets give a doleful sound,
Bemoning then man's misery,
When hell shall gape most horribly.
Before the Lord at that same hour,
Shall Kings be brought and men of power,
A fearful fire from heaven shall burn,
With store of brimston for that turn.

Chap. In whose time lived that Sibyll?


Salt. He that compares the 23 Chapter of the 18 book De Ciuitate Dei, with
the Chapter aforegoing, shall find that she was in the days of Romulus and
Ezechias, Romulus was some 700 years before Christ.
but in the end of that Chapter he says some wrote that she was, belli
Troiani tempore, in time of the Troiane war.


Chap. Did she write such things so long before the Incarnation of our Savior
Jesus Christ?


Salt. It should seem so by S. Austin, but since your coming was not for
Sibyl-Salt, but for Salt Canonical, tell me how much you will have.


Chap. Marry friend Salter tell me first I pray thee what I shall say to these
Atheists if they should ask me how I know that this Salt which comes from
Bible-Spring, does pass all other.


Salt. He which for that matter has not the inward testimony of ye spirit
which is the chiefest, must be exhorted to seek for some outward testimony in
the fountain it self, whereof the first may be the majesty of the doctrine
every where appearing in those sacred and Canonical books, Vide Whita. in
dis. de sacr. Scrip. contren 1. Q^aest 3. cap. 3. sect. 5.
The ^econd the simple, pure, and heavenly kind of writing, neither Plato,
Aristotle, nor Demosthenes, nor Cicero, nor any other that wrote so purely, so
holily, and so divinely. The third is the antiquity of them, for the books of
Moses are more ancient then the writings of all men, other Writers were utterly
ignorant of the History he deducteth from the creation, or had it from thence,
or else be sprinkled with many fables. The fourth testimony is the Oracles
which confirm the authority of those books to be very sacred, as the which
must needs be divine, for that in them are foretold some things which came
to pass man^ ages after, and names were put upon some men before they were
borne, certain hundredth of years, as in 1 Kings 13 Chapter the man of God
which came out of Judah by the commandment of the Lord, cried against that
Altar, in the presence of King Iereboam, and said: O Altar, Altar, thus says
the Lord, behold a child shall be borne unto the house of David, Josiah by name
and upon thee shall he sacrifice the Priest^ of the high places: this he spoke
more ther^ 300 years before Josiah was borne, 44.28. and 45.^.
, th^^ Prophet Esaie in like manner names Cyrus some 100 years ere he was
borne.


Chap. How can you prove that Iosia^ and Cyrus were named so long before they
were borne?


Salt. I find in the 2 Chronicles 13 20. that Jeroboam, in whose days Josiah
was named by the man of God aforesaid, being plagued of God, died in ye days
of Abijah, who was then King of Judah, now he that will reckon how many years
each King of Judah, from Abijah to Josiah did reign, shall find the years
when he fetteth down the whole sumine to be more then 300. And as touching
Cyrus named by the Prophet Isay; know you that this Prophet prophesied in the
days of Vzziah, Iotham, Ahaz, Isay. 1.1.
and Hezekiah Kings of Judah, now presuppose that the Prophet Isay named not
Cyrus till the last year of Hezekiah his reign, and that Cyrus was borne in
the 11 year of Iehoiakim, (about which time began the captivity of Babylon)
if ye reckon the years of the reigns of the Kings of Judah, that reigned
betwixt Ezekiah, 2. Chro. 26.6.
and Iehoiakim, you shall find them as I said to amount to some hundred years
lacking some nine months, for Manasses who succeeded Hezekiah, reigned 55
years, Amon two years, Josiah 31 years, Ioachas 3 months. Iehoiakim 11
years.


Chap. Go on now with the rest of the testimonies for the authority of the
Scriptures.


Salt, The fifth is the number of miracles.


Chap. What miracles? if you mean such are found in the Scriptures, assure
your self that they which doubt of, or set light by the Scriptures, make
little account of the miracles or any thing else contained in them, though they
were not feigned.


Salt. If that testimony seem weak take the sixth, Do. Whitak in dis. de sacr
Scrip. contro. 1 Qu. 3. ca. 3. sest. 5
which is the enemies themselves, who though they have often gone about to take
away all the Scriptures from the sight of men, yet they could never bring it to
pass, but by their own pains and punishments understood, that it was the
word of God that they oppugned.

The seventh is ye testimony of the Martirs, which by their confession and
death sealed the doctrine delivered, and set forth in those books,

The eigth the Writers themselves who wrote the^, bring great credit unto the^,
for if ye consider what manner of me^ they were, before they were stirred up by
ye holy Ghost, to take this upon them we shall find that they were very unfit
for such a business.

Moses before he was made fit to be a Prophet and a guide to ye people of
Israel, Exodus 2.10. and 3.1.
was first a Courtier in Egypt, and after that a shepherd.

Jeremy before the Lord touched his mouth and said, Ier. 1.6.
I have put my words into ^hy mouth, confessed himself to be as unfit ^o be a
Prophet as an infant that cannot speak, for that was his meaning when he
said: O Lord God I cannot speak for I am child.

David when he was sent for to be an^ointed was called a little one, 1. Sam.
16.11.
and we find that he kept sheep also.

Peter and John fishers and unlearned. Ma. 4.18.31. Acts 3.13. Acts 9.1.4 Col.
4.14.


Matthew a Publican, Paul a persecutor ^f the same doctrine which after he
professed, and Luke was a Physician, how could i^ be that such manner of men
should write so divinely, had they not as other holy men of God been moved (as
Saint Peter says) by the holy Ghost. 2. Pet. 1.21.
And herein I may not forget one special thing, wherein these aforesaid differ
from profane writers: They hid not their own infirmities, but set them down
without partiality, which the other seldom or never do, least that should
take something from their glory: and now friend Chapman, to make an end of this
in few words, know you, that though these outward testimonies may suffice to
show that the holy Ghost spoke by the Prophets, and directed the writers of the
holy Scriptures; yet those are not of sufficient force to persuade us to assent
unto them, except we have also the inward testimony of the holy Ghost to work
in us,


Chap. Does the authority of the Church avail nothing in this matter?


Sal. You are good to go on a dead man's errand, you come for Salt to season the
Atheist, but if you lead me thus from one thing to another, he may be dead
and in hell ere you come at him.


Chap. He was in health and merry when I saw him going toward the Wine-tauerne
with his companions.


Salt. Many have fallen out when too much drink has been in, and then they
beastly, sometimes cowardly, and drunken stab, causes some of the company
turn up their heels, I would wish you to make have to him, for as a man is
but a buble, so he is but a blow.


Chap. I pray you tell me ere you go what be the offices of the Church
toward the Scriptures.


Salt. Some of the learned have set down four, whereof the first is to be a^
witness and key of them.

The second is to discern the true and natural Scriptures from the false and
bastard

The third is to publish and set forth the Scriptures, wherein she does the
office of a crier, which ought with a loud voice pronounce the decrees of the
Princes without pretermitting, changing or adding any thing.

The fourth office of the Church is to expound and interpret the Scriptures,
wherein she is to forge nothing of her own but to expound Scriptures by
Scriptures, but if you will have any Canonical Salt for ye fool and his
fellows for whom you came, tell me quickly, for I would be leath to stay other
Chapmen to long.


Chap. Why do you call him fool?


Salt. Hear the cause why.


The fool has said in his heart there is no God, Psalm. 14.
but your man if he be an Atheist, says so, ergo, his is a fool and a wicked
fool. Acts 16. Psalm. 58.11.
The holy Ghost who (as Saint Peter says) spoke by the mouth of David tells
us that without all doubt there is a God, and that he judges the earth: and
the aforesaid Peter says, but those things which God before had showed by the
mouth of al his Prophets that Christ should suffer, he has thus fulfilled, in
which words he teaches us four things.

1 That there is a living God, else he could show nothing. 2 That he has
spoken by the mouth of all his Prophets. 3 That those prophesies foretold that
Christ should suffer. 4 That whatsoever they foretold touching that suffering
is fulfilled.
Chap. Well let me have some more of this kind of Salt.


Salt. At Bible-Springs there are two Fountains, the one called the old, the
other the new, you shall have some of both if you will.


Chap. Content.


Salt. Who would not fear thee o King of nations. ger. 10.


Wherefore Nebuchadnezzar spoke and said: Dan. 3.28. and ^9.
Blessed be the Lord God of Shadrach, Messach, and Abednego who has sent his
Angels and delivered his servants that put their trust in him: Therefore I make
a decree that every people, nation, and language which speaks any blasphemy
against the God of Shadrach, Messach, and Abednego, shall be drawn in pieces,
and there houses shall be made a iakes, because there is no God that can
deliver after this sort.

O King hear thou, Dan. 5.18.
the most high God gave unto Nebuchadnezzar thy father a kingdom and Majesty,
and honor, and glory, etc.

Behold God is excellent, and we know him not, neither can the number of his
years be searched out.

When I made the clouds as a covering thereof, Job. 38.9
and darkness as the swaddling bands thereof.

10
When I established my commandment upon it, and set bars and doors,

11
And said, hitherto shall thou come but ^o further, and here shall it stay thy
proud waves.

If I have lift up my hand against the fatherless, Job 31.21.
when I saw that I might help him in the gate.

22
Let mine arm fall from my shoulder, and mine arm be broken from the bone.

23
For Gods punishment was fearful unto me, and I could not be delivered from
his highness.

All they shall be ashamed and also confounded, Esaias 45.10.
they shall go to confusion together that are the makers of images.

17
But Israel shall be saved in the Lord, with an everlasting salvation, ye
shall not be a^hamed nor confounded, world without end.

18
For thus says the Lord that created heaven, God himself that formed the
earth and made it: he that prepared it, he created it not in vain, he
formed it to be inhabited, I am the Lord, there is none other.

19
I have not spoken in secret neither in a place of darkness, I said not in
vain to the seed of Jacob seek you me, I the Lord do speak righteousness,
and declare righteous things.

20
Assemble your selves and come draw near together, ye abject of the Gentiles,
They have no knowledge that set up the wood of their idol, and pray unto a God
that cannot save them.

21
Tell ye, and bring them, and let them take counsel together, who has
declared this from the beginning? or has told it of old? have not I the Lord?
and there is none other God besides me, a just God and a Savior, there is none
besides me.

22
Look unto me and you shall be saved: all the ends of the earth shall be saved,
for I am God and there is none other.

Woe unto them for they have fled away from me; Hosea 7.13.
destruction shall be unto them because they have transgressed against me,
though I have redeemed the^, yet they have spoken lies against me.

God is very greatly to be feared, Palm 89.7.
in the ^ounsell of the Saints, and to be had in re^erence of all them that are
about him.

^
O Lord God of hosts, who is like unto ^hee, thy truth most mighty Lord is on
eue^y side.

O Lord the hope of Israel, all that for^ake thee shall be confounded, they
that de^art from thee shall be written in the earth, because they have forsaken
the Lord, ye foun^aine of living waters.


Chap. This Salt is fit for such as fall away from God.


Salt. If they be confounded that fall from God then there is a God. and ye
same (...) terrible God to such as forsake him.


Chap. Go on then.


Salt. Their words have been stout against me, says the Lord, Mal. 3.13.
yet ye say what ^aue we spoken against thee?

^^
Ye have said it is in vain to serve God, and what profit is it that we have
kept his ^ommandements, and that we walked hum^ly before the Lord of Hosts?

This first understand that there shall come ^n the last days mockers which
will walk after their lusts. 2. Pe^. 3.3.


And say where is the promise of his ^omming, for since the fathers died all
things continue alike from the beginning

Thou beleeuest that there is one God, ye do well, the devils also believe it
and tremble, whereby we learn that they which believe not so much, are worse
then devils

Behold the Lord comes with thousands of Saints, Iud. 14.15.
to give judgment against all men, and to rebuke all the ungodly amongst them
of all their wicked deeds, which they have ungodly committed, and of all their
cruel speakings, which wicked sinners have spoken against him.

God will bring every work to judgment, ^ccle. 13.14
and every secret thing, whether it be good or evil.

The Lord will try the righteous, Psalm 11.5.
but the wicked and him that loves iniquity does his soul hate.

6
Upon the wicked he shall rain snares, fire and brimstone and stormy tempest,
this is their portions of the cups

In flaming fire rendering vengeance to them that do not fear God. ^, These. 1.8.



Chap. If any of this biting salt, or the like should move either the Atheist
(which says in his heart there is no God) or the Epicure (which denies his
providence) or any of the wicked to come into the Church, and there by hearing
of Gods judgments, thundered out against them, begin to tremble and quake, is
there any softer salt or any ware to be had at Bible-Spring that may serve to
keep them from dispairing.


Salt. When by preaching of the word, and fervent prayers of the righteous,
which as Saint James says avails much, they be brought to a true feeling of
their sins, and through the grace of God, which is given to the humble, have
that godly sorrow that causes repentance not ^o be repented of, and some
measure of a sound faith in our Savior Jesus Christ, in whose name (for that
he is the mediator between God and man) we ought to pray: when I say they are
thus far reformed, let them either publickely confess their sin in such
sort, as authority shall appoint, or else privately say these or the like
words. O Lord God which art great and fearful, A prayer.
and keep covenant and mercy toward them that love thee and keep thy
commandments, Dan. ^*
we have sinned and have committed iniquity, and have done wickedly, yea we
have rebelled and departed from thy precepts and from thy judgments: O Lord
righteousness belongs unto thee, and unto us open shame: O our God we are
confounded and ashamed to lift up our eyes to thee our God, Ezra. 9.6. Psalm
51.
for our iniquities are increa^ed over our head, and our trespass is grown up
into the heaven: create in us clean hearts o God, wash us thereby from our
iniquities, cast us not away from thy presence. Turn thou us unto thee O Lord
and we shall be turned: Lame. 5.21. Hosea 14 2. Psalm. 32 5.6 7
take away all our iniquity and save us graciously: O Lord we do find in thy
word, which is written for our learning, that thy servant David confessed his
sins unto thee, and thou forgauest him, and that every one that is godly
makes his prayer unto thee, in a time when thou may be found: and that as a
father pittieth his own children, so thou art merciful unto them that fear
thee, Psa. 103.13.145.18.
and thou art near to all them that call upon thee faithfully: we pray thee
therefore for Jesus Christ his sake to hear us now with sorrowful hearts
confessing our Epicurisme, Atheism, our gross impiety and wicked infidelity,
whereby we became worse the^ the devils, for they believe there is a God, and
tremble: but we f^ared no God at all, we were so led by our own lust, and so
followed the fashions of the world, that we had no mind to call upon thee,
but forsaking thee and thy word to keep company with the wicked, we were
defiled in their pitch, corrupted in their ways, and sat down in the
scornful seat wherein we so often and so offensiuely scoft at al Religion,
and all show of devotion, that now through thy great mercy having some feeling
of the burden of our sins, we do wonder that we with our houses have not long
since felt that fearful fiery vengeance which Sodom and Gomorah felt, or that
hell did not swallow us up quick, as the earth did Corah and his company: Number.
^6.^2.
O Lord what have they done, that we have not done, we know not what to say,
but that thy justice appears in destroying them, and thy unspeakable mercy
is showed in sparing us, which sparing of us being now through thy grace (for
which we give thee praise) so sensibly felt, does put us in hope, that as thou
have begun to work a new birth in us, so thou will sanctify us more and
more with thy holy spirit, and never leave us till by the fruits of a sound
faith thou do assure us we are effectually called, and so are of the number of
those that be elected in Christ to eternal life: Wherefore we pray thee
dear father, sithence of thy goodness, thou shast taught us, and we have
learned, not only that there is a God, but also that thou which art immortal,
invisible and only wise, art the only true God whom we ought to fear, and
in whom we must believe, and that thou art about our path and about our bed;
spiest out al our ways, know all our words as being so resident every where
by thy spirit, that we can go no where from thy presence: we pray thee have
mercy upon us, to forgive us all that is past, to try us and seek the ground of
our hearts, Psalm. 139.23.
prove and know our thoughts, consider if there be any wickedness in us, rid
us out of it, and lead us in the true way that brings to the true life: we
beg these things and whatsoever thou know needful for us and thy holy
Church, in his name, and for his sake, which is the way, the truth, and the
life, saying as he has taught us, Our father which art in heaven, etc.


Chap. When these or any other that have offended (as who has not) have made
these or the like prayers: confessing their sins with true sorrow of heart,
what shall they take to comfort their hearts again? if you have no softer salt
I must seek further, for I fear this salt will nothing but fret them.


Salt. There are diverse sorts of Salt to be had at Bible-Spring, some is sharp,
that ^^rueth to consume gross humors, some is more mild and has virtue to
heal wounds, but because some Physicians setting down what is good for the
heart, say maces is best of all; Hospit. p. 42. Cant. 2.5.
and the Spowse in the Canticles desires to be comforted with apples: you may
call that which I shall now deliver unto you apples, or maces, or wine and
milk as the Prophet Esaias calls that which he delivers, where he makes
his cry saying, Ho every one that is thirsty come ye to the waters, Esaias 55.12.
and ye that have no silver come buy, and eat, come I say buy wine and milk
without silver and without money.


Chap. If men must not pay money for this milk and wine: with what must they
buy it?


Salt. He tells them in the second and third verses saying: Hearken
diligently unto me, and eat that which is good, and let your soul delight in
fatness, incline your ears and come unto me, hear, and your soul shall
live.


Chap. It should seem by his calling for hearing, and eating with delight,
that it is the word of God, or some other spiritual gift, which is there meant
by waters, wine, milk and fatness.


Salt. Some by waters understand the waters of grace in this present life,
Nicola d^lyra.
and of glory in the heavenly City to be given by Christ himself, according
as he himself says.

He which shall drink of the waters which I shall give him shall never be
more a thirst, ^oh. 4.14.
but the water which I shall give him shall be in him a fountain of water,
springing up to eternal life.

By wine and milk the same writer understands the good things of grace and
glory, Benagr. and gl^^.
and by fatness the fatness of grace likewise.


Chap. Well, let me have some of this spiritual nourishing wine and milk, or
whatsoever you list to call it.


Salt. Ye shall, and first I will begin where the aforesaid Prophet made his
cry.

Seek the Lord while he may be found, Esaias 55.6.
call ye upon him while he is near.

^
Let the wicked forsake his ways, and the unrighteous his own imaginations,
and return unto the Lord and he will have mercy upon him, and to our God, for
he is very ready to forgive.

My soul praise thou the Lord, and all that is within me praise his holy name.
(...). 103.8.


^
My soul praise thou the Lord and forget not all his benefits.

5
Which forgiueth all thine iniquities and heals all thine infirmities.

6
Which redeemeth the life from the grave, and crowns thee with mercy and
compassion.

8
The Lord is full of compassion and mercy, slow to anger and of great
kindness.

9
He will not always chide, neither keep his anger for ever, he has not
dealt with us after our sins, nor rewarded us according to our iniquities.

18
The loving kindness of the Lord indureth for ever and ever upon them that
fear him, etc. and think upon his commandments to do them.


Chap. Yea, but these for whom I come have not feared the Lord nor made any
reckoning of his commandments.


Salt. This which I deliver unto you now, as Apples for comfort, is to be set
before them when, as I said, they are well seasoned with the salt of the law,
containing a fearful curse against all the trangressors of the same, and so
being brought unto a feeling of their sin, are entered into the fear of God
which is the beginning of wisdom. Pro. 9.10.



Chap. Then belike those which fear not God, how wise soever they seem to
themselves, have not trodden one step in the path of true wisdom.


Salt. No doubt of that.


Chap. On then.


Salt. Who is a God like unto thee that takes away iniquity and passes by the
transgression of the remnant of his heritage: Mich. 7 18.
he retains not his wrath for ever, because mercy pleases him.

He will turn again and have compassion upon us: he will subdue our
iniquities and cast all their sins into the bottom of the sea.

When the wicked turns away from his wickedness that he has committed,
Ezekiel. 18.28.
and does that which is lawful and right he shall save his soul alive.

28
Because he considers and turns away from all his transgressions that he
has committed, he shall surely live and not die.

32
I desire not the death of him that dies says the Lord God, cause therefore
one another to return and live ye.

She shall bring forth a son, Mat. 1.11.
and thou shall call his name Jesus, for he shall save his people from their
sins.

And lo a voice came from heaven saying: 3.17.
this is my beloved son in whom I am ^ell pleased.

I am not come to call the righteous, 9.13.
but ^^nners to repentance.

Saint Paul says, this is a true saying, Tim 1.15.
and ^y all means worthy to be reciued, that jesus Christ came into the world
to save ^^nners.

Come unto me all ye that are laden (mea^ing with the burden of their sins)
and will ease you, Mat. 11.28,


Likewise, Luke 15.10.
I say unto you there is joy in ^e presence of the Angels of God for one ^^nner
that repents.

31
It was meet that we should make merry and be glad, for this thy brother was
dead and ^s alive again, and he was lost, but he is ^ound.

As Moses lift up the serpent in the wil^ernesse, Ioh. 3 14.
so must the Son of man be lift ^p, that whosoever believes in him should
not perish but have everlasting life.

We believe (says Saint Peter) through ^he grace of our Lord Jesus Christ to
be ^aued even as they do. Acts 14 11.


And it was the same Peter that said: Acts 10.43.
To ^im give all the Prophets witness, that through his name all that believe
in him, shall receive remission of sins.


Chap. Are those then that believe in Christ pardoned and saved, whether they
fear God or fear him not, whether they serve sin or righteousness?


Salt. What friend Chapman do thou think that Saint Peter speaks of such
(...) carnal faith as does not carry about with it the fear of God? if there
were some fear of God in Cornelius before Saint Pete^ preached remission of
sins unto him through faith in Jesus Christ, as we may see in Acts the 10
the 2 verse, no doubt i^ was in him much more abundantly afterward, Assure thy
self therefore my good friend yt where is a sound faith in our Savior, there
is also ye fear of God, but each of those has his proper office, for by faith
we believe that Christ dying for our sins, ^rising again for our
justification, Rom 4.25. and 3 25. and 5 9.
has reconciled us unto God, and that we, justified by his blood, shall be
saved from wrath through him, and fear joined to love serves to bridle our
corrupt affections, that we might walk worthy of our vocation, to the glory of
God, the good example of others, and to the assuring of our own selves, that
we have that faith, whose end, as Saint Peter says, is the salvation of our
souls. 1. Pet. 1.9.



2 Chap. Good Salter make an end with ^im, or else I will be gone.


Salt. I have done with him, if he have ^one with me,


1 Chap. If it be so I may depart without paying any thing for my Salt.


Salt. We will talk of that another time, ^ome now my second Chapman what
^ould you have?


The second Chapman.
Would have salt to season such as seem to me not to be so obedient to the
Kings Majesty's laws as they ought: Some will not come to Church, some will
not com^unicate, some that be lusty and strong will ^ouch no fish on such days
as flesh is for^iden by the laws, not as if it did defile ^s of it self any
day, but that as God has ^ent both, so both might be spent by strong ^odies in
fit time for the good of the com^on-wealth: I am in charity to judge the ^est
of their love and affection toward his Highness, Tim. 1.2.
and such as be in authority under ^im, for whom we are bid to pray, but this
(...) certain many disobey, some in one thing, some in another.

Salt. Such as refuse to come to Chur^^ are not of the Prophet David's mind, w^^
in his Psalms shows, that not only h^ himself loved to be in the house of
ye Lord but * rejoiced to see others there also, Psalm. 122.
I^ the Psalm 42 he shows that he was mu^^ grieved that he could not as
aforetimes g^^ with the multitude and lead them into the house of God with the
voice of singing an^ praise. In the 84 he says, his soul lo^geth, yea and
faints for the courts of the Lord, and that be had rather be a dore-keper in
the house of God then to dwell in the tabernacles of wickedness.


In the 95 Psalm he does as it were kno^ the bell calling the people together
wit^ Come, come, come, In the first vers^ come let us rejoice unto the Lord. In
the second verse, let us come before his fac^ with praise, in the 6 verse, Come
let v^ fall down and kneel before the Lord ou^ maker, not meaning by the word
Maker (...) Sacrament, which some in Popery hau^ called their maker, saying:
they had seen^ there maker when they had seen the Hoa^ lifted up, for the
Psalms were made some hundred years ere Christ took bread an^ brake it, but
by the Maker he meant the invisible God, the Creator of all things, in^^ whose
gates in the hundred Psalm, he ^ddeth the people enter with praise, and unto
his Courts with reioyeing, and in ye ^salme 122 he says, he rejoiced when the
people said unto him, not as some now fro^ardly say, we will not, but we will
go up ^^to the house of the Lord: and who know^^h not it is a greater comfort
to King He^^kiah to hear that the third day he should (...) up to the house of
the Lord. If they do (...) forget these words, but think upon ^^em well
enough, then belike they take ^ot our Church for the Lords Courts, be^^use they
see not Saint Dumbs image in ^^ery Church, before whom they might, in ^^nour of
some other, bend and how, but ^^are you friend Chapman, do you your ^^fe
observe every jot and title of the law?

Chap. I am to crave pardon of God and ^^an for many things, and this I may say
^ith a safe conscience, that I was never, I ^aise God for it, so
superstitiously bewit^ed but that understanding that our late ^^re Queen, of
famous memory, was, and ^^is our right dread Sovereign Lord King ^ames
(thanks be to the Almighty) is a fa^urer of that Gospel which Saint Paul
^^ith, Romans 1.16.
is the power of God unto salvation to every one that believes, and have been
both of them very careful that the holy Scriptures concording to the skill of
those within this land are best learned in the tongues might be faithfully and
truly translated, the Sacraments rightly administered, and that al in the land
both high and low might be edified, and live in peace, love, and unity, which
are the badges of true Christianity, understanding this (I say) I saw not with
what conscience I might refuse to go with my neighbors to the Church where
the word of God is sounded out, and to join with them in prayers for all
estates and degrees, for all graces needful, and for pardon for all our sins:
I could never take him for a true Vicar of Christ, that would keep me from
hearing the word of God in a tongue that I understood, or seemed more careful
to feed our senses with needless and barren ceremonies, then our fowls with
necessary and fruitful Sermons. Touching meats, though I have learned, that
to the clean, whose hearts are purified by faith, all things that God has
cleansed, and appointed to be received with thanksgiving, are as pure and
clean, as fish figs, and Almonds, etc. Yet for that God shall destroy both
bellies and meats, and for that flesh by our ^^wes sometimes is forbidden, and
fish ^^ommanded to be fed on (as I said before) ^or the common good of the
land, I like not ^^at young lusty fellows which can well di^est any kind of
fish, should in time of re^^raint, when they come to faires or mar^ets, seek
always to places where the spits ^re laden with roast, and the ouens full of
^^esh pies: this makes the Butcher busy, the ^^shmonger fume, and adds
strength to ^^nnefull flesh, which is prone enough of it self to evil and
needs no flesh-pampering ^o work his own woe. If sometimes ^^en have found
fish hurtful unto them, or ^ot having good flesh present, should in the ^eare
of God, and without contempt of ^awes eat some flesh, it is to be thought that
as God prefers mercy to sacrifice, so (...) Christian Magistrate, which
wishes as^^ell to all his loving subjects, as a father ^^oth to his children,
will consider of cir^^umstances, and discern betwixt the aged and some others
that eat now and then, either at home, or in tra^elling by the way for healths
sake, warily and sparingly, and those that do it commonly, offensiuely, and
con^emptuously, still refusing fish and calling ^or flesh.


Salt. Though gracious Princes no doubt of it as appears by licenses, do wish
those that rule under them, not to deal hardly with the weaker sort and such
as fear God in things that be of themselves indifferent least summum ius
should become summa iniuria, too much law-pressing, too much life crushing: yet
it is good for subjects both victualers and their guests, not to presume too
much on pardons, nor do any thing royoteously or in contempt of laws but if in
any point they fail in their obedience, to examine themselves what reason they
can render of their doing if they should be called to an account, and to take
heed that their conscience condemn them not inwardly, for that which they
seem to allow outwardly: but my good Chapman it should appear by your talk,
you have been at Bible-Spring, where is store of the best salt, there I
marvel you brought none from thence for your purpose, but come to me.


Chap. Hearing that you were in town, and had salt of sundry sorts, I thought
good to try some of it, to see whether it were right or no.


Salt. Come on then take this first.

Let every soul be subject to the higher powers, Romans 13.1.
for there is no power but of God, and the powers that be, are ordained of God.

Submit your selves unto all manner ordinance of man, for the Lords sake,
whether it be unto the King, as unto the Superior, or unto governors, as unto
them that are sent of him, for the punishment of evil doers, and for the
praise of them that do well.


Chap. If as S. Paul says, there be no power but of God; and if as S. Peter
says, we must submit our selves to all manner ordinances of man, then it
should seem we must obey them in every thing, least in disobeying them we
disobey the ordinance of God.


Salt. You are to understand that if God, which has the hearts of Kings in his
hand, set up a power that regards not his laws, but comandeth that which is
contrary unto them, hating his faithful messengers, and making much of
faithless flatterers; that he does this partly to make known his wrath
toward such as make more account of ly^s, then of the truth, partly that there
might be some trial whereby Mycheas with his plain speeches and bread of
affliction, 1 Kin. 22. 11.17.
might be known from Zedkijah and his false horns: and faithful Daniell
discorned from those that drew on Darius to seal to their wicked decree. Dan.
6.8.9.



Chap. But when that decree was sealed, was it not to be taken as the Kings
ordinance.


Salt. Whose ordinance soever it was, Daniell was not to submit himself
because such submission was not (...) as Peter says, it was not for the Lord,
it was not for his honor, it was not agreeable to his will, it was flat
against the first commandment, and in very deed if he should have refrained
from asking any thing at the hands of his God for the space of 30 days, yea,
if in that captivity he should have asked any such petition of the King any
one day, as he ought to have asked of his God; he had not only made the King
an Idol, but also kept such a silence as had been more fit for one that
fails away from God, then for him, whom the King himself confessed to be a
man that always served his God: ^an. 6.20.
For you must understand that by petitions in that place, is not meant such as
subjects make to their Princes, to move them to grant some thing, that is in
their own power, as if Daniel had framed a petition or supplication to the
King himself, to desire that of his Highness which he required of the chief
of the Eunuchs, that is yt he might not defile himself with the portion of
the Kings meat, and wine, for that petition had been lawful. But if Daniell
had yielded to make any such petitions to the King, as no doubt he used to make
to the Almighty, praying either that he, or his brethren, might do nothing in
that captivity that might offend his gracious Majesty, or that his anger and
wrath might be turned away from his City Jerusalem, Dan. 9.16.17.18.
that he would cause his face to shine upon his sanctuary for his great tender
mercies, and that he would hear, forgive, consider, and do it without
deferring, etc. If I say he had yielded to make, such or the like petitions to
the King, it had been gross idolatry, and a token that he put his trust in
man, which is forbidden, as in many other places; so in Psalm. 146. v. 3.

Put not your trust in Princes, nor in any child of man, for there is no help
in him.

In a word that man of God knew well, that such a yielding would have been a
rejoicing to his enemies, and a greater torment to his conscience, then the
Lions could have brought to his carcass,


Chap. But I marvel that Daniel should think the Kings portions would defile
him, fith our Savior says: Math. 15.110
That which goes into the mouth defiles not a man.


Salt. It is true that meat, and drink, and such like, of themselves, as they
are ye creatures of God, do no more defile a man, then the torches, tapers,
crisme, oil, tunicles, chisibles, holy water, holy-bread, whereof a learned
and reverend Father, In defense of the Apol p. 24. Printed 1570.
sometimes a Bishop in this land, writes thus: Verily Master Harding, we hate
not any of all these things, for we know they are the creatures of God, but
you have so misused them, or rather defiled and bewrayed them, with your
superstitions, and so have with the same mocked and deceived Gods people, that
we can no longer continue them without great conscience: It is the abuse then,
of meats, drinks, garments and such like, that hurts, not the lawful use of
them.


Chap. It is not like that Daniel would have abused any meats or drinks
whatsoever.


Salt. I grant it: But you must remember that Daniel lived in a time wherein
the people of God were not permitted to eat of many things, which the
Christian man is allowed to eat of: It was not said to Daniel, eat what thou will as to Peter, kill and eat, what God has cleansed count thou not common
or unclean: by which vision and voice Peter was given to understand, that not
only meats forbidden by the Law, being now cleansed, and meateable might be
used, Act. 9.13.15.
but also the Gentiles such as Cornelius, etc. whom before being uncircumcised,
the Jews counted unclean, were to hear of Christ, yt through faith in his
blood they might be purged and cleansed from their sins, Daniel I say had not
this liberty.


Chap. Then it should seem that Daniel refused not that portion, because it
was of the Kings meat, but for some other matter.


Sal. Some write that it was a custom in elder time to set some of those
meats, which had been offered to Idols, on the Tables of great men; On which
also sometimes was set Swines-flesh, and other Meats, forbidden by the law of
Moses. Daniell fearing least that some times such should be brought him,
(perhaps also that he saw it was more fit in respect of the times, to take
himself to a straight diet,) refused those Portions.


Chap. Was there nothing which had been sacrificed to Idols set on the Table
before Christians in the Apostles times? 1. Cor. 1.1^.



Sal. It should seem that there was: For S. Paul says: If any man see thee
(which have knowledge) sit at the table in the Idols Temple, (...).
or Banquet, shall not the conscience of him that is weak be built? (For so it
is in the original:) Meaning (as some translate) be boldned to eat those
things which are sacrificed to Idols, and through thy knowledge, shall thy
weak Brother perish, for whom Christ dyed. By which words of the Apostle, and
others, in Romans 14. We see what a grievous sin it is for a man to be pufft
up, and so to seek to please himself with his knowledge, that he makes no
conscience of offending, or sets light by wounding him, which for that he is
somewhat lightened with the knowledge of God, and has begun to hearken to the
Doctrine of the Gospel, is to be counted a brother, and one of the^ for whom
Christ dyed: And for that he is not yet settled, nor come to the full knowledge
of that liberty which Christ has brought us unto, is to be dealt withal not
roughly, but tenderly, as being yet weak in the says, and so either easily
offended, or else drawn on to do this, or that, (which ye stronger in faith
knows to be lawful,) not having any other warrant but the others example:
For if he were thoroughly persuaded in the matter, his conscience should take no
hurt thereby.


Chap. What if there had been some Christian Magistrate amongst the
Carinthians, that he had commanded the stronger in faith, and such as had more
knowledge then others of the Christian liberty (touching the use of Meats,
Drinks, and such like,) to eat and drink what they thought good, sacrificed,
or not sacrificed, any man offended, or not offended? Ought such to have
obeyed?


Sal. You presuppose yt which could not be, for it there had been a Christian
Magistrate amongst them, which had been a sound professer of the Gospel, he
would have put down all Idols. So no Idols, no Sacrifising to them, no
sacrafising no such meat to offend.


Chap. But what if a Christian Magistrate which tendereth the honor of the
true God, the peace of the Church, and the tranquillity of the Kingdom,
command any thing which of it self is counted of many great Clearks
indifferent to be used in the Church, or else where, not attributing any holiness
or special worthiness to the same, but for decency, gravity, and order, and
some not only of the weakest sort, and such as have less knowledge, but also
of the strongest, such as have less knowledge, but also of the strongest such
as are known to have studied diligently, and labored painefully, in some
portion of the Lords harvest a long time, being also well reported of, for their
life and conversation? What I say if these be offended to see such things used,
should others that are not of their mind forbear the use of them for their
sakes?


Sal. I cannot gather by any of the Apostles words, that the strongest, and
such as knew well what belonged to the Christian liberty, were then offended
with such external things as you speak of; no, not though they had been
abused by Idolaters: But I find the Apostle forbidding the despising, and
judging one an other. Rom 14.3.12.13.
I find him selling us, that every one of us shall give accomptes of himself
to God, that no man should put an occasion to fall, or a stumbling block
before his Brother, that the weak conscience of those, that with conscience of
the Idol did eat as a thing sacrificed unto it was defiled, 1. Cor 8.7. Romans
14.5. 1. Cor. 10.13.34.
that every man should be fully persuaded in his mind, that all things are not
expedient, neither do edefie, that he would have no offense given, neither to
Jew, nor Gretian, nor to ye Church of God.


Chap. If the higher power command me to do that which my neighbor is grieved
at; it cannot be, but I shall offend one of them, either the Commander, or my
neighbor.


Salt. That is all one, as if you should have said, I shall offend either my
neighbor or my neighbor: for my Prince is my neighbor, I prove it thus:

He whom I ought to love as my self is my neighbor; but I ought to love my
Prince as my self, for I ought to adventure my life for his safety, far more
willingly then for my self: for that under God he is the light and peace of
the whole land: ergo, he is my neighbor, and such a neighbor to whom I owe
more honor duty and obedience, then to any other on earth whosoever: So that if
I be persuaded, that I may with a quiet conscience obey his commandments, and
have the testimony of my conscience, that I have no mind to put any stu^bling
block before my brother, nor to do any thing of purpose to offend any Gods
servants: (for that deserves the millstone about the neck, Mat. 18.6.
etc.) In this case my brother is rather, in my simple judgment, to prove his
own works, and to look what reason he can render for his refusing, if he be
commanded to do the like, then to be angry or offended with me, which though I
framed my self to obedience, yet not as one willing to touch, much less to
wound his conscience, be it never so weak, or strong: neither am I so free in
this case, as they that did eat meat offered to Idols: for I am commanded by
a Christian Prince to do that I do, but no man commanded them to do that.


Chap. So I see your mind, let me have some more of your Canonical salt, to
see if that will season any of the Recusants, especially such as have more will
then wit.


Salt. If that which they have had, to wit: Let every soul be subject to the
higher powers, etc. And submit your selves to all manner or dinance of man, for
the Lords sake, etc. will not serve your turn, I know not what to say to you.


Chap. I know it is sound, but let me have a little more.


Salt. Then take it as I shake it.

He whom we ought to fear and honor next to the Lord, is to be obeyed next
unto him, and for him: but where the fear of God is required, the fear of the
King is required next, both by Solomon, which says:

My son, Prou. 24.21.
fear the Lord and the King, and meddle not with them that are sediti^us. And
S, Peter also (after these words: 1. Pet. 2.17.
Honor all men, love brotherly fellowship) ^aith: Fear God, honor the King:
where^y he teaches us, that though we owe a ^inde of honor to all men, yet
the King is to be honored above all the rest: this being so, I may safely
conclude, that the King is to be obeyed in the Lord, who commands us to
honor him.

The fifth Commandment also bids us honor Father and Mother: Now that
stretches to the King, which is a father to the country: as a father then
thinks himself not to be honored, if his son obey him not, which made
Solomon say: Prou. 6.20.
My son, keep thy fathers commandments. And Saint. Paul: Ephesians. 6.1.
Children obey your parents in the Lord: So a King does not think himself
honored of those that frame not themselves to obey him in the Lord. To command
to go to Church, to hear Gods word, to pray to him, to praise him, to show
forth the Lords death, etc. is to command in the Lord: if then in this, and the
like we stubbornely disobey him, we give him not the honor due unto him; to
find fault with translations, and to say, we are cut off from the head, are
stumbling-blockes of their own laying: for our tran^^slations which we have
already, dare show their faces in any place in the world, where their old
Latin vulgar edition dare, and s^ long as the Apostle Paul teaches, Tha^
Christ is the head of the Church, Ephesians. 5.23. Contra Crescomum, lib. 3. cap. 5.
Dix^plane and d^^o, ibid.
which lesson S. Augustine having learned, wrote thus: Christus Christianisit
caput, let Christ be the Christian man's head. And S. Peter, that the King is
the superior, (unto whose ordinances, if the Christians were to submit
themselves in his time in civil matters, why should not we submit our selves
unto them in Ecclesiastical matters also, now when God in his mercy has made
them not only receivers of the says, but also defenders of the same) so long
I say as we are thus taught, and so have learned: why should any say, that we
are cut off from the head, and seek to join the whole Church militant to one
ministerial head: I must needs confess, that it were a blessed thing, and
very comfortable to all that profess the religion of the crucified Christ, if
when there be iarres in the Church, we might find some one man, or many in
Rome, or any where else, that were so assured of his or their not erring, M.
Hard. in Confut.
as that whatsoever he or they said by way of judgment (to use their own
words) and sentence definatiue in doubtful points touching religion might
safely be taken for truth: for my part, if I ^ould meet with any such, I would
give them as much reverence as were lawful to be given to any man.


Chap. What if they should put forth their feet to be kissed.


Salt. I find that our Savior to teach humility, washed other men's feet, but I
do not read that he required any either to kiss or wash his feet, though no
man were too good to do it, and those that did it, were to be commended for
their love, as she that powered ointment on him is to be remembered wheresoever
the Gospel shall be preached; to be remembered, I say, not by painting her with
a whip in her hand, Luke 7.38. Math. 26.13.
as if she were a Jesuit, but her doing is to be spoken of.


Chap. Your talking of translations has made you digress from the salt of
obedience, return to it again.


Salt. I will: We are to obey those in God for whom we must pray, Tim. 1.2.
Pro. 8.15.1^. Pro. 12.1.
which reign and rule by God, and for the glory of God, who turns the hearts
whithersoeuer it pleases him; but godly Kings are such, therefore so to be
obeyed.

We are to obey that Ruler which loves him that speaks right things, Prou.
16.13. Prou. 20.26.
scatters the wicked, and causes the wheel to go^ over them: but this is
done by a wise King therefore we are to obey him.

We are to fear to offend him, whose wrath and fear is like the roaring of a
Lion, Prou. 19.12. Prous 20 2.
and in the light of whose countenance is life: Prou. 16.15.
but such are these things in a King, therefore we should fear to offend him.

We are to love, honor, and obey him who sits in his Throne, Prou. 20.8.
Prou. 29.4.
chaseth away evil with his eyes, and by judgment maintains the Country:
but so does a King, as Solomon says: ergo, we are to love, honor, and obey
him.

It is a shame for reasonable creatures having a King, not to do that which
Grasse-hopper, swanting both reason and a King, do: Prou. 30.27.
The Grasse-hopper (says the same Solomon) has no King, yet go they forth
all by bands, meaning they keep order, though they have no guide.

The faithful subjects that seek the peace of the Church, the common good,
their own good, and the favor of God, are to obey such commandments of their
King, as are in the same predicament, (if I may so speak) in which were the
commandments of that good King Hezechias; but these commandments: Go to
Church, hear Gods word, communicate, pray for unity, peace and concord, etc.
are of the same kind as his were: therefore they are to be obeyed, etc.


Chap. What commandment of Hezechias do you speak of?


Salt. Such as are mentioned, Verse. ^.
2. Chron. 30. where it is said, that Hezekias sent to all Israel and Judah,
and also wrote Letters to Ephraim and Manasses, that they should come to the
house of the Lord at Jerusalem, to keep the Passover unto the Lord God of
Israel: So the Priests went with Letters by the Commission of the King and his
Princes, through all Israel and Judah, and with the commandment of the King,
saying: Ye children of Israel and Judah, turn again unto the Lord God of
Abraham, Isaac, and Israel, and he will return to the remnant that are escaped
of you out of the hands of the King of Ashur.

7
And be not you like your Fathers, and like your brethren, which trespassed
against the Lord God of your Fathers, and therefore he made them desolate as
ye see.

8
Be not ye stiff-necked like your Fathers, but give the hand to the Lord, and
come into his sanctuary, which he has sanctified for ever, and serve the Lord
your God and the fierceness of his wrath shall turn^ away from you.

For if you return unto the Lord, your brethren and your children shall find
mercy before them that led them captives, and they shall return unto this
land: for the Lord your God is gracious and merciful, and will not turn away
his face from you, if you convert unto him.


Chap. What entertainment had those Posts in the the land of Ephraim, Manasseth
and Zabulom.


Salt. Some laughed them to scorn, and mocked them, and some submitted
themselves, and came to Jerusalem.


Chap. And what did they of Judea?


Salt. The hand of God was in Judah, so that he gave them one heart to do the
commandment of the King, and of the Ruler, according to the word of ye Lord,
and when it shall please the same God that gave them one heart, to give us in
this land one heart also, we shall do the Commandment of our King and
Rulers, according to the word of the Lord: for if we had all that heart, if
there were unity, then as they in Judea came into ye house of the Lord to serve
him and to keep the Passover unto him: so should all we in this land go to
the Church, serve God, and in communicating show forth the death of our Savior
with thanksgiving, until he come. 1. Cor. 11.26
We should not be some in the Church, and some in the chamber; Some doing that
which Christ commanded to be done in remembrance of him, and some kneeling
before some work of Man's hand; Luke 22.1^
Some hearkening to the preaching of Christ crucified, and some contenting
themselves with hearing a Mass, and looking on a Crucifixe; Some through
faith, feeding in Christ, which is above, sitting (as Paul says) at the right
hand of God, Col. 3.1. Heb. 1.3.8. Ca. 8.5.1.
which to the Hebrews is called, the right hand of Majesty in the highest
places, and other some after certain words spoken, and grossly understood,
seeking for him in form of bread, as if our Savior when he said: This is my
body, had either two bodies, or else one and the same body, at one and the same
time, seen and heard at the Table, and hid and silent in the bread.


Chap. I wonder that they holding a bodily presence, will themselves be bodily
absent.


Salt. They absent themselves from our Church, not only in body but also in
Spirit, they have no mind to us, nor to our congregations.


Chap. It may be they think there be as many things that need clensing, as
needed clensing in Jerusalem, when Hezechiah began to reign, at which time, as
I have heard, there were many things amiss.


Salt. Indeed that godly King found high places, images, and groves, all which
he took away; and when he had brought the Priests and Levites into the east
street, he said unto them: Hear me you Leuits, sanctify your selves, 2 King.
18 4 3. Cro. 29.5.
and sanctify the house of the Lord God of your Fathers, and carry forth the
filthiness out of the Sanctuary: For our Fathers have trespassed, and done
evil in the eyes of the Lord our God, and have forsaken him, and turned away
their faces from the Tabernacle of the Lord, and turned their backs.

7
The have also shut the doors of the porch, and quenched the Lamps, and have
neither burnt Incense, nor offered burnt offerings in the Sanctuary, unto the
God of Israel.


Chap. I think our Recusants have Lamps and Incense still.


Salt. They have, or would have, and Images too, but they forget that those
lamps, and those offerings, were signs of our Savior Christ, which is called
the light of the world, and was once offered to take away the sins of many,
Heb. 9.28.
as they may read in ye Epistle to the Hebrews: where also they shall find,
that the Priests, Heb. 8.4.
according to the Law, offered gifts, which serve unto the Pattern of
heavenly things. Reu. 8.3.
And in the Revelation they may read of an Angel that had a golden Censer, and
much odours were given unto him, that he should offer with the prayers of all
Saints, upon the golden Altar, etc. Whereby we are given to understand, that
even the prayers of the faithful, are no other ways accepted then through the
sweet smelling merits of our Savior Christ, who having brought the light of
the Gospel, given himself to death for us, and finished whatsoever in the Law
was figured; Lamps, incense, and burnt offerings and such like, must now cease.


Chap. May not the Preachers of the truth be called Lamps and Lights?


Salt. Yes, so long as they lead us to Christ which is the true light of ye
world, and many such Lamps were put out, not quenched with water, but consumed
with fire in the Bonerian days: God grant all Princes to take heed how they
put out such lamps as show the way to life eternal. The same Spirit that said:
Touch not mine anointed, said also: Do my Prophets no harm, Psa. 105.5.
the learned know who are meant by anointed in that place.


Chap. Do not you think that many of the superstitious Catholics (for by
that word I distinguish them from such Catholics as are sincere) did not
murmr in the days of our late Sovereign, when they saw the pictures of
Lions and Drago^s painted where they were wont to see such pictures as bare the
names of Christ, Mary, and John?


Salt. I know not whether they did or no, but if they did, they had no reason
for it, since the Arms of Princes, which profess the Gospel, with the
supporters, whether they be Lions Dragons, or Unicorns, being painted in
Churches, do signify, that the Prince, whose Arms those are, is a defender of
the faith, and of the pure worship of the living God, and that he is supreme
Governor in all causes, and over all persons not only Civil, but also
Ecclesiastical, next and immediately under Christ in his own Dominions: who
knows not the simple people are more easily drawn to make Idols of the
pictures of Saints, then of beasts? and therefore the removing of their
pictures, and the placing of Arms in their room, is no sufficient cause to
keep them from Church, as if Christian Princes were to be reckoned amongst
those that set up their banners for tokens. Psalm. 74.4.



Chap. Sure I think some of them could frame themselves to come to Church,
notwithstanding the want of Images, but that they have been away so long.


Salt. This is no good excuse for a man to say, I cannot do this or that,
because I have not done it in a great time, for then Israel, and Judah, might
have made that excuse for not coming to Jerusalem, to keep the Passover in
the second Month, for that it is said, they had not done it in a great time,
as it was written. 2 Chro. 30



Chap. I will trouble you no more about this matter.


Salt. My good friend talk not of troubling me, it is the King and those that
govern under his Majesty, that are troubled, they see there be sundry
opinions, and that the favorers of each would be tolerated to have their
own way, which if it should be granted, then the land, though it have a godly
King, should appear as if it had none. But wise and godly Kings, which make
much of them that are known to fear the Lord, suffer not every man,
especially the idolaters, to do what seems good in their own eyes, but do
what in the^ lies: that first God, by whom they reign, be purely worshipped,
and then that the land be quietly governed, and as they no doubt pray for their
subjects after the example of Ezekiah (who praying for such as were not
thoroughly cleansed) said: The good Lord be merciful toward him that prepares
his whole heart to seek the Lord God of his fathers, 2. Chron. 30.18.19.
though he be not cleansed according to the purification of the sanctuary: So
ought all loving and faithful subjects heartily to pray for their Princes,
that it would please the Almighty to direct their words, thoughts, and deeds,
to his glory and good of the Church, and to give them wisdom whereby they may
discern betwixt those that prepare their hearts to serve God in sincerity
according to his word though they have their faults (as who has not too many)
and those that serve him superstitiously according to their own fantasies,
though they have heard, or might have heard a thousand times, yt whatsoever is
not of faith is sin, Romans ^4.23.
and that we must not be wise in our own opinions.


Chap. For my part I have so prayed, and by the grace of God will pray so
still, and I beseech him for his sake that shed his most precious blood for us
on the cross to frame such obedience in us all (first toward his own divine
Majesty, and then to our good King) as shall be most acceptable in his sight,
that such as be in authority, for whom we are bound to pray, may govern us
with comfort, and not with grief, and thus I leave you, because here is one
looks as if he thought us long.


The third Chapman.
I Have thought you long indeed.

Salt. Your long tarrying shall be recompensed with a quick serving: what
would you have?


Chap. I would have salt to season some which seem not to give so good ear to
Sermons as they have done.


Salt. How does that appear?


Chap. By there talking and sometimes sleeping in time of the Sermon and
prayers.


Salt. When one begins to shrink from that whereto God has called him, he
shall have means ready at hand to further him therein: If Jonas will fly to
Tarshish he shall find a ship ready at Iapho, to carry him from the presence of
the Lord, that is, from presenting himself to the place, whether the Lord sent
him to cry against it. otherwise, as appeared by the mighty tempest, he could
not fly from the presence of him that is every where: Tell me I pray, are the
men you come for any thing learned?


Chap. Yes they can read well.


Salt. Then they know what Salt is good in such a case.


Chap. We have have not always that in remembrance which we know.


Salt. Indeed I remember S Paul says to the Romans: Nevertheless brethren I
have somewhat boldly, Romans 15.15.
after a sort, written to you, as one that puts you in remembrance, etc.
Saint Peter also seems to be of that opinion, ^. Pet. 12.1^.
saying: Wherefore I will not be negligent to put you always in remembrance of
these things, though ye have knowledge and be established in the truth, for I
think it meet, so long as I am in this Tabernacle, to stir you up by
putting you in remembrance, And our Savior Christ though he knew that they to
whom he spoke were not ignorant of that which is written of Lots wife, how,
after he looking back, she was turned into a pillar of salt: Yet he said:
remember Lots wife.


Chap. If some Recusant were here, he or she would say this of Lots wife is a
good watchword for us to take heed of you, and your Salt.


Salt. If I or any other would have them look back with an affection to any
thing that God does abhor, they should do well to take heed of such looking
back: but for as much as the going back from gross superstition is a going
forward in a sincere religion, they need not fear the Salt, which I or any
other, shall bring to that end.


Chap. For my part I fear not your Salt, but I fear I shall be called fool
of those for whom I fetch it.


Salt. He that is faint-hearted before he comes to the battle, were better to
stay at home, then go to discourage others, pluck up your heart man and
remember, that wise men suffer fools gladly: if a wisemans foot should slip,
and some simple fellow should stay him from falling, would that wiseman think
you, frown upon the poor man, that thought him no hurt but good?


Chap. Since you so encourage me, let me see what I shall carry.


Salt. Take heed that no man fall away from the grace of God: (...). Cor.
10.12. Heb. 5.15. and 10.38.
if any withdraw himself, my soul shall have no pleasure in him.

My sheep hear my voice. Ioh. 10.

Hear my doctrine o my people, Prou. 5.1.
incline your ears unto the words of my mouth.

There are many disobedient and vain talkers, ^^r. 1.10.
chiefly they of the circumcision.


Chap. I do not think that the Apostle in those words finds fault only with
such as by their vain talk go about to deceive men's minds at Sermons.


Salt. Neither do I cite that place as if I so thought, but thus I gather from
those words, if such deserve reproof, and to be shunned, as labor to deceive
men's minds at any time, then chiefly such as do so in time of Sermon, or
reading of the holy Scriptures, which are means to reform and not to deceive.


Chap. Well go on.


Salt. Behold a Sower went forth to sow, Math. 13.38.4.
and as he sowed, some fell by the ways side, and the Fowls came and devoured
them up, etc.

I have somewhat against thee, Reu. 2.4.
because ^hou have lost thy first love.

Remember therefore from whom thou ^rt fallen, and repent, etc.

No man that puts his hand unto the ^low, Lam, 9.62.
and looks back, is apt to the kingdom of God.

Finally, my brethren, be strong in the Lord, Ephe. 6.10.
and in the power of his might put on the whole armor of God, that ye may be
able to stand against the assaults of the Devil.


Chap. They are not acquainted with this armor, which arm themselves to
destroy the Lords anointed.


Salt. No indeed Chapman, for their loins be not girded with ye verity, but
with vanities, superstition, and idolatry, they have not put on ye breast
plate of righteousness but of sin and wickedness, Psalm. 124.6.
they be armed with volumus hos spoliare, and with ye pride of nolumus hunc
regnare, the would give ye crown the foil, to ye end they might come to the
spoil, but praised be ye Lord yea an hundred thousand tunes blessed be his
holy name, which has not given his Majesty, his Progeny, his Nobility, and
other faithful Subjects as a prey unto the teeth of such blou^ thirsty men,
whose feet be not shod with preparation of ye Gospel of peace, but wi^^ a
mass of massacres battle and blood: the^ have not the shield of faith to
quench ye fie^^ darts of ye wicked, but of some Popish di^pensatio^ or of some
fond imagination, unto (...) which while ye trusted thinking thereby to b^
advanced, they threw themselves down head long into perpetual confusion: many
things are laid to ye charge of such as wish Papish gone, with bag and baggage:
as y^ they are a with soning crew, quarrelsome, sectaries, agree with the
Annabaptists, etc. but for ought y^ I ca^ see, they are so far from thinking on
any such hellish stratagems, that for ye defense of our right dear Sovereign,
the Gospel, and their country, they would spend each drop of blood in their
bodies, God grant all those that profess the Gospel sincerely, so to love one
another, that if need require we may fight together against the common enemy.


Chap. Alas how should they fight that have lost their livings, though a man
had money to buy him a weapon, yet if his body be weak for want of nourishment
he will scarce be able to kill a frog.


Sal. It were good they had maintenance, and weapons too, to defend themselves
^om their Enemies: I know the Lord is ^ur best Buckler, he is only our
support, Psalm. 23.
that Horses, Bows* and Swords, can not ^^ue men, yet he that said so, 1.
Sam. 40.45.47.
had a Sling and a Stone, though he trusted not in them, ^ut in the Lord of
Hosts, who the very ^ame day that the Philistine had thought to ^aue given
David's flesh unto the Fowls of ^^e Heaven, and to the Beasts of the field,
^losed him in David's hands, and so his own ^ead was cut off with his own
Sword: Such as make pittes for such as fear God, ^oe oft-times fall ints the
same themselves.


Chap. But how fell we to talk of this, from talking of such as talk in time
of Sermon?


Sal. I cited that place in Saint Paul, where he bids the Ephesians put on
all the Armor of God, and so we digrest to the Armor of the wicked; who if
they made any reconing of the Scriptures, they would ^reade them oftener then
they do, and in reading, note that David was touched in his heart, when he had
cut off but the ^lappe of Saules Garment, that though Amon worshipped his
Fathers Idols, yet by the just judgment of God, 2. King. 21.2^.23.
the people of the Land slew all those that conspired against him, and that
though King Pekaiah did euil^ in the sight of the Lord, yet Captain Peka^^
that slew him to reign in his steed, wa^ himself slain by Hosea, the Son
of Ela^ If these wicked Walkers (for I have done with the Church talkers,
hoping I shall need to say no more of that matter,) would remember those
histories, and the fall o^ Traitors in all ages, and how that the Lord has not
only forbidden to touch, will bloody hands, his Anointed, and the heri^tage of
his Prophets, but also threatne^ that the bloudthirstie, and ungodly men^ whom
he abhors, shall not live out half^ their days, they would not imagine suc^
mischitfe upon their beds, and conceive much less bring forth such monstrou^
fruit. Alar* Lib. vniuer. iuri. Histor. des^^ip, page ^5.
The day in which proud Tarqui^^ was banished, was called Regifugium, I^ were
well if the fifth of November were called Papae-fugium, for that I wish (...)
reigned no longer in any man's heart here, (...) these be their fruits.


Chap. If they escaped not that conspired against bad Kings, how shall they be
fre^ that rise up against a good King, which by his calling of a Conference,
and by his Proclamations, and by his Books, has mad^ (...) known to all that
will not be willfuly ^gnorant, that he has great care that all things may be
well ordered, both in Church, and Common wealth? If any have Popish Pardons for
such pestilent plots, they came not from the Chair of Peter, who says even
in that translation which they most esteem, Fear God, honor the King. But
from some other bloody bench where Satan has a throne, I think few of these
we speak of come to our Churches.


Sal. I think so to, but if they would come with a mind desirous to find the
truth, and pray from their hearts, that it would please God to deliver them
from whatsoever offends his Majesty. If they would call afterknowledge, Pro.
2.3.4.
and cry for understanding; If they would search for her as they would for
silver, and treasure, then (as Solomon says) they should understand the fear
of the Lord, and find the knowledge of God.


Chap. The Lord for his tender mercies grant that both we, and they, may so
seek for the true knowledge of God, and of his true worship, as that we may
find it, and finding it, may hold it fast unto the end; and so I leave you,
making room for the next Chapman.


The 4. and 5. Chapmen.
WE would be the next if we might.

Sal. What would you have?


Chap. We would have Salt for two Shepherds.


Sal. Shepherds use Tar, and not Salt, as I think.


Chap. As Tar is good for some Sheep, so is this Salt which you bring, good
for the Shepherd.


Sal. How know you that before you have tried it?


Chap. They say that your Salt is Canonical, and that being sound, must needs
be good.


Sal. True, if it be well used, but what is amiss in the Shepherd for whom
you come?


Chap. The one is either so lame, or so lither, that he will not feed his
Flock: And the other, though he fodder his Sheep, yet he does not look well
to his way, and that makes him stumble very much.


Sal. If I thought they would esteem of it, and take it in good part, and not
snuff at it, as if you sought and brought this Salt rather to frecte them to
their heart, then to whet them for their good. I would gladly help you to that
you come for, but I marvel you seek not first for your self, but begin
with your Shepherds?


Chap. I am persuaded, that if they were sound, we should all do the better.


Sal. You do well to seek to have your Shepherd sound, so that you remember
there was never any perfectly sound but one called Archipoimen, The chie^
Shepherd
who gave his life for his Sheep, 1. Pet. 5.4.
and fitteth now at the right hand of Majesty, in the highest place.


Chap. That Shepherd was peerless, Reu. 1.5.
for as some write of him, he washed them in his own blood: But our Shepherd,
I fear me, has more fellows; though some say, a lame Shepherd has no
fellow.


Sal. Not only your Shepherd, but my self (for I am a Shepherd also.) and
all Sepheards have their infirmities, more, or less, and it were to be wished
we could; and would, all of us take as great pains for the good of the Flocks
committed to our charge, as did Jacob, Moses, David, and those Shepherds, to
whom the Angel of the Lord on a time brought tidings of great joy: The first
of these, Genesis 30.29.
to wit Jacob, says thus to Laban, his Wines Father: Thou know what
service I have done thee, and in what taking thy Cattle have been under me,
for the little that thou hadest (before I came) is increased unto a multitude;
and the Lord has blessed thee by my coming etc.

This twenty years have I been with thee, Gen 31.38.39.40.
thine Ewes, and thy Goats have not cast their young, and the Rams of thy
Flocks have I not eaten. etc. I was in the day consumed with heat, and with
frost in the night, and my sleep departed from mine eyes.

Moses, ^^od. 2 17.^1
after he had succored the seven Daughters of the Priest of Midian, (defending
them from the downish and clubbish Shepherds, that would not suffer them to
matter their Fathers Sheep at ye Troughs which they themselves had ^^iled;)
married one of those Sisters, and having agreed with Iethro, his Father in law,
to look to his Sheep, he did not, to the end he might follow his own
pleasure or pros^ite, commit them to a careless and unskillful Ladde, but
followed them himself through the desert, and yt a long time, enduring many
storms no doubt, ear he came to the mountain of God, Exodus 31.
Horeb.


Chap. And what say you of David?


Sal. He says of himself to King Saul: Thy Servant kept his Fathers Sheep,
1. Sam. 17.34.
and the^e came a Lion, and likewise a Bear, and took a Sheep out of the
flock; and I went out after him, and smote him and took it out of his mouth;
and when he arose against me, I caught him by the beard, and smote him: and
slew him, So thy Servant slew both the Lion, and the Bear.


Chap. It should seem that this David was a courageous and a careful
Shepherd.


Sal. The Servants of Saul said; He was strong, valient, and a Man of war;
wise in matters, and a comely person, and that the Lord was with him.


Chap. Was it his trusting to his strength then, that made him leave his sheep
with a Keeper, and go within the compass of the Host?


Sal. I did not say he trusted to his strength, though he were strong yet he
was the least of his Brethren: And Saul, in comparison of Goliath, thought him
but a Boy: He left not his Sheep (as he himself said) without a cause, for
his Father sent him, and the Lord, no doubt, had decreed that he (though
vnllkely in man's judgment) should kill that great man of war, 1. Sam. 17.46
47.
that all men might know that Israel had a God, Psalm. 78.70.
and that the battle is the Lords: This is, that David, of whom it is said in
the Psalm, that God Took him from the Shepe-foldes, even from behind the Ewes
with young brought he him to feed his People in Jacob, and his inheritance in
Ifraell; so he fed them according to the simplicity of his heart, and guided
them by the discretion of his hands.


Cha. This was a great preferme^t, to come from feding of sheep, to govern
Israel, and a greater blessing of God that he had, wit, and will, to guide
the^ so well: But what have you to say of those other Shepherds, to whom the
Angel brought such joyful tidings?


Sal. Saint Luke says, Luke 2.8.
They abode in the field, and kept watch by night, because of their flock.


Cha. I promise you these Shepherds were worthy to be well rewarded, whom
neither the night (which is uncomfortable,) nor the Bear which roareth, nor
the Lion which deuoureth, could drive from their flocks: We of our town would
be glad if our shepherd were half so painful, and courageous.


Sal. It is marvel if he want pain, being lame; but what may I call the
Town where you dwell?


Chap. It is called Little-taught, a pretty Town, if it were well taught.


Sal. If it had neuerso much teaching, it were never the better, except there
be following.


Chap. True, but rather the worse, because it should be beaten with more
stripes; but I pray you let me have some sharp Salt, that may stir up our
Sepheards to feed us, and I doubt not, if God bless his labors, you shall
find us in better plight when you come this way again.


Sal. What will you do with the Salt when you have it?


Chap. I will carry it to him, and pray him to lay it to his eyes, or if any of
this kind has been laid to them heretofore, that he would now at length
lay it to his heart.


Sal. On y^ condition ye you will do the like when he shall wish you, I will
serve you presently.


Chap. I hope I shall.


Sal. Hold then, and as I deliver it with goodwill, so do you carry it wc
goodwill, and I pray god to stir up your shepherd, according unto that which
shall be measured unto him to feed you with goodwill.


Chap. Amen.


Sal. Thus says the Lord God unto the Shepherds: Ezekiel. 34.^.
Woe be to the Shepherds of Israel, that feed themselves: should not the
Shepherds feed the flocks? Yea eat the Fat, and ye cloth you with the
Woll^ yea kill them that are fed, 3
but ye feed not the sheep: The weak have ye not strengthened, the sick have
ye not healed, neither have you bound up the broken, 4
nor brought again that which was driven away, neither have sought that which
was lost: but with cruelty and rigor have you ruled them. 5


And they were scattered without a Shepherd, and when they were dispearsed,
they were devoured of all the Beasts of the field.


Chap. I perceive a shepherd has work enough to keep him from idleness, he
had not need be lame or lasy, that must feed, strenghthen, heal, bind up the
broken, bring again sheep that be driven away, and seek about for such as
be gone astray, but if I should desire to know, who they be that feed and
cloth themselves, and do not that which is here required, would you not do so
much as tell me?


Salt. If other Chapmen will stay so long you shall hear, not what I say, but
what I find in a book that bears the name of an ancient and famous
shepherd, Aug. d^. pastoribus.
that lived in Africa more then twelve hundred years ago: how say you my
Masters are you conent to stay while I show what I find here?


Other Chap. Yes if you stay not too long, as one forgetting that we come for
that which is Canonical.


Salt. If I bring any that agreeeth not with that, you may leave it where you
find it.

In the first chapter of that book he asks this question: Aug. de
Pastoribus cap.
Where are they which feed themselves? and answers.

All that seek their own and not the things that are of Jesus Christ: for we
(says he) whom the Lord according to his vouchsafing, and not according to our
merit has set in this place, for which a dangerous account is to be given: are
both Christians and Rulers: In that we are Christians we are for our selves,
Phil. 2.21. So the sam^ Augustine also in Fol* 21. tract. 123. si^ut meas
pasce, non sicut tuas, gloriam mearnin cis quere, non tuam, domimium meum non
tuam, lucra mea, non tua ne sit in eorum societate quipertin^n^ ad tempora
periculosa se^psos amantes. Tim, 3.^.
in that we are Rulers it is for you, etc.

In the second Chapter having affirmed that be milk, whatsoever is given of
the people to their guides for temporal food, he says: That albeit the
Apostle had rather labor with his hands, then to take the milk of the flock:
yet he said he had power to take it, and that the Lord had so expounded, that
they which preached the Gospel* should live of the Gospel, And in the end of
that Chapter he concludes, that they are reproved, which taking the milk and
ye wool, neglected the sheep.

In ye third chapter he says: These be the two things, which they that feed
themselves, and not the Sheep, do seek: the commodity of satisfying necessity
and the favor of honor and praise, For by clothing, which covers
nakedness, may well be understood honor: such manner of honor (says he, a
few lines after) the same Paul had received from the good people of God, when
he said: Ye received me as an Angel of God, I bear you witness, that if it
might be done, you had plucked out your eyes, and given them to me: But when as
so great honor was given unto him, did he for this spare those which erred,
and went astray, least perhaps it should be denied him, when he reproved them,
and he himself should have less praise and commendations, if he should so
have done, he should have been reckoned amongst those that feed themselves and
not the Sheep, and he would have said within himself what does this concern
me, let every man do as best likes him, I shall be sure of my mainetenance,
I shall have milk and wool enough, let every one shift for himself? etc. And
a little after in the same Chapter, the same Saint Augustine says: God forbid
that we should say unto you, live as you list, God destroys no man, only
hold fast the Christian faith, he will not destroy that which he has
redeemed, he will not see those perish for whom he has shed his blood, if
you be disposed to delight your minds with shows and sightes (meaning such
shows, De sin. ^d catli^. 2. ca. 2.
as I take it as are spoken of by him in another place, where chastity by their
own filthiness is violated) go your way, what hurt is it, go celebrate those
feasts, which are frequented in ^^ery City, in the merry meeting of such as
feast together at the common tables, where men thinking to sport and cherish
themselves do rather spoil and perish themselves, the mercy of God is great
which may pardon all, crown your selves with roses before they wither, etc.
Which thing ^f we shall do (meaning if by such speeches we should encourage men
in evil, as if we should teach that Christ dyed to the end we should not dye
to sin, but live in it still) these not being the words of God, not the words
of Christ's, we are (says he) Shepherds feeding our selves, and not the
Sheep.

In the fourth Chapter of that book he says: De Pastor.
There be very few Sheep that be fat that is, sound in the word of truth,
using well the food they have by the gift of God, but those had Shepeheards
spare not these* it is not only a small matter with them to neglect the sick,
the weak, the wandering and lost Sheep, but therewithal as much as in them
lies kill the strong and fat: those fed Sheep shall live through the mercy of
God, yet those naughty Shepeheards kill them by their evil life, and by giving
an evil example, for shall we think that it was in vain said to that servant
of God which was eminent and famous among ye members of the chief Pastor *
Above all things show thy self an example of good works. (...). Ti^. 2.7.


For even the strong Sheep, for the most part marketh whether his naughty
living guide turns away his eyes from the rules of the Lord or not, and so
looking upon the man begins to say in his heart: if my ginde feade this
life, what am I, that I may not do as he does? If then he kill a strong Sheep
what work will he make with the rest, which by his evil life has destroyed
that, which he himself had not strengthened, but perhaps found strong before?
I say unto your charity though the Sheep live and be so strong in ye word of
the Lord, holding fast yt which they have heard from the Lord: do as they say,
but not do ^s they do, yet he which is a bad liver in ^he sight of the Lord,
as much as in him is, Math. 23.3.
^illeth him that has an eye to his life.


Chap. Says he nothing of the weak and ^icke, 34.4.
and the rest spoken of in the fourth ^erse.


Salt. Yes, in the fifth chapter of the said ^ooke, he says: the Sheep has
then a weak ^eart when he believes not that tentations shall profit him, and
when such a weak ^^e does so believe, the negligent Pastor ^oth not say unto
him, son, come to the ^eruice of God, stand in righteousness and ^eare, and
prepare thy soul unto temptation: And a little after, having set down what
Christ has suffered for us, he cites other ^laces of holy Scripture as he
thought fit, ^o strengthen the weak, and such as be rea^y to fainte in
afflictions.

All that will live godly in Christ shall suffer persecution, 2. Tim. 3.
he scourges every son whom he loves.

God is faithful and will not suffer you ^o be tempted, above that which you
are ^ble to bear, etc.


Chap. Does he make any difference in that Chapter, between the sick, and the
weak.


Salt. Yes; he says: Such as seem to be fervent in good works, but yet not
willing or not able to bear imminent passions, are infirm and weak, and such
as love the world, and by some evil desire or lust are called back from good
works, they languish and are sick.


Chap. Have not others besides S. Augustine expounded that place of Exekiell.


Salt. Yes, diverse, and namely one Nicholas de Lyra, many of whose exposi: ions
are approved of the learned.


Chap. I pray you let me hear what he says of this matter.


Salt. He calls ye Pastors which be there reproved, Princes, meaning evil
Prophets, and false Prophets, and says, that they then feed themselves, when
they so set their minds on carnal delights that they care not for such as be
committed to their charge, that they eat the milk and cloth themselves, when
they snatch away their goods to maintain their own diet, and raiment, that
they kill the fat when they lay heinous matters and capital crimes to the
charge of the richer sort, that so they may come by their substance, that they
feed not the flock by example of good life, and with the word of sound
doctrine, that they strengthened not ye weak when they labored not to hinder
those which are prone and apt to vice, ye they healed not the sick when they
did revoke and call back such as were accustomed to evil, ye they bound not up
such as were broken through impatiency, when they did not kindly comfort them,
yt they caused not such as went astray to return, when they brought not again
to the true worshipping of God yt which was driven away from it by idolatry:
that they sought not yt which was lost, when they did not raise up such as
despared, by promising them par^on through the mercy of God: that they ruled
them with cruelty when they laid such burdens upon them as they were not able
to bear; that ye Sheep were dispersed without a Shepherd, when they were
scattered through diverse vices, wanting good government and teaching, and that
they were devoured of all ye beasts of ye field when they became a prey for
devils, and cruel adversaries, such as were the Assirians and Chaldeans.


Chap. I see diverse men have diverse expositions.


Salt. They may so, and all profitable, so long as they swerue not from the
Analogy of that faith and doctrine which is taught in holy writ: but if you
will have any more (...) Ezechiels salt, here it is.

Thus says the Lord God: Eze. 34.10.
Behold, I come against the Sheepheards, and will require the sheep at their
hand, and cause them to cease from feeding the sheep.


Chap. Stay salter, stay.


Salt. Why so?


Chap. Tell me, I pray thee, why does the Lord say, he will cause them to
cease from feeding, if they feed themselves and not the flock, they need not
be stayed, but rather spurred.


Salt. If one should take upon him to make you a watch, which when you have
tried it, you find to be stark naught, would not you say, this man shall
make me no more watches?


Chap. Yes.


Sal. But your meaning is, he should mar you no more: for though he took
upon him to make a good one, yet he made (...) had one and that is marring.


Chap. True.


Salt. So, many stand in the place of watchmen, which wink when they should
wake: and many in the room of feeders, which rather serve then feed, the
meaning therefore of the Lord is this, he will not suffer them to feed his
Sheep in such sort any longer.


Chap. Answer (...) to one question more, then I will trouble you with no more
questions: In the foresaid Chapter (as I remember) the Lord says: And ye my
sheep, the sheep of my pasture, are men: are all men the Lords sheep?


Salt. Hearken what he himself has said by the mouth of his only Son: Io,
10, 27, 28
My sheep hear my voice, and I know them, and they follow me.


Chap. No doubt but it shall go well with such sheep.


Salt. Mark what follows: And I will give unto them eternal life, and they
shall never perish, neither shall any man pluck them out of my hand.


Chap. I see then, if one will be a true member of Christ, and enjoy life
everlasting, he must hear Christ his voice, and follow him. But what if some
Judas preach, must I follow him?


Salt. See, you forget your self, you told me you would trouble me with no
more questions, take heed you be not one of those that are more forward in
asking questions, then obeying precepts: They which heard Judas, were not to
follow him in treason, Math. 10.4. Mat, 14.17,
he wrought to his own condemnation, but in the doctrine he taught for their
salvation: for he was sent (...) ^^ch as well as Peter, Math. 6.16
who was not to be followed when he cursed and swear that he knew not the
man, but in confessing Christ to be the son of the living God.


Chap. If Peter be not to be followed when he did evil, why should we
follow any man that is a Deputy for the Diuill. If any man dispensed with this
late pestilent practice with powder, he deserves rather to be called a
searcher for saltpeter, then a successor of Peter, and not a Vicar of Christ,
but an aid to Antichrist; but let these Salt-peter-men go, or rather shut them
up, lest they work our woe, and let me have some more of that salt for which I
came.


Salt. You shall.

I will give you pastors according to mine heart, Iet. 3, 15,
and they shall feed you with knowledge and understanding: happy are they
(friend Chapman) that have such Pastors: These are not like those watchmen and
Pastors which are pictured by the Prophet Isaiah, Isai, 56, 10.
where he says, their Watchmen are all blind, 11
they have no knowledge, they are all dumb dogs they cannot bark; they lie
and sleep, and delight in slee^ing, and these greedy dogs can never have
enough, and these Shepherds cannot understand, for they all look to their
own way, every one for his advantage, and for his own purpose.


Chap. If any man in the fear of God, and in a charitable sort should cast
this salt upon any to season them, being drowsy, dumb, and too greedy, ought
any man in anger to call him barking dog, and to reckon him in the number of
those, whom the Apostle means, when he says: Beware of Dogs.


Salt. To this I answer, that I fear me there is too much doggishnesse every
where: For God for his tender mercies sake, give us more charitable hearts one
toward another. Love, which is the badge of Christianity, is lost, we had
need make haste to seek it, lest the anger of God take us away before we can
find it.


Chap. You say well, but let me have a little more.


Salt. Take heed therefore unto your selves, Act. 10.2^.
and to all the flock whereof the holy Ghost has made you overseers to seed
the Church of God, which he has purchased with his own blood.

Let no man despise thy youth, but be unto the^ that believe, an example in
word, 1. Tim. 4.1^.
in Conversation, in Life, in Spirit, in Faith, and in pureness.

Till I come, give attendance to reading, to exhortation, to doctrine: take
heed unto thy self and unto learning, continue therein, for in so doing thou
shall save thy self, and them that hear thee.


Chap. If it be so, it is good for a Pastor to be painful and careful to
bring men to Christ which saves, but go on.


Salt. I charge thee therefore before God and before Jesus Christ, 2. Tim. 4.^.
which shall judge the quick and the dead, at his appearing, and in his
Kingdom.

Preach the word, be instant in season (to the willing, says the former book,
de Pastoribus) and out of season (that is to the unwilling says the same book)
improve, rebuke, exhort, with all long suffering and doctrine.


Chap. Is it with all long-suffering, or with all long-silence.


Salt. The word in the original is Macrothumia, which some translate lenity,
some patience, and some long, suffering, but why do you ask?


Chap. If it be long-suffering, then I gather that though the Shepherd should
see many things that grieve him, or that he likes not, yet he must not cast
of his burden then but bear, and bear long to.


Salt. It should seem so, but let me go on without interrupting, you shall now
have some Peter-Salt, which if your Shepherd, and all others lay to their
souls, they shall have less cause to fear ye Saltpeter men, which can but
kill the body.

The Elders or Priests (as some translate) which are among you (says Saint
Peter) I beseech, 1. Pet. ^
which am also an Elder, and a witness of the sufferings of Christ, and also a
partaker of the glory that shall be revealed.

Feed the flock of God which depends upon you, caring for it, not by
constraint but willingly, not for filthy lucar but of a ready mind; not as
though ye were Lords over Gods heritage, but that you may be an example to the
flock.

And when the chief Shepherd shall appear you shall receive an incorruptible
crown of glory.


Chap. Stay there; this shall suffice for this time, now tell me what I have
to pay.


Salt. I will tell you anon, but first you shall have some Salt for advantage,
which may be profitable both to your self and your Shepherd also, and that is
this.

Obey them that have the oversight of you, Heb. 3.17.
and submit your selves, 18.
for they watch for your souls, as they that must give accounts, that they may
do it with joy and not with grief for that is unprofitable for you.

Pray for us for we are assured that we have a good conscience in all things,
desiring to live honestly: So much for the vantage; now for the payment: Wish
your Shepherd from me not to set light by this Salt in regard of my
rudeness, which have shaken it forth according to my homely manner, but to
consider who made it, and to what end, my desire is it may do him good, and
this is all the payment I look for.


Chap. I thank you.


Guide. Let God have the thanks, for ye Canonical Salt is his, and not mine,
come now who is next.


Chap. Nay stay a little, and answer me to one question more ere I go, I had
forgot to ask you, who they were, and where they dwelt, whom Saint Peter
besought to feed Gods flock, did any feed Christ his Sheep while 3. Peter
lived but himself?


Guide. Yes all the rest of the Apostles, for Christ our Savior meeting them on
a mountain in Galilee, before his ascending into heaven, Math. 28.16.18.19.
said to the eleven Disciples, All power is given to me, in heaven and earth
go therefore and teach all nations, etc.


Chap. Why is there mention made but of eleven, Disciples where was the
twelfth?


Guide. The twelfth which was Judas the fraytor having thrown down himself
headlong, brast asunder in the mids and all his bowels gushed out, Acts.
1.18.
and Matthias was not chosen in his room till after the Ascension.


Chap. But who were they to whom Saint Peter wrote and beseeched to feed the
flock of God.


Guide. Saint Peter himself calls them, to whom he wrote, strangers, which
then dwelt here and there throughout Pontus Galatia, Cappadocia, Asia, and
Bithinea: among whom no doubt but there were some that could or should feed,
1. Pet. 1.1.
for the Apostle would never have besought them to do that which belonged not
to them.


Chap. So now I pray let me have some of that Salt as is good to clear the
sight of our Shepherd that stumbleth so often in his going. The fifth Chapman.



Salt. The very heathen may be one Schoolemaisters, as in many other things so
in this also, and namely Cicero, who says, qui sibi hoc sumpsit vt corrigat
mores aliorum, etc. He ye has taken upon him to correct other men's manners,
and to reprehend their faults, who will pardon him, if in any point he fail,
as not regarding his duty: these and the like speeches of Heathen men, if there
were none other, might be motives to stir both my self and all other
spiritual Salters to take heed our life be not offensive, for the which
matter among others-that be not Heathen, but godly learned Christians. In his
Epist. to the chief governor of the School of Argent. set before his comment
on they udges. Though he excludes works from justification which is free: yet
he requires a pure life, and holy actions in him which is justified, thereby
lively to express God himself, etc.
Peter Martyr seemed to be very careful, who as he himself says, reasoned
thus with himself: If unto all men, being justified only by the mercy of the
true God, through Jesus Christ our Savior, not undoubtedly by works, but freely
receiving forgiveness of sins, there remains no other thing in the course
of this short life, then that having obtained the holy Ghost, and nature being
somewhat relieved from his proper corruption, they should, by pure life and
holy actions, lively express God himself their regenerator, and Christ their
redeemer: The same thing without coubt is much more required of men of my
profession, whom the Ecclesiastical Spirit has appointed to administer lively
doctrine unto other men, that whilst they teach uprightly, by their evil deeds
they deface not the weight and authority of their doctrine, which thing if they
do (meaning if they have a care to live well) they shall in ye darkness of this
world most brightly give light unto others, and cause them to lift up the eyes
of their minds unto God, the chief fountain, head and beginning of all good
things, and to honor him with praise and most upright religion. But though the
Salt of Cicero, a wise man among the Heathen, and also this of Peter Martyr, a
godly and learned Divine among the Christians, be wholesome and fit to season,
yet sithence you came for Salt Canonical, take this.

Therefore the sin of the young men was very great before the Lord, 1. Sam. 2.17
for men abhorred the offerings of the Lord.


Chap. Who were those young men.


Salt. The sons of Eli, who were called wicked men, and such as knew not the
Lord.


Chap. So now go on.


Salt. Wherefore the Lord God of Israel says, that thine house and the house
of thy fathers, should walk before me for ever, but now the Lord says it
shall not be so, for them that honor me I will honor, and they that despise
me, shall be despised, and verse. 30.

30
There shall not be an old man in thy house.

And this shall be a sign unto thee that shall come upon thy two sons Hophni
and Phyneas, 1. Sam. 3^.4.
in one day they shall dye both.

Now therefore I have sworn unto the house of Ely that the wickedness of
Elies house shall not be purged with sacrifice, 34
nor offering for ever.

And he (that is Ezekias) brought in the Priests and the Leuits and gathered
them into the East street. 2. Chro. 29.4


And said unto them hear me ye Leuits, sanctify your selves and sanctify
the house of the Lord God of your fathers, 5
and carry forth the filthiness.

And they gathered their brethren and sanctified themselves, 15
and came according to the commandment of the King, and by the words of the
Lord, for to cleanse the house of the Lord.

Their Priests have broken my law and have defiled my holy things, Ezekiel. 22.16.
they have put no difference between the holy and profane, neither discerned
between the unclean and the clean, and have hid their eyes from my
Sabbothes, and I am profaned among them.

If you will not here it, etc. I will curse your blessings, (...). 2.3.
etc.

Why see thou thy moate in thy brothers eye and perceiuest not the beam that
is in thine own eye. Math. 7.3.


Or how say thou to thy brother, suffer me to cast out the moat that is in
thine eye, 4
and behold a beam in thine own eye.

Hypocrite first cast out the beam out of thine own eye, 5
and then shall thou see clearly to cast out the moat out of thy brothers eye.


Chap. I will carry this to him though perhaps I be brow-beaten for my labor.


Salt. If you be more faulty herein then he, I cannot blame him though he
frown upon you.


Chap. Leave that to him that judges righteously, and tell me what I have to
pay.


Salt. That which I say to you, I say to all the rest, yt I be troubled no more
about ye payment: ye price of ye Salt, whether you take much or little; for your
selves or others, is this, use it well yt it may do you good, and give God the
glory: if you contemn this or the like ye shall be brought home to you, by
what Salter so ever, you shall pay dearly for it to ye Salt-maker, to whom
every one of us, must give account for himself, at the day appointed.


Cha. Shall no man give account for others?


Salt. It is not said, every one of us shall give an account for himself only;
there be some that shall give account for others also. The Maigistrate shall
give account for his governing or misgouerning the people: the Pastor for not
feeding or mis-feeding his flock: fathers and masters of familyes if, with
Abraham, they command not their household to keep the ways of the Lord: Genesis
18.19.
nor exhort them to take heed they deserve no evil report, as did the sons
of Eli, 1. Sam. 2.23.
All these should be as watchmen to sound the Trumpet when they see dangers at
hand, and they which are warned must learn this lesson. Ezekiel 33.^.
He that receives warning shall save his life: But if these men see the wrath
of God hanging over the heads of such as be committed to their charge, by
reason of their sins, and give no warning; then the blood of their charge
will be required at their hands, and the other shall be taken away for their
iniquities.


Chap. This may seem hard not being warned.


Sal. You must understand that this was not spoken of such as might plead
ignorance, if that might excuse, as indeed it cannot in this case, because the
Heavens declaring the glory of God, and the firmament, with other of his
works, have (as it were) sounded out unto all lands, that Man having not only
eyes, with the Beasts, to gaze upon these things, but also reason, and
understanding with Angels, (though not so perfect) to consider that these
works being so pure, excellent, and glorious, must needs be created,
governed, and preserved, by some most pure, wise, pourefull, and glorious
Spirit: If he dishonor this Divine Majesty, he must not look to be free from
al stripes, though he deserve not so many, as when besides the fight of the
mighty works, he hears also the sound of his most holy word, as no doubt
they to whom Ezekiell was sent, did, or might have done. For they had the
wrytings of Moses, and others, whereby they might discern good from evil,
light from darkness, humble obedience from wilful transgression. So that
though the Prophets, and watchmen of their time had kept silence; yet they
themselves had knowledge sufficient to take from them all excuses: And so had
all other Nations no doubt some light leaft, whereby they knew that great
wickedness doserued great punishment, otherwise the Lord, which is most
righteous, would not have destroyed Cities, and commonweals, for neglecting
to give the wicked that which they had deserved.


Chap. Can you name any Commonwealth that has gone to wrack, for winking at
wickedness? If you can, let me hear something of one, and I will be gone?


Salt. I have read of one Scedasus, who though he were of little wealth, yet
neat, in his House, Os^rius de Regis ^ns^it. 2^3.
and Hospitable, according to his ability; this man had two fair Daughters,
which were deflowred in his absence, by two young men of Sparta, in their
return from Boetia, these vngrations youths, after they had deflowred them,
slew them, notwithstanding their most grievous lamentation, and threw them into
a Well: When their Father came home, a Welpe took him often times by the Coat,
and ran crying, and making mo^e toward the Well; whereupon he searching,
found their Bodies, and went straight to Lacedemon in great heuinesse
complaining, and requiring justice of the Governors* called Ephori, and
others, and seeing no man regarding his heaviness, he ran (at last being out
of his wits) through the midst of the City, lifting his hands toward the
Sun, sometimes striking the earth, sometimes calling on the Furies for
reuengement; And so at last killed himself: But in short space that
Commonwealth, Sceleris atque flagitij illius paenas exoluit, was by Gods just
judgment paid home, for suffering such horrible wickedness to go unpunished.


Chap. So now I leave you.


The sixth Chapman.
Chap. I am next.


Sal. You should say, I would be next, as he said that offered largely for the
Benefice, before the bell rang out for the old Parson. What salt would you
have?


Chap. I would have Salt, to season a pinching Patron.


Sal. Verily I do hear many complain of ye vnco^scionable dealing of many
Patrons, some care not for ye feeding of souls, so their bodies may have ye
greatest portion, of that which in time of less light was allotted to ye Church
ministers: A modicum must serve many Ministers now, for fear of surfeting:
Some others would seem willing to have a preaching Minister, and to give the
Benefice freely; But their Wives, or some of their Children, must see more
Angels then one descend, ere the Scholar that has been long payned with
poverty, be put into the Poole of Bethesda to be cured: If Homer come thither
empty-handed, there is no place for him, or if they refrain to covenant with
him, because of his oath, which he is to take before the Bishop: yet some of
his Friends must promise, or enter into bands, to pay a round sum of money,
and that he which would be the next incumbent, must not look for such and
such commodities, and this is not only a shrewd pinching of purses, but also a
great trouble of mind to him that must take an oath to perform none of their
promises; for he is in a straight on both sides, i^ he pay not, then his
friends must pay, or loose their credit: if he pay ye which he promised, then
he is for-sworne, but he that fears God, howsoever he be willing to be
thankful, yet in no case will he be found perinr'd.


Chap. A number care not what becoms of the Parson and people, so they may
pocket the pounds, but therein they walk not in the steps of Abraham, for he
faid to the King of Zodom: Give me the persons, take thou the goods.


Salt. It should seem that such Patrons do not, Gen, 14.
or will not know, what belongs to a good Patron.


Chap. Whom do you think to be a good Patron?


Salt. He that is careful to present such a Pastor as has a good report,
both for his learning and life, and that is so far from reserving any
commodity, that belongs to the Minister, to himself, that he does what in
him lies to keep him from taking any wrong: he will cause his Tenants to make
known all the glebe, and all the customs of the Parish for paying of tithes,
calls on the incumbent to repair the houses, forbids him to make any
spoil of any thing that is on ye ground, and sees ye his Executors carry away
no Tables, Forms, Graners, Glass, nor any thing that was given to the
Parsonage, neither does himself desire to have any of his own Tithes, without
recompense.


Chap. If the Patron should be so careful, for the Parson, and have nothing
for his labor, but a power to present, he may seem to be worse dealt with,
then a Gentleman's Bailiffe for he has something for his pains.


Sal. So has every good patron, for he is honored of men, and beloved of God,
as every Magistrate is that does good in his place.


Chap. True, but yet few delight in worship, without wealth: If Patrons reserve
their ownetithes, will not their wealth be the more?


Chap. If the Patron without contenting the incumbent, will keep his own
Tithes to himself; men will say he gives nothing to the Leacher for his
pains: The maintenance he has, is from the rest of the Parish. Many think to
thrive, by withholding that which by the Laws is due to an other, and by
shifting their Cattle out of one ground into an other, to save some Lambs, and
Fleeces, which might fall to Tithes, not regarding that saying of S. Paul: If
we sow unto you spiritual things, is it a great matter if we reap your
carnal things? I should think that all such as think to thrive by
covetousness, and fraud, have good cause to amend, lest their thriuing be
like theirs that neglected the building of the Lords house, to whom the Lord
said: Consider your own ways in your hearts: You have sown much, ^^agg. 1.
verse. 7* 6*
and bring in little: Yea eat, but you have not enough: yea drink, but you
are not filled: yea cloth you, but you be not warm: and he that earneth
wages, puts the wages into a broken bag. Yea looked for much, and lo it
came to little: and when ye brought it home, I did blow upon it. etc. Meaning
that he would curse their blessings, as he threatens those Priests in Malach,
which gave not glory to his name. Mal. 2.2.
I tell thee friend Chapm^n, there is neither Prince, Priest, nor people, ye
God regards, if they regard not his wo^^. If we would believe ye word of god,
we ^ould hate wrong, and do right to every man; we would not make love to give
place to our stomachs; we would not think to thrive by griping, but believe
the blessings are upon the head of the Righteous, Pro. 10. verse. 6.7.22.
and that the memorial of the just shall be blessed, but the name of the
wicked shall rotte, and that the blessing of the Lord makes rich, Pro. 15.8.
And that better is a little with righteousness, then great revenues without
equity. And that a man with a wicked eye hastes to riches, Pro 28* 22*
and knows not that poverty shall come upon him.


Cha. These, and the like places, should move men to love just dealing, but
would you not have Ministers show kindness to them that presented them, and be
careful to please his neighbors.


Sal. That Pastor may seem a very Churl, and void of all humanity, that will
not show himself thankful to his Patron which preferred him, and very
troublesome, if he love not quietness: But if he should let every one have his
way, he should have but a little money in store to pay Tenths, and Subsidies, to
repair the Chauncell, and other Houses; to buy Books, and to relieve the
poor. etc.


Chap. Truly it is fit (that since the Patrons Soul, as well as others, is
committed to the Pastors charge,) the Pastor should do what in him lies, to
reform him, and the rest, in a charitable sort.


Sal. You say well, in a charitable sort: yet so, as he speak home to their
conscience, least he daube (as the Prophet says) with untempered mortar.


Chap. Well, since the word of God is fit Salt to season men's Souls, let me
have some that is good: First to stir up the Patron I come for to be more
careful to provide a good Pastor, and then some to move him to deal more
liberally with him, then his present greedines will suffer him.


Sal. Here is for him, if he will suffer it to come near him. Mat. 15.14.
If the blind lead the blind, both fall into the dytch.

Pray the Lord of the Harvest that he would send forth Laborers into his
Harvest. ^^at. 9.38.


Where there is no vision, Pro. 19.28.
the people decay. Where no Counsel is, the People fall: Pro* 11.1^.
But where many Councellers are, there is health.

Whosoever shall call upon the name of the Lord shall be saved: To. 10.14.
But how shall they call on him in whom they have not believed? And how shall
they believe in him of whom they have not heard? And how shall they hear
without a Preacher: And how shall they preach, except they be sent? Isaiah.
52.7 To. 10.15.
as it is written.

How beautiful are the feet which bring glad tidings of peace, and bring glad
tidings of good things.


Chap. Many say, that their Preachers bring not tidings of peace to them, but
troubles of conscience.


Sal. As the Poole, into the which the Diseased were put, did not cure before
the Angel of the Lord had troubled the Water: Io. 5.4.
So the conscience of him that is in error, and out of the way, can have no
true peace before it be well shaken and sifted with the word of God: It is good
rubbing on the Galle, if so be that men do heal withal: But as I wish your
Paymaister more libecall; so would I wish your Leuite to take heed he
complain not without cause, least it turn to his own hurt.


Chap. You say well, but this Salt which you have delivered, may serve to teach
men, that unless their guides have the eyes of knowledge and understanding,
and with the same guide them in the right way, they are like to fall into the
ditches of error, heresy, superstition, idolatry, and all kind of iniquity:
It serves also to teach that if we will be reaped, and made ready for the
Lords Barn, we must not think it sufficient that our Haruest-men come in
their Iackets or wastcoates, (which Workmen in Harvest commonly lay a side
because they bring more heat, and sweat) but also pray that they may come,
not with blunt, but with sharp Sickels, and work with them discreetely, and
painefully: But now let me have some Salt to season him for dealing so hardly
with his Pastor, that he is not able to hold out, his maintenance is so small.
In many places there is little paid out of Parsonages to the Colleges, in
respect of vallue, nor to the Minister, in respect of his labor, and charge:
What is seven pound in pecunijs to the Minister, or sixteen pound to the
College, out of seven score?


Sal. You shall have the best I can help you to.


The Labourer is worthy of his Wages: (...) 10.7.
who goes a warfare. etc.

Who feeds a flock, 1. Cor. 9.7.
and eatheth not of the milk of the flock?

If we have sown unto you spiritual things, is it a great thing if we reap
your carnal things.

Do you not know that they which minister about the Holy things, eat of the
things of the Temple. They which waighte of the Alters, (he meneth not Mass
Priests, nor their Alters, but Jewish Priests, in time of the Law) are
partakers with the Altar.

So also has the Lord ordained that they which preach the Gospel should live
of the Gospel: Gal. 6* 6.
let him that is taught in the word, make him that has taught him, pertaker
of all his goods.

Now we beseech you brethren, 1. These. 5.11*
that you know them which labor among you, and are over you in the Lord and
admonish you.

That you have them in singular love, for their work sake, be at peace among
your selves.

Will you have any more?

Chap. I think this be more then our Saltmans pay-maister can well digest,
therefore let us try first how this will work.


Sal. Well, let charity rule your thoughts, hope the best, and assure your
self, that they which have more care of their foure-footed sheep then of
their own Souls will bring their repenting oil when the deores be shut. what
a lamentable blindness is this, y^ men when they see any of their Sheep in
an evil taking should check, and chide their Shepherd in such sort, as they
do, saying, come on you idle Lubber, y^ lazy Fellow, a rope on thy hyde,
here be Sheep in a trim pickle indeed; thou come Cloaked, and Hooded, as
if thou did watch among them day and night, armed for all storme^s and
tempests, and thou carryest thy Tarre-boxe to dingle to dangle upon thy hook,
and thy bow of thy Sheeres peep out of thy scrip, as though thou would do
a great act; but look upon these Sheep here, do not see what a wrigling
they make, and how of^ they lie down, biting and gnawing where they are
payned; put off your combersome Cloak, youly there marrhant, lay hands on
these poor Seepe, searrh them well, shed the wool, and where thou find any
scurse scrape it off, and cut away those durty daglockes with thy Sheeres, and
do not tar them as if thou were afraid to hurt them, but make it to gee to
the skin, and labor by diligence to save that which is ready to perrish by
thy negligence. It is lamentable I say, that a man should so take on with his
Shepherd for a seely sheep, and have not the wit or the will to speak thus
to his spiritual Pastor, if he find him negligent: Sir you reap our carnal
things, to the end you should do what in you lies to make us sound Sheep,
and to bring us to Christ's fould, therefore I pray you if you can do more then
read, and be allowed to preach, stir up your gift, and when you have ^^ne
reading, gather some profitable notes from your text, and exhort us to carry
them away; apply the word to our consciences, spare us not, tar us not
slightly, search us thoroughly, though we strive and struggle, do you your
duty; if we crush our poor neighbors, if our lives be licentious, if we be
slack in hearing, or whatsoever is a miss, tell us of it privately, and if we
hold on as not regarding your counsel, lay before us the judgments of God,
due to such sins as you shall find among us, that it may may appear, that you
would not have us perrish, and if you see any of us ouerladen with the burden
of sin, and thoroughly grieved for the same, then take pains to ease and
comfort us with the sweet promises of the Gospel, promised to the penitent.


Chap. Alack, alack, these thoughts are far from our Salt-mans pay-maister,
he looks straight to the neighbors for the ^ithing of corn, milk, wool,
lamb, etc. he passes not whether the Salt-man can or will season him, so that
he be content to take ten in the hundred, on this condition, that he never
look for the principal.


Salt. It is marvel if your Salt-man have any good skill in seasoning that he
will yield to so little maintenance.


Chap. Alas friend Salter what would you have men to do, when they have
ouercharged their friends, and often emptied their purses, few Patrons send unto
the Universities, to seek for the skillful, and if any such seek to the
Patrones (I speak not of all but of the greater part) they must yield to their
conditions, or else if Peter-Preacher will not, Rowland-Reader will, and so it
is wrapped up with omnia been, for that men have not eyes to see, what in the
sight of God, is done, male, or else have forgotten that it is appointed unto
men that they shall once die: Heb 9.
and after that comes judgment: But I pray you before you go any further
give me leave to ask one question.


Salt. Nay first I pray thee answer me to one thing while it is in my head.


Chap. What is that?


Salt. As you asked me what I would have Students to do, when they have
ouercharged their friends: so I ask you if the reverend fathers before they
admit any to take an oath of them, and require them upon their oath to make it
known, whether they were presented freely or not, would you have them run
into perjury.


Chap. God forbid I should be of that mind, having learned that the Lord
himself will be a swift witness as against soothsayers, adulterers, Mal. 3.5.
such as wrongfully keep back the hirelings wages, vex the widow and the
fatherless, oppress the stranger, etc. so also against such, as be false
swearers, therefore I hold if they have no other means to live by, better a
thousand fold, go to plough then to periure. But as he that is presented must
beware of this, so others must take heed that neither for gain nor malice they
draw that into the compass of Simony, which the Law will not suffer to be
drawn so far, and that they discourage none from being thankful to their
benefactors.


Salt. Now I have heard your answer, let me here your question, for I shall
have leisure to talk with you till more Chapmen come.


Chap. You said even now, that if a man should see his Sheep in ill plight, he
would reprove his Shepherd for his negligence, and that notwithstanding he met
hm, having his cloak on his back, his hook in his hand, his sheares in his
scrip, etc. as if he were a right skillful Sheepeheard, yet all this would not
satisfy the master, but the Shepherd must put off his cloak, and fall to
work. But what if some skilful or paineful Shepeheards, who sildome or never
use to fodder and tar their Sheep cloaked, for that they thought it would be
cumbersome, and a hinderance unto them, nor ever used to crosse-brand their
Lambs, because they would not seem to be of their mind which think that this
mark has force and virtue* to drive away the wolf? What I say if such
Shepeheards, should be commanded by the Sheepe-reeue (whom the Lord had
charged to see all things ordered) that always when they come into the fold,
they come in white cloakes, and that when they washed their Lambs, they would
crossebrand them, not meaning thereby to fear the Wolf (who, if being
permitted he durst set upon the owner, by all likelihood would not shrink
from that brand) but to show that the owner, to recover his Sheep from the
Wolf, and other wild beasts, Math. 4.
had put himself in great danger, and endured greiuous things, would you have
such Shepherds, (who might not stay except they yielded) to obey, or fly the
field, and so leave both flock and maintenance?


Sal. Do you know any such Sheepeheards?


Chap. It may be I do.


Salt. If they be so skillful as you say, what should you ask me being but
a sily Salter, what is best for them to do, they know better then I what to
do in such a case, for mine own part if I found these things so troublesome
to me, that by no means I could frame my self to yield, and that the
Sheepe-reeue would not be entreated to bear with me (though I brought all the
reasons that are against them) I would resolve with my self to depart quietly
and commend my Flock to him to whom one ye is now a Saint in heaven commended
the Shepherds of Ephesus, Act. 20.32.
but if I felt them not so cumbersome, as belike some have done, who as I have
heard, after they had yielded to the cloak, and the rest yielded up the Ghost,
I would choose rather to stay and fodder my Flock cloaked, then for a matter
not so heavy to me, to leave both them and the maintenance which God had
provided for me and mine.


Chap. But they will say* the same God which provided for the^ before, can
provide for them after.


Sal. True, but for my part if I may enjoy the old provision with any
quietness, I think not good to seek for a new, but since those Shepeheards
which cannot frame themselves to yield, have been so diligent in their calling
as you say, some man pe^haps would marvel why authority should be so loath to
tolerate them.


Chap. This noble Sheepe-reeue, having herevnder the owner of the Sheep the
chiefest stroke, and being appointed high Steward of the whole household,
thinks it more reason the Shepeheard should yield to him, then he to them,
in that which he is persuaded to be most convenient, for that not they, but he,
with the advice of the wise, etc, has authority to order the whole as he
shall think good, having always an eye to the will of the chief Lord. Now as
the rest of the officers are known by their apparel, so he would have the
Shepherds discerned from others, by the garments appointed for them also,
only as an outward mark, otherwise he knows well that the chiefest note of a
good Shepherd is his diligence in feeding.


Salt. So it is for the owner of the Sheep to teach all Shepeheards what is
their chiefest duty, said not to one of the chief Shepherds, if thou love
me, were such a cloalt but feed my Sheep: but as you said the white cloak
was appointed for an external note, so I say there may be other causes why
this noble and wise Sheepe-reeue does s^ straightly require the same and the
like, as to try men's obedience, to draw those ye be divided to more unity,
which if we do embrace (as an ancient Shepherd says) tenemus charitatem, Aug.
con. lit. potil l. 2. cap. 77.
we hold fast charity, so that if unity and uniformity be herein respected,
we may not think it is done to try men's constancy, as did the Emperor
Constantinus father of Constantine, who on a time feigned that he would put out
all the Christians which would abide in their Religion, from their honors and
offices: but they which are in very deed, godly of their own free will, gave
over their dignities, choosing rather to give place to dignities, then to
depart from Christ: but it turned to good unto them, for the Emperor embraced
them, and those which denied Christ, to keep their dignities, he utterly
removed them from himself, saying: that they would not be faithful unto him,
which had broken their faith unto God.


Chap. Our Sheep-reeue fayneth no such matter in requiring these things, but
does indeed seek uniformity.


Sal. He does it not then as one superstitiously addicted unto them, or putting
any holiness in them?


Chap. No friend Salt-man he is counted, of all them that know him, so far to
hate superstitious vanities, that if he should see any to make more accoumpt of
shadows, then of matters of substance, he would either take away the abuse, or
deal with the^ as that noble Sheepe-reeue Ezekiah did with the brazen Serpent.


Salt. He brake it in pieces when he saw men burn incense unto it.


Chap. True, and he is said to have done uprightly in the sight of the Lord, so
that after him was none like him among all the Kings of Judah, neither were any
such before him.


Salt. You say right, and this sanctified commendation moved a learned
Shepeheard, ^^il^ con ^es. ^a* pa^ 365.
yet living in this land, to say, a figure of Christ erected by Gods own
commandment: and serving to put all Isreal's posterity in mind of the wonders,
which their fathers saw in the wilderness, when it was abused, defaced, and
the fact allowed by Gods own mouth.

And herein he agrees with another famous Shepeheard, more ancient then he,
by more then twelve hundred years, who speaking of the same Serpent amongst
other miracles says: Aug. de ^iu^e. Dei. l. 10.^.8.
Quem sane serpentem propter facti memoriam reseruatum, cum ^upulus postea
errans tanquam idolum colere caepisset, Ezekias Rex, religiosa potestate Deo
seruiens, cum magna pietatis laud contriuit: which Serpent surely being
reserved for a remembrance of that which was done, when afterward the people
erring began to worship it as an idol, King Ezekiah serving God with a
religious power brake it in pieces, with great commendation of piety. But since
you have put me in mind of some speeches of that learned Shepeheard which yet
lives in the land: give me leave to call to mind what ye same man in the same
book under the name of Theophilus, says to Philander, touching such as would
subdue men's consciences to that which was flat against the express word of the
eternal God, we must not rebel, says he, and take arms against the Prince,
as you affirm we may, but with reverence and humility serve God before the
Prince, and that is nothing against our oath.

And again he says: if you can excuse us before God, when you mis-leade us,
we will serve him as you shall appoint; otherwise if every man shall answer for
himself, good reason he be master of his own conscience, in that which
touches him so near, and no man shall excuse him for; and a little after he
has these words: The poorest wretch may be supreme governor of his own
heart. Princes rule the public and external actions of their Countries, but
not the consciences of men.


Chap. But the words of that reverend and learned Pastor are not so be taken as
if he thought it not lawful for Christian Princes by laws to urge such as
have been misled in superstition and Idolatry to be hearers of Gods word,
which ought to guide our consciences, and by which they may be better
instructed, and brought to a more sound and pure worshipping, etc.


Salt. No, he is rather to be thought in this case to agree with another
learned pastor, Meet Mo^^y (...) 1.
who speaking of such men, says: When they are well instructed and taught, the
Magistrates must compel them to sound and pure worshippings which are prescribed
in holy Scriptures, for ye Magistrate may not suffer his Citizens to live
without exercises of godliness, for the end of civil rule is, that the
Citizens should live both virtuously and happily: and who sees not but that
godliness, and the worshipping of God is the chief of all virtues. But
peradventure some will say, if a Prince should compel those to the right use of
the Sacraments which are not persuaded of the truth, he should drive them
headlong into sin, so far is it off from setting forward their salvation,
wherefore I think it good to make a distinction between that which is off, or
by it self, and that which is at adventure and by hap, or as they are wont to
speak in schools, that which comes per accident, that is by chance: the
Magistrate in this thing which we have now in hand, sets forth to his
subjects that thing which is of it self right, good, and just: but that sin
thereby comes that happens nothing at all by his default, but rather by
those men's incredulity or mis-beleefe, whereof he is not to be accused: when
as he has diligently labored to have his Citizens well instructed, neither
the Papists which at this day are suffered of Christian Magistrates are
ignorant that we ought to have in use the Sacraments instituted by the Lord:
wherefore they cannot justly complain of their Magistrates, if they will have
them uprightly and in due honor ministered unto them: moreover they which
object these things unto us must diligently mark this, that by the same way we
may cavil against God, for he has set forth unto men his law, which is most
perfect, to be kept of them: shall we say unto him? we are weak and of a
corrupt and vicious nature, neither can we perform thy commandments as thou
co^mandest, whether we do against that which thou have commanded, or whether we
endeavor our selves to perform, that which thou have bidden, we shall ever
sin because we shall faint, neither can we obey as we should do, wherefore
whatsoever we dee we shall not avoid sin: If aany br^^^lingly should speak
these things against God, might not he by good right answer: they be just and
right which I have set forth unto you to her observed, but in that you are
seeble and we^ke, it ought not to by counted a fault in me, for I have
excellently holp^^ your weakness, which for your sakes have given my Son
unto the death, if you shall believe only in him, whatsoever you shall not
accomplish in performing my precepts, it shall not be imputed to you to
everlasting death. So also may a good Prince answer, I require of you those
things which are written in the word of God, and which are decent and (...)
edify, wherefore if your opinion or conscience be against it, that is not to
be ascribed unto me, which have diligently labored that you might not be
ignorant of the truth and miserably perish, for I have diligently seen unto
that you should be taught and instructed in the truth, and so will I still go
forward in exhorting, admonishing and commanding you, but read you the holy
Scriptures, hear your teachers, and pray unto God to open the eyes of your
minds: these things if the Prince shall say unto those men which do so cavil
against him, I do not see by what right or by what means he can be reprehended.

But it return to the Shepeheards that refuse or at least be loath to use the
white cloak, (which has another name usurped by car-men and carters, when
they put on their sauecoates) I pray thee tell me are they married.


Chap. Yes, neither is it to be thought (marriage being honorable among all
men, and the forbidding of it a point of devilish doctrine) that the Shepeheard
does mislike that, only he would have them to make choice of such as be
modest, and virtuous, without greedy scraping, or taking any man's house over
his head, or bestowing more upon them then is decent and necessary, that by
their good carrying they may do what in them lies to stop the mouths of such
as swell against them, as misliking their marriages more then any other. Not
any families of Beare-wards, Tinkers, Pedlers and Hog-heards, so trouble the
commonwealth, belike as the children of these married Shepherds, some as it
should appear by their books have studied Arithmeticke to learn to multiply,
and by multiplying to set down how many thousands of such men's children might
be borne since the beginning of Queen Elizabeth reign, they are afraid
belike that the professors of the Gospel should become mightier then they:
Though some grudge at increase: (...) S^lomon ^aith: In the ^^^^^^de of (...)
^^ple is (...) ho^^^r of a King. Prou. 1.1.28.
I hope they be not so cruel as in their hearts to wish that our midwiues
would do with them as they did in Egypt with the males of the Hebrews.


Salt. Surely I think that if in ye house of any of our Shepherds, some maid
ye live unmarried should prove with child, these multipliers would say it was
the masters deed: If there Shepherds in times past had no more children of
their own the^ they had wives of their own, it is well for them, I judge them
net, I remember an old fellow came diverse times to my door, with these
speeches: I was borne in this town, id est Rector,
and the Shepherd had me call him uncle, but the townes-folke said he was my
father,


Chap. Yea, but such fellows come not within the multiplyers account, but I
pray you tell me why did you ask whether the Shepherds we talked of before
were married.


Salt. You shall hear: what if the laws were such, that whosoever would not
feed his Sheep and far them in the attire of Turkish Shepeheards, should be
divorced, ought any whom God has coupled together to be separated, rather then
this should be yielded unto?


Chap. I think no, for whatsoever the attire were, there dealings otherwise
would sufficiently declare that they were no Turks nor worshippers of Mahomet.


Salt. Well then do you not think that when men that fear God having will and
skill do take pains with their flocke-feeding, both Sheep and Lambs, do you
not think I say, that such men loving their flock, and the Flock hearing
their voice, are coupled to their Flocks by the Lord himself?


Chap. Yes.


Salt. Why then should not they choose to wear their white garments (though
Turkish Shepherds should wear, or the Shepherds of the Idol His in Egypt
had worn it) rather then for this and such like matters, be as it were
divorced from their Flocks, May not we use myrrh, aloes, and cinnamon, E^on.
7.17.
because the woorish woman persumeth her head therewith.


Chap. She abused those things and the ornaments named in the 16. verse. to
serve sin in the chamber not in the Church.

May not we sweeten the Church with frank ensence and use such things as our
governors call decent, because these things were abused to superstition do you
think that any of those Shepeheards which use these cloakes here, make such
accoumpt of them as the Shepeheards in Italy made of their apparel, touching
whom a skillful Shepeheard writes thus.


Salt. (...) in preparation the Mass. ca. 4.
Where good is hourers are wont to cast of their clothes, when they go about
their work: the B. and Priests do clean contrary, putting garment upon
garment, when as they go to work: and a little after he says, that the Aube
upon the gowns, is, as they interpret it, in steed of a shirt of male, and
therewith represents the gown which Herod gave to Jesus Christ in a mockery,
ye girdle signifies a bow, and ye scourge wherewith they scourged Christ, and
the little cord wherewith the stole is tied to his girdle signifies his
quiver, ye stole, that is to say the breast plate, which goes about the neck,
and is crossed over the belly like a S. Andrews cross, etc. serves for a
lance to shake against the enemy, and also in steed of ye cord wherewith Jesus
Christ was bound when they scourged him, the maniple is his mace, etc. the
chisible is his bucklea, etc.


Chap. To my remembrance I have heard a Preacher say, that one Doctor Durand,
has some significations too.


Salt. Yes, he says Amictus est pro galea, In ration. li. ^^. cap. 3. See
defense of Ap. p. 39^.
etc. his amice is his head-peece, his Albe is his coat of male, his girdle is
his bow, his subsingle is his quiver, his stole is his spear, his maniple is
his club, his chisible is his Larget, and in the end he says. Haec sunt arma
quibus pontifex, vel sacerdos armari debet contra spirituales nequitias
pugnaturus. These be the pieces wherewith the B. or Priest must he harnised,
that will fight against the spiritual wickedness.


Chap. Have you read any speeches of any of the Popes touching appparell?


Salt. Some write that Pope Caelestinus the first says, Discernendi sumus a
plebe doctrina, Cae^e, 1. in Epi. ad Epis^ Galli^. cap. 1. ^i^ed in defen. Apo.
p. 401.
non vest: conuersatione, non habitu: mentis puritate non cultu: Si enim
studere cuperemus nouitate traditum nobis a patribus ordinem calcabimus, vt
locum vacuum superstitionibus faciamus, docendi potius sunt rudium animi quam
illudendi, nec imponendum est illoru^ occulis sed mentibus infundenda praecepta
sunt: We must be known from the lay people by our doctrine, not by our coat:
by our conversation not by our apparel: by the pureness of our mind, not by
the attire of our body: for if we once begin to devise novelties, we shall
tread our fathers orders under foot, and make room for superstition, the minds
of the ignorant ought to be taught and not to be mocked, neither may we go
about to dazell their eyes, but rather ought to pour wholesome doctrine into
their hearts.


Chap. I take this to be his meaning, that if one came in a Shepherds weed,
and do not feed he does nothing but mock them with shows, and not that he
would have a Bishop go like a butcher, or a Minister like a milner.


Salt. You may be sure he had no such meaning deither do I think that the
Ministers of the Church of Bethelem, were so indiscreet: though Saint Jerome
describing the orders of that Church says, Hieroni. ad Marcell.
In vest nulla discretio, vtcunque placuerit incedere nec detractionis est nec
laudis: In apparel there is no difference, there is no wondering, howsouer a
man list to go, it is neither slandred nor praised.


Chap. But our Shepherds may not go as they list, In Q. M. time
but according to the orders set down, and they say they are the more
unwilling to yield, for that some wolves which did devour not only many poor
Sheep, but also some worthy Shepherds in this land, did use some apparel
suitable to this that is appointed to be worn.


Salt. Unless I be deceived some of those Shepherds that were burnt to ashes
did wear the same.


Chap. If they did I think it was more for the peace of the Church then for
any fancy they had to it, otherwise they might have devised decent apparel
differing from that of their enemies, the knew well if Saul had Ioued Steven he
would never have kept the clothes of him that stoned him.


Salt. Saul kept the persecutors clothes as one consenting to his death: and
he did it willingly, and as one that hated Steuens doctrine, but these reverend
fathers, whose love to the Gospel and suffering for ye same, is worthy to be
remembered, while the Sun and Moon keep their course (though some whose filthy
idolatry cannot be but hated of the jealous God, do call them stinking Mattyrs)
these godly and true zealous men I say, did not consent but lament for the
bloody butchering of all that trusted to be saved by the mercy of God toward
them through the merits of Jesus Christ our only redeemer: so ye howsoever
some of them thought good not only to keep them, but also to were such things
for a time, yet it is well known they did as much detest their adversaries
cruelty, as Saul converted was sorry for his persecuting: as those grave, wise,
and godly men, thought good to bear with the weakness of men then, hoping
that in time they would become perhaps stronger, though things fell not out to
their expectations, so now it may be those that are in authority think that
the wearing of ^his coat, would be a politic kind of ^hewing-horne (if I
may so call it without ^ffence) to draw such as are backewards to ^^ng another
note: so that the Shepeheards ^ou speak of, if they may with any quiet^^esse
of conscience, shall do well, as I think ^eing now urged, to obey, least they
seem ^o such as be in authority rather opiniatiue, ^hen zealous.


Chap. It may be these Shepeheards are ^erswaded that it is no more expedient
for (...) professor of the Gospel to wear these things, Tertul. de Coron.
millitis.
then in Tertullians judgment (as I ^aue heard) for a Christian to go as the
^leathen did with a laurel garland upon their head.


Sal. It was meet that the Christians should abstain from that, Beatus
Rhenanus in argu^^^^^^ in libro Tertul. de Co^ron. iml.
as Beatus Rhenanus says, for these causes; Partem ne infir^nior ex
Christianis offenderetur, partim ^e echunici in suis erroribus co^firmarenter,
dum rectius putant esse quod etiam Christianos obseruare vident: partly least
any of the weaker Christians should be offended, partly least the Heathen also
should be encouraged in their errors thinking yt thing, for that the
Christians themselves do it to be ye better, but if you have any more to say
touching these Shepeheards, speak quickly for I would feign make an end of
this matter.


Chap. What if some of their Sheep should judge according to the outward
appeerance, and say if our Shepeheards yield to any thing which heretofore
they have misliked, we will come to the fold with the inside of our cloakes
outward, do you think it would not grieve our Shepeheards to hear this?


Salt. If they have fed their Sheep with sound fodder heretofore, let them do
so still, let them in that point use the same whistle; and the same note, and
the wiser sort (things being as they be) will think never yt worse of the^.
Hungry Sheep yt be not wanton, will hearken to the note, and not stand
staring on the coat, they seed upon fodder and not upon color, upon substance
and not upon shows.


Chap. But it may be if they should yield to this, they should be urged
further.


Salt. And it may be if they could or would yield so far, they might find
such favor: being skillful and painful Shepherds, yt they should be urged
no further: Howsoever it be, God grant for Christ his sake, that both
commanders, and such as be commanded may do his will: But now I see more
Chapmen therefore tell me quickly what ^isease he has whom you called a man
of my ^oate, for our digressing to others, has ^ade us almost forgetful of
him, for whom you came.


Cha. It may be ere I come home to that man, I may meet with some of those
Shepherds we have talked of, therefore if you have any Salt to season them,
let me ^aue some.


Salt. I know there is not any Canoni^all Salt that sauoreth of obedience, but
they have it already, and know how to use ^t.


Chap. Have you no other Salt here?


Sal. If Canonical Salt will not serve, what do you ask for other, I have but
a ^ittle other Salt here, and touching these matters, I remember I have some
in a Lattine box, made by one, whose labors in searching for the truth, all
that love the truth are to praise God.


Chap. I pray let me have that box, and if it be too heard for me to open, I
will get some that have skill to help me.


Salt. I know by some of your former speeches, that you can make a shift to
open a harder Lattine box then this.


Chap. Well let me see it.


Sal. Si non licet obtinere quod cupimus, fe^ramus illos defectus non
approbemus, modo (...) subsit illic impietas, aliudue dei verbo repugnans, vt
si quod, Call. in quadam Epistola.
verbi gratia, idolatriae specime^ existeret illi ad mortem vsque resisti a
nobi^ oporteret, vbi vero Doctrina ipsa sana at que pura est ac ceremoniae ad
ciuilem quandam honestatem vel decorum vsurpantur, silentio nobi^ praetereunda
sunt ista magis quam vt little occasion ad disceptationes et grauiores motus
veniendum sit.


Chap. Will you give me leave to open it here before I go hence?


Sal. Yes.


Chap. If we may not obtain that which we desire. let us bear those defects,
not approve them, see that no impiety be there under, or any other thing
repugnant to the word of God, as if for examples sake thereshould be any kind
of Idolatry, we ought to resist it, even to the death; But where the Doctrine
it self is sound and pure, and the ceremonies used for some civil honesty,
and decency; these things are rather to be passed over of us with silence,
then that for their cause we should come to wrangling, and more grievous
broils: now if you have any more Boxes of this kind, I pray you let me have
one more.


Sal. Itaque primum respondemus, The. Beza Epist, 12.
etc. quum non sint ex earum rerum genere quae per se impiae sunt, non uideri
nobis tanti momenti, vt propteria Pastoribus descerendum sit potius
Ministerium, quam vt vestes illas assumant vel gregibus omittendum publicum
pabulum potius quam it a vestitos Pastores audiant. Open it now?


Chap. Therefore first we answer, etc Sith these things be not of that sort
which are of themselves impious, they seem not to us to be of so great moment,
that for them, either the Pastors should choose to forsake their Ministry,
rather then take to themselves those garments, or that the flock should omit
the public fodder, rather then hear the Pastors so clothed: I think some
had rather yield to such clothing then to crossing, because there be some that
do worship that sign, and say they will do so still, but that I came for an
other, and have troubled you so long, I would feign have some Salt for such.


Sal. The second Commandment forbids such kind of bowing, and worshipping,
for that is to make an Idol of an Image, and if we may not make an Idol of an
Image, why should we make an Idol of the Cross?


Chap. Some say, Love me, and love my Hounde.


Salt. True, but the Hound is loving to his Master, and does him no hurt, but
rather in hunting helps to recreate him after he has wearyed himself about
such matters as his calling has tied him to: But the Hammer, Nails, and
Cross, were no loving Hounds to Christ, unless they be loving that hunt one
to death.


Chap. Though Christ felt great pain there, and thereon ended his life, yet we
have a great benefit thereby.


Sal. True but tell me this; If a man by treason has deserved death, and a
friend of his (whom the Kings Majesty favors) entreats or pardon; and
the King grants the Rebel his life on this condition, that he which sued
for his pardon would loose his right hand; would you have the Rebel or
Traitor to kiss, and to thank the Axe, and him that chopped with it, or his
Friend that felt the pain, and lost his hand?


Chap. Me thinks a man should have little list to kiss the Axe, or the
Chopper; but rather with all thankfulness embrace such a dear Friend;
unless such a Friend would have such a man to esteem such an Axe more then
an other.


Sal. Let our blessed Savior then (which gave his life for us) have the
honor; let neither the Nails wherewith (nor the Cross whereunto) he was
fastened; nor Judas that betrayed him; nor he that entered into that Traitor; nor
they that said, crucify him, rob this our Redemer of any part of his honor
and glory: And note this, that as the sign of the Cross was much in use, and
much regarded amongst the auneient Christians: whereby they declared that they
were not ashamed of that crucified Christ, whom the Heathen scorned: So
sometimes they give the name of the Cross to the sufferings of Christ, and
sometimes the name of blood to the Cross: For when Augustine upon John says:
Last of all, he chose a kind of death, Aug. in. ^^.8. tract. 43.
that is (says he) to hang on the Cross; and ^ould fasten the cross in
their hearts, that the Christian might say, God forbid that I should rejoice
but in the Cross of our Lord Jesus* Christ. etc. It is not to be thought, that
by fastening the Cross in the heart, and by rejoicing in the same is meant the
wodden Cross it self, whereon our Savior Christ was fastened, but rather that
which he suffered thereon: Again when he says: Aug in ^^ 12. tract. 50.
Sanguine occisi pecoris Iudeorum posts signati sunt, sanguine Christi frontes
nostrae fignantur. The posts of the Jews were signed with the blood of ye
same lamb, our foreheads are signed with the blood of Christ: Does he not
there call the sign of the Cross Christ his blood: yes no doubt, for they
signed themselves with that sign, and not with his blood: but because his
precious blood was shed on the cross, therefore he gives it the name of his
blood, as the sacramental wine representing his blood, is called blood in the
Supper.


Chap. It should seem then that in Saint Augustines time the Christians did
use that sign: but were they all good Catholics, or sound Christians which
so signed their foreheads?


Salt. Saint Augustine says no: for some there were whom he calls
Agitatores, which signifies driuers, vexers, or troublesome fellows, which
says he, facile habent in front signum Christi, and cord non recipiu^t
verbum Christi, have easily the sign of Christ in their forehead, and receive
not the word of Christ in their heart: Aug 10.12. tract. 50.
But how do you know that some do worship the Cross?


Chap. Besides those that have written in defense of it, whose doings are in
print: there came of late into my hands, a wild welcome home set down in
Meeter, by some that are to wilful, as it should seem, in this
Crosseworship, regarding that more, it is to be feared, then the book of God,
wherein the true worship of God is taught and the sufferinges of Christ our
Savior at large set forth.


Sal. I pray you let me see it.


Chap. Here it is.


To the Parson of Enborne, our hearty commendation.
Wishing him a Catholic mind, or no salvation.
NOw Master Parson, for your welcome home,
Read over these Lines, you know not from whom
A holy Cross, for an outward token and sign,
And remembrance only of that religion of thine:
And of the profession the People do make,
For more then this comes to, thou do it not take.
Yet holy Church tells us of holy Cross, much more
Of power and virtue, to heal sickness and sore,
Of holiness, to bless us from all enill,
From foul fiende fend us, and save us from Devil.
And of many a miracle which holy Cross has wrought,
And which into light holy Church has brought.
Wherefore holy Church holy worship does it give,
And sure so will we so long as we live.
Thou then say it is idolatry and superstition,
Yet we know it is holy Churches tradition?
Holy church then disgrace not, but bring it to renowns,
For up shall Holy-crosse, and you shall go down.
And now what we are, if any will know,
Catholics we are, and so do anow.
Thy service book here scattered all,
Is not divine, but heretical.
So is thy Bible of false translation,
To ^ut it and mangle it, is no damnation.
Thy Register also, if so we it serve,
We give it no more then it does deserve:
For why should new heretics be thus in^old
With good Catholics, being dead of old?
Out with new Hereticques, hence let them go,
Register good Catholics, and register no more?
For Catholics be worthy only of record,
And into Church-register to be restord.
To the Parson of Enborne give this with speed,
The carrier is paid already, as much as he looks for,
And so it shall cost you nothing but the reading,
And would you have it better cheap?
Chap. Have you framed any answer to this well come home?


Salt. Yes, but not as one that cannot away with that sign, but as misliking
such as make an Idol of it.


Chap. I pray you let meee see it.


Sal. If you will give it the reading here it is.

To Master Mar-bible. One that favors the Bible, wishes a Christian mind,
that he may come to salvation. IF Master Parson returned well home to his
house,
He has cause to thank God, and not wanton Mouse^
Which in his absence his Books did so gnawe,
No Catte being present to keep them in awe.
If name of a Mouse you think nothing fit,
Then take you the name of a Man, void of wit:
For what man is there that has his right mind,
And not with Idolatry, dimme-sighted, and blind
Would make such a stir to set up a Cross,
And mangle the Bible as if it were dross.
If Cross be so holy, whereon Jesus felt pain,
Why do Hammers, and Nails unholy remain?
If the Smith want Cross to stand him before,
He may worship his Nails: And Hammers adore:
And Hedgors, and Ditchers, must not take scorn,
Insteade of a Cross, to Bless them with Thorn.
I pass over Scourges, for this may suffice,
To show these men's follies that seem holy wise:
And eke so forward in Crosses behalf,
As to make of the same a right Golden Calfe,
I speak not as Heathen, contemning this Sign,
But as ^illing to worship, what is no divine:
If I could be persuaded that he which all sees,
With crosse-worship were pleased, I would creep to it on knees.
Worship God (quoth the Angel that talked with John:)
But of worshipping Crosses I find not word one.
Old Christians did cross them; it is not denied,
To show they believed in Christ crucified:
But if they adored it, what warrant they had
If once you would tell me, I should be right glad.
If your answer be thus; It came by tradition:
That will will not free it from gross superstition.
Thou shall no more worship the work of thy hand
Says God: Look in Micha, and there understand.
If Crosses were made by hand of a man,
If you do them worship you cross God, and then
You show your selves wilful, not like that good King,
Which could not endure any such kind of thing.
Though old Brazen Serpent had warrant in word,
Yet King Ezechias did not afford,
That men should burn Incence unto the same,
But brake it in pieces, and so far from blame,
That he is much commended by Gods holy Pen,
To work the like zeal in such kind of men.
As God would have carry the Scepter and Crown,
To set up the Gospel, and pluck Idols down:
Such is the Cross if you to it bow,
For no place of Scripture does so much allow,
Nor Crosses at all command (...) to make,
But in cause of Christ Jesus, our Cross up to take.
Not meaning by Cross, your gilte Crucifixe,
Nor Crosses of Stone, Copper, or Sticks,
But that Christians should choose, much rather to dye,
Then Christ to refuse, or once him deny.
But this does not please you, for you will have more,
Holy Cross has power to heal sickness and sore:
You are not content to use it as sign,
But as though it were sent with a power divine.
You say it can bless us from all kind of evil,
From foul Fiende defend us, and save us from Devil,
If I could find this in any old Creed,
I think I should not miss, but say so indeed.
Lactantius I know does write some such thing,
To let others go which Harp on that stringe.
But if men might not err in word nor in act,
Then Austin need nothing in writing retract.
Nor note any error, in Origin old,
But what if the Serpent superstition to uphold,
At sign of the Cross would seem for to flee,
Shall we believe him, and yet know that he,
To tempt the most holy, was not affraide:
Ye know that same Spirit that was in the Maid;
(Which to her Masters brought in much gain,)
Was not driven out, by crossing, it is plain,
But by commanding, Paul made him to flee;
As in the Scrpture if you list you may see,
I command thee (says he,) in Jesus Christ's name,
From her to come out: And so out he came.
Though Elisha had Mantle, and Moses had rod,
Wherewith they wrought wonders, yet these men of God,
Did never put trust in these outward things,
But in the most Mighty, the ruler of Kings.
A shadow had Peter, and Napkins had Paul,
But I can not find they had cross great, or small*
I read of Aftiction, for Gospel they taught,
That God by their hands, the Miracles wrought.
Aeneas which eight years kept bed very weak,
Heard not S. Peter at Lidda, thus speak:
Come near to my Shadow, or Sign of Cross take,
But Jesus Christ does thee cure, arise and Bed make.
By the grace of which Christ (as the same Peter says)
We believe to be saved: And this is the faith,
Which such as do preach, you say must go down,
And crossing go up: But Jesus would frown,
Which said not make Crosses, and then bow the knee,
But Preach, and do this in remembrance of me,
When he said, Take, eat this: Also ye know
He said, Harvest is great, and Laborers sewe.
But you would have fe^er if so that you might,
For dumb cross will serve to put sin to slight,
Your selves you auowe to be Catholics,
And us you do hold, for right Heritickes.
If they be good Catholics which saved shall be,
Then we are no Heretics, and that prove will we*
Who so will be saved Quicunque vult, says,
Must se that he hold the Catholic faith.
Meaning that whosoever holds fast this,
Is suer to attain the Heavenly bliss.
But Catholic faith, which there is set down,
We read, and believe in Country, and Town.
Catholics then, and saved be we,
Though you do condemn us uncharitably.
That Creed may be found in that Service Book,
Which you threw to ground, when you did on it look,
You say it is scattered all, as Book heretticall*
The reason why, well know not I:
Unless it be this, in that Creed you do miss,
Your transubstantiation, and gross superstition:
Which though it be not there, Athanasius does not fear:
But constantly says, this is the Catholic faith:
So then hy that Creed, we be Catholics indeed:
And you go awrye, when this you deny.
But is it a trifle? no point of damnation,
To mangle the Bible, as if our translation*
Were nothing so sound as vulgar edition,
In which there are found, if you come to repetition:
Or rather it compare with Hebrew and Greek,
You shall see that there are, if dispensation you seek,
Such a number of faults, that if you had shame,
You would correct your own, ear ours you blame.
Well you may deceive the ignorant sort,
In making them believe, it is a true report,
That vulgar edition must needs be the best,
In enery condition, yet to let go the rest:
In the ninteenth Psalm, more faults some men find
Then there be verses: But you are so blind,
That no fault you can see in that you do favor,
This is your old wont, and common behavior.
What you do well like, has no spot at all,
But what you mislike is straight heretical,
And then you must tear it, though Bible it be,
The beams in your own book you cannot espy.
But that in our register Protestants be enrold,
With those whom you call good Catholics old.
This you can epsy, and put us out of doubt,
That this you do envy, and would have them thrust out.
^u^ why should not we those, remember, and record
Which always repose their trust in the Lord.
And not in their works, for though they could do all,
Unprofitable servants themselves they must call.
God grant us his grace, that faith so may work,
That we may have place where no sin does lurk.
Though carrier be paid, you come not in sight,
^^^^ke you are afraid you have not done right:
For such as do evil, do still hate the light,
As serving the Devil by day or by night:
God guide you and us, while here we take breath,
That with our Lord Jesus we may live after death.

Chap. To this your prayer I say Amen, and so I bid you farewell.


The seventh Chapman.
FRiend Salter tell me quickly whether you have any Salt to season an Usurer.

Salt. An Usurer, what kind of Usurer?


Chap. Why do you ask that question? is not all kind of Usury unlawful?


Sal. All men be not of one mind in this matter, some mislike it altogether,
some do not so, and the Lord allowed that to be taken of strangers, which he
forbad to be taken of brethren. Deuteronomy. 23.19.20. The Apostle says: Love hurts
not, Romans 13.10.
or does not evil to his neighbor: By which words some gather, that if a man
so lend, that his neighbor, notwithstanding the paying of Interest, has good
and not hurt by that borrowing, it is not unlawful. You know there be some
widows that have many children left with portions, and there are many weak
and sickly, and neither of these can well follow any trade of buying or
selling, or if they may have others to do it for them, yet hearing that many
have been deceived, they dare not commit their money into their hands. If such
as these lend some hundred pound or whatsoener to any tradesman, to any that
has a ground to store* to any that is to purchase or take a lease, etc. and
they ye received it, do sinde that it has done them a great pleasure* and be
willing to pay the I^^erest admitted, do you think it a sin to take it.


Chap. It is no matter what I think, or you think, what says the Lord in his
word, does he allow to lead upon Usury, to (...) poor man, or keep his pawn
if he cannot keep touch?


Salt. No indeed, we should lend to such, yea give to such of charity, and as
pitying their necessity, for no doubt our Savior chiefly respacteth such*
Math 5.42.
when he says, Give to him that asks, and from him that would borrow of
thee, turn not away And the Lord by Moses said: Thou shall not harden thine
heart, De^^. 15.7.
nor shut thine hand from thy poor brother.

And touching Usury (under correction be it spoken) there is a place in Exodus,
which may well serve to make known what Usury is forbidden in other places of
holy Scripture, and this is it.

If thou lend money to my people, (...) 22.25.
to the poor with thee, thou shall not be as an Usurer unto him, you shall not
oppress him ^ith Usury, Where we see that to take V^ry of a poor man, is a
crushing and an op^ressing of him: And touching the keeping (...) his pledge,
Leuit. 35.25.36.37. Deui. 23.19.20.
we read thus Exodus 22.26. ^f thou take thy neighbors raiment to ^ledge, thou
shall restore it unto him be^re the Sun go down, for that is his co^ering
only, and this is his garment for his ^kinne, wherein shall he sleep?
therefore ^he he cries unto me, I will hear him, for ^am merciful, Luke 6.36.
And therefore our Savior ^aith: Be you merciful as your Father also (...)
merciful.


The eighth Chapman.
S^r if you stand so long in serving every one of us, as you have done with
that fifth chapman, it will be night ere we be all ser^ed you came so late to
market.

Sal. Time enough my good brother, vn^sse this Salt which I bring be better
re^arded, then a great deal of that which ^as uttered by other manner of
Salt-men ^en I am, or ever shall be, in ye days of our most gracious Queen
Elizabeth, in whose times we enjoyed many great blessings, never to be
forgotten.


Chap. Yet there were some that thought something amiss, in those days, and
sought for a reformation, I remember well, that once I saw in a certain book
the names of some that met to confer about such matters.


Sal. A certain Minister that fears God, and has good report of all ye know
him, thought good when he came to be deposed, not only to show the cause of
such meetings, but also to name those whom he saw at any conference, unto
which diverse were requested to come, and asked whether they would put their
hands to certain supplications: so that though in that book you saw diverse
named, yet not all there blamed, as authors of any sect, or maintainers of any
dangerous position, neither were all yt are named by that Minister present at
all conferences in ye Dioces wherein he dwells, some of the^ which were
thought to be ye authors of such meetings, lie now in their graves: If the
discipline they sought and their manner of seeking for it, did please God, it
is ye better for them, if not, they have ye more to answer for; As touching my
self, I think good, having cause, to say thus much before I be laid in my
coffin, (which being under my writing table, I touched with my knees when I
wrote this) that I always used that book of common prayer which was set forth
by authority, I always loved the peace of the Church, prayed for an unity in
the verity, hated brawling and iarres, always feared to give any just occasion
of offense, to any, especially such as were then, or be now in authority for
who^, as also for the amending of whatsoever the Lord sees to be amiss in any
of us, namely in my self, and those that be committed to my charge, by Gods
help I will pray heartily, as I have done, and so prepare my self to go to
him which dyed for me, even to the place of true rest, where through him I
shall be free from error, sin, and sorrow, which will not be in this world.


Chap. I am of your mind for that, but now I pray you, serve me of that I come
for quickly, that I may be gone, for a stranger is come to our town, who
minds by God his grace to speak soon, and I purpose to hear him.


Salt. To speak where?


Chap. In the Pulpit.


Sal. Why do you not say Preach?


Chap. It was out ere I was aware, I have been often quipt for it, and yet I
forget my self, but since you moved this question, I pray you, if I shall not
trouble you, tell me whether you think it a sin, to use the word speaking
for preaching?


Sal. I do not think that any account it a sin, no more then to call Sunday
the Lords day, though they like ye usual words, for the word speak is often
found in the Acts of the Apostles, for setting forth the word of God, 4. Acts,
and as they (meaning Peter and John spoke unto the people, etc.)

Now what they spoke we shall see if we read the third of the Acts from the
12. ver. to the end of the Chapter, where is set down the sum of that Sermon
or speech which Peter made to the men of Israel, (...)
which were astonished at the curing of the cripple; which Speech being called
speaking in the first verse of that fourth Chapter, is called Teaching and
Preaching in ye second verse: Thus taking it grievously (meaning they Priests)
that they taught the people and Preached in Jesus the resurrection, etc. in the
17. verse of Act. 4, Let us threaten and charge them (Lalein) to speak
henceforth to no man in this name, And in the 20 verse Peter and John says: We
cannot (me Lalein) but speak the things which we have seen a and heard:
Lalounto^. Act. 10.44
And Acts 5. the Angel says: Go your way, and standing speak in the Temple,
all the words of this life, meaning they should set forth that doctrine whereby
the way to true life is declared, while Peter yet spoke, the Holy Ghost fell on
all them that heard the word, And Acts the thirteenth and the forty two, The
Gentiles besought that the next Sabbath that they would Lalethenai, speak,
which some interpret preach, etc. And Act. 14.1. and so Lalesai speak, that a
great multitude both of the Jews and Grecians, believed: Act. 18.9.
Then said the Lord unto Paul, etc. fear not but speak, etc. now what the
Lord meant by bidding him speak appears in the 11. verse of that 18. of the
Acts: so he continued there, (meaning at Corinth) a year and six months,
and taught the word of God among them: But least the stranger you speak of be
gone out of the place ere you come there, tell me quickly what you would have?


Chap. My coming hither is for some such Salt as is fit to season some that
seem ^ery devout, and religious outwardly, and yet are reported to be
hard-hearted, and full of fraud, pinching both Teacher, and Tenant, little
regarding the tears of the fatherless and widow, nor to walk in the steps
of their fathers, who kept good houses, and brought up many children, without
such grinding of lean faces, that would be glad to live under them, if they
might with any reason.


Sal. God forbid all reports should he true* euill-will never said well: but
howsoever it be, friend Chapman, know this for certain, that a man may seem
to be sound in profession outwardly, and yet be hallow and rottten inwardly:
to profess to be one of Christ's Sheep, and that whosoever will be saved most
repent, and believe the Gospel, and bring forth ye fruits of repentance, is a
sound profession in word, but he that professes not this by deeds, but
biteth and gripeth by usury, to men's undoing, pincheth with hard payments,
ouerloadeth poor men with heavy burdens, keeps no measure in his enclosing,
makes no conscience of swearing, perjury, profaning the Saboth, lying,
stealing, stabbing, whooring, and such like, he is in Gods sight, a very
hypocrite, and a helhound, till he amend, howsoever in mean time he beguile
those which lend their ears to his talking, and have no eye to espy his
walking: but to be short, if there be any such hollow heartedman with you, I
fear me if you be his tenant, you dare not carry any such Salt to him as is
fit for him.


Chap. The truth is I am a freeholder, and therefore may with less danger do
it, then a Tenant,


Salt. You say true, but yet, to the end you may carry it in good sort, you
shall first have a little Salt to season your self, and that is,

Let all your things be done in love.

Now for those you speak of, here is for them, I pray God they may take it in
good part, and that it may do them good.

Hear the word of the Lord, Isai. 1, 11.
o Princes of Sodom.


Chap. Stay, stay.


Salt. Why so?


Chap. Because I made you no promise to ^arry Salt to Princes.


Salt. No matter, for that, if the men you come for, have any understanding,
they will reason thus with themselves, if the highest Majesty spare not to
reprove the mightiones, when they deserve it, why should we, that be inferior
to them think to escape, if we be as faulty in our places as they in theirs?
but if you had not stayed me, you should have heard the Lord rebuking the
inseriours as well as the superiors, in these words.

Hearken to the law of our God, (...)
o people of Gomorah: Now these both high and low, were indeed by profession
and by covenant, Gods own peculiar people, for in the first verse I ^^ade,
that the vision of Esai did concern Judah, and Jerusalem, and in the third
verse the Lord calls them whom he reproves Israel and his people, and in
the righth verse the daughter of Zyon, so that in respect of the covenant,
which God made with their fathers, they were and in regard of their outward
worship they would seem to be Princes, and people of Judah and Jerusalem, but
in regard of their had fruits, the Lord calls them Princes of Sodom and
Gomorah, giving them by those terrible (...) to understand, that if he should
deal with their according to their deserts, they should be destroyed with as
fearful a fire as were they of Sodom and Gomorah, where Lot himself (whose
righteous soul is said to have been vexed amongst them) by reason of his
prolonging, had been like, with his wife and two daughters, to have ^^r^shed in
the punishment of those Cities h^^ not the Lord been merciful unto him. For
the most high and holy one, did so abhor the sins of those places, that Lots
wife looking back was turned into a pillar of Salt, to the end says Saint
Austin, De cant, no^o cap 4.
that by her example, she might season fools: this our Savior would not have
forgotten, and therefore said: Remember Lots wife. Luke 17.32.


For indeed the remembrance of that Slat-stone, if there be any grace in us,
might serve very well to season our souls in such sort, that it should stir
us up daily to pray, and that heartily, that when temptations come it would
please his goodness so to asist us, and lead us forward in his ways that we
never return with the dog to the loathsome vomit, or with the swine to
wallowing in the most filthy and stinking mire, but that through his grace,
endeavoring to serve his Divine Majesty in holiness and righteousness all the
days of our life we may be counted fit Temples for the Holy Ghost to be
resident in, until we (being set free from all tentations, and delivered from
all our troubles) may quietly and ^^e^refully possess the inheritance which
our blessed Savior, with the shedding of his most precious blood, has
purchased for all them, that repent, and through a lively says, bring forth
fruits of true repentance, cleave steadfastly to him unto the end.


Chap. Friend Salt-man you forget your self.


Sal. Why my good Chapman?


Chap. I came not to hear you Preach, but to have some Canonical Salt, fit for
the men you wot of.


Salt. If you had not interrupted me, you had been gone ere this, take now
the rest of the Salt, and say nothing till you have sufficient.

What have I to do with the multitude of your sacrifices, (...).
says the Lord, I am full of the burnt-offerings of Rar^s, and of the fat of
fed beasts, and I desire not the blood of Bullocks, nor of Lambs, nor of
Goats.

12
When you come to appear before me, who required this of your hands to tread
in my Courts.

13
Bring no more oblations in vain, Incense is an abomination unto me, I cannot
suffer your new Moons, nor Sabboths, nor solemn days, it is iniquity: nor
solemn Assemblies.

14
My soul hates your new Moons, and your appointed Feasts, they are a burden
to me, I am weary to bear them.

^^
And when you shall stretch out your hand, I will hide mine eyes from you, and
though you make many prayers, I will not hear, for your hands are full of
blood.

16
Wash you, make you clean, take away the evil of your works from before mine
eyes, cease to do evil,

17
Learn to do well, speak judgment, relieve the oppressed, judge the
fatherless, and defend the widow.

18
Come now and let us reason together, says the Lord, though your sins were
as crimson, they shall be made white as snow, though they were red like skarlet
they shall be as wool.

19
If ye consent and obey, ye shall eat the good things of the land.

20
But if ye refuse and be rebellious, ye shall be devoured with the sword,
for the mouth of the Lord has spoken it.

See also Esai. 58. what Fast pleases God: see also Jeremy 7.9.10. against
stealing, murder, etc. and such men standing in Gods-house, and Ier. 22.15. Did
not your fathers, etc.

Whosoever then hears of me these words and does the same (says our
Savior) I liken him to a wiseman, Mat. 7.24.
which has builded his house on a rock, 25
and the rain tell, and the floods came, and the winds blew, and beat upon
that house, and it fell not, for it was grounded on a rock.

26
But whosoever hears these my words, and does them not, shall be likened to a
foolish man, which has builded his house upon the sand, and the rain fell,
and the floods came, 27
the winds blew, and beat upon that house, and it fell, and the fall thereof
was great.

Then began he to vbraide the Cities wherein most of his great works were
done. Mat. ^^.^^.21.
Woe be to thee Corazin, woe be to thee Bethsaida, for if the great works
which were done in you, had been done in Tirus and Sidon, they had repented
long ago, in sackcloth and ashes, etc.

O Hypocrites, (...). ^9.7.
Esaias prophycied well of you, saying:

This people draws near unto me with their mouth, (...). 29.1^.
and honors me with their ^ippes, ^ath. ^^.3.
but their hearts is far from me.

Be ye doers of the word and not hearers only. (...) ^.^2.


Pure religion and undefiled before God even the Father, is this, to visit the
fatherless and widows in their adversity, and to keep himself unspotted of
the world.


Chap. This shall suffice for this time, but I pray you tell me why does the
Lord reject those oblations, and say their feasts were a burden unto him, were
they not appointed by the Law?


Salt. Yes, but the Lord does hate this pleasing of our selves, with outward
shows, and ceremonial service, for when there is no inward reformation; The
sacrifice of the wicked is an abomination. Prou 27, 21.
Therefore I may well say.

To kill an harmless beast, and nourish hurtful sin,
To keep a solemn feast, and no sound says within.
To come with fat of Rams, and make the poor look lean.
To offer up young Lambs, with bloody hands unclean.
In sight to fast and pray, and make the Tenant cry,
To hear the word all day, and put the widows by.
Such incense has a smell, like brimstone burnt in hell.

Chap. I would ask you one question more if I might,


Salt. What is that?


Chap. Why does the Lord say, wash you, make you clean? can we cleanse our
selves? Act. 2.40.



Salt. Saint Peter says to some in the Acts of the Apostles, Save your selves
from this froward generation.

And Saint Paul after he had exhorted Timothy to take heed unto himself, 1.
Tim. 4.10
and unto learning and to continue therein says.

For in doing this thou shall both save thy self, and them that hear thee.

By which places we are given to understand, that as such as teach, if in their
calling they labor to bring men to Christ their Savior, may assure themselves
to be in the way to salvation: if they believe and have a care to follow that
word of God, which they set before others: So if others also which be exhorted
to wash and save themselves, shall after such exhortations, through the grace
of God (by which as the Apostle says we are made safe) reason thus with
themselves, (...)
we use to wash that which is soul, and cleause places that are filthy,
surely whatsoever cleaves to me, that the Lord, which is only perfectly
pure, and holy, has forbidden in his word, and in justice from time to time
punished, threatening eternal death and destruction to such as die uncleansed,
that must needs be foul and filthy in his sight till it be washed away: but
he has forbidden, threatened and punished idolatry, witchery, blasphemy,
perjury, contempt of the Sabboths, treason, resisting authority,
wilfull-muether, filthy fornication, adultery, incest, theft, fraud, wrong,
lying, covetousness, and such like, therefore these, with all their branches, and
roots, are most foul and filthy in Gods sight, If thus I say, they reason
with themselves, and being pricked in their hearts, through the feeling of
their own filthiness, humbly fall down before the Almighty, judging, and
co^demning themselves, confessing ye to the^ belongs shame confusion, death,
and damnation, for that they have sinned against heaven and earth, and shall
therewithal pray to God to have mercy on the^, according to his loving
kindness, and according to the multitude of his mercies, to do away
theiriniquities, to wash and cleanse them thorougly from them, in the blood of
his Son; to create in them and a new heart, and to renew a right spirit
within them, having therewithal a steadfast purpose to walk in newness of
life; thus if they do, they may be said, after a sort, to wash themselves,
because as people earnestly defiring to serve God, from henceforth in newness
of life, they have used the means to come to the right washing.


Chap. Blessed be the Lord Jesus which has loved us, Reave. ^.
and washed us in his own blood.


Salt. Amen, and God give the Jews grace to repent of their errors, which are
set down by Munster, in Hebrew and Lattine, before S. Matthew his Gospel; in
Hebrew, dedicated to King Henry the Eighth.


The ninth Chapman.
I Pray you make an end with him, for I cannot stay long.

Sal. What would you have?


Chap. Salt to season one that can not be persuaded, that God suffers the
Wicked to prosper, and flourish, at any time.


Sal. Hold here is for him, spill it not. Among my People there are found
wicked Persons, (...)
that lay wait, as he that sets Snares: They have made a Pit to catch men.

^^
As a Cage is full of Birds, so are their Houses full of deceit; thereby they
are become great, and wax rich.

2^
They are waxed farte, and shining, they oue^passe the deeds of the wicked, the
exc^nt^ no judgment, no not the judgment of the Fatherless, yet they
prosper, though they execute no iudement for the Poor.

Wherefore do the wicked live, (...)
and wax old, and grow in wealth? their seed is ^stablished in their
sight with them, and their generations before their eyes*

9
Their Houses are peaceable without fear, and the rod of God is not upon
them.

Their Bullock gendereth and fails not, their Cow calueth, 10
and casts not her Calfe. etc.

And in Ecclesiastes we find, that no man here under the Sun, can discern
by prosperity, or adversity, whom God loves, or hates, and therefore it is
there said*

All things come a like to all, Eccle. 9.2. He speaket not of their state in
the life to come, for the unbelievers, and impenitent die eternally.
and the same condition is to the Just, and to the Wicked, ^o the good and
pure, and to the polluted, and to him that sacrifices, and to him that
^^crificeth not, as is the Good, so is the Sinner, he that swears, as he
that fears an oath.

By Sacrificing, here he means, a religions, and sincere worshipping of God:
^or many bad men did fill the Lord with ^^crifices: Which he loathed, seeing no
^^^dement.


Chap. Though the wicked many times ^^^rish here, as much as, or, more then
(...) righteous, yet there shall not be one con^^^ion to them both afterward.


S^l. No; neither while the Body lies in the dust, nor after the Resurrection;
for the Souls of such as depart hence faythlesse, and fruitless, are
tormented with such torments, as cannot of us that live here be comprehended,
and therefore for our capacity, they are expressed by bodily pains, as
appears by these words.

Send Lazarus that he may dip the tip of his finger in water, and cool my
tongue: for I am tormented in this flame. Saint Augustine in one of his Books
of ye City of God, shows by the example of the rich man in Hell (who spoke
the foresaid words) that ye soul sometimes feels pain, not in corpor^
constituta, not being in the body, as I showed to the first Chapman.


Chap. Are not the bodies of the wicked tormented before the resurrection?


Salt. The same Augustine writing on S. John's Gospel, has these words:

Habent omnes animae, cum de seculo exierint, diuersas receptiones suas, (...)
^ra^^* 49.
habent gaudium boni, and mali tormenta: sed cum facta fuerit resurrectio, and
bonorum gaudium amplius erit, and malorum tormenta grauiora, quando cum corpore
torquebuntur. All souls when they go out of this world, have their diverse
receptacles, the good have joy, the bad have torments: but after the
resurrection, the joy of the good shall he more, and the torment of the wicked
more grievous; when they shall be tormented with the body: So that the bodies
are not tormented before the resurrection there can be no pain where there is
no feeling.


Chap. What says the Salter and seasoner of all Salters, touching the
Resurrection; for no man's Salt is to be esteemed, if it favor otherwise then
his does.


Salt. He says:

The hour shall come, Ioh. 5.^8. 1. These, ^.^^.
in the which all that are in the Graves shall hear his voice: (which voice
the Appostle calls the voice of the Archangell.)

And they shall come forth that have don good unto the Resurrection of life:
But they that have done evil unto the Resurrection of condemnation.


Chap. Shall all be condemned that have done evil?


Sal. Hear what the son of God says to Idolaters under the name of
Iesabell; which labored to deceive Gods Servants; Aug* in Apocal. hom* 2*
to make them commit fornication, and to eat ^eates sacrificed, to Idols:
Which Iesabell, the Governor of the Churches do then suffer (says Austin,)
when upon the ^yotous, the Fornicators, and other ill ^oers, they lay not the
severity of Eccles^^^^icall discipline.

I gave her space to repent for her fornications, Reu. 2.^^*
and she repented not.

By which words we learn, that evil not repented of, brings condemnation.


Chap. So, this shall suffice for that matter, let me have a little more of
that Salt I came for, and then I will give place to an other.


Sal. Hold then.

I fretted at the foolish, 4. Psalm.
when I saw the prosperity of the wicked, for there are no bands in their
death, but they are lusty, and strong.

They are not in trouble as other men, neither are they plagued with other men.


Chap. Yet many times the Lord shows tokens of his wrath upon the wicked in
this life.


Salt. They which mark not that, mark nothing, many ruff^nly swearers, kill
one an other; and so do many drunkards.

Many Traitors make pittes to catch themselves: Many filthy Fornicators are
plagued with pox, and pining.

Many which have devoured others, have been devoured themselves, and become
stark Beggars.

Many which have taken a pride in their beauty, have become so deformed, that
they have hid their faces for shame.

Many Thieves, and Murderers, which have bound, and spoiled true men, have
themselves, in their most lusty time, met with Fetters, and Halters: So that
though these ungodly Persons flourish for a time, yet they wither away on a
sudden, for they care not a Fly for this which God threatens by his Prophet.

The bloodthirsty, and deceiptfull men, shall not live out half their days.


The tenth Chapman.
Who comes next?

Chap. I do.


Salt. For what?


Chap. For Salt to season one that is given to sloth, sleep, and idleness.


Salt. I have here, that is fit for him?


Chap. What do you call it?


Salt. It is called Salomons Salt.

A slothful hand makes poor, but the hand of the dilligent makes rich.

He that gathers in summer is the son^^ of wisdom, but he that sleeps in
har^^ is the Son of confusion.

He that tilleth his Land shall be satisfied with Bread, ^^ou, 1^.11.
but he that follows the idle is destitute of understanding.

The Sluggard lusts, but his Soul has naught, Prou. 1 3.4.
but the hand of the dilligent shall have plenty.

The hand of the diligent shall bear rule, but the idle shall be under
tribute. Prou. 12, 14.


Love not sleep lest thou come unto poverty, Prou. ^0.13.
open thine eyes, and thou shall be satisfied with bread,

Go to the Pismire thou sluggard, behold her ways, Prou. 6.6.7.
and be wise, for she having no guide, governor, nor ruler, prepares her
meat in summer, and gathers he^ food in harvest.

How long will thou sleep, thou sluggard? When will thou arise. etc.

13.
The slothful man says, a Lion is without, I shall be slain in the street.

Thou see that a dilligent man in his business stands before Kings, and
stands not before the base sort.


Chap. Yet I may say to you, friend Salter, (...) have seen many dilligent
Preachers, take ^^ines in congregations, that consist for the ^^ost part of
rude and base hearers, which ^^^e to note the end of each sentence, with
^^^^ng, as singing men keep time by moving of their hand.


Sal. And I may say to you friend Chapman, if there noting be nothing but
nodding, they will be found in the end, rather noddified then edified, and the
seats they nod on, if it be a willing or an usual nodding shall be in better
case then they, for the seats wanting ears shall not be called to an account,
but the drowsy nodders, that make no difference betwixt their beds, and their
seats, shall know to their cost if they amend not, that God has not sent men
to labor amongst them, some ten, some twenty, some thirty, or forty years,
to the end to lull them asleep, but to rowse them and wake them out of their
drowsy sleep of gross ignorance, superstition, idolatry, and as much as may
be, to shake off all sin and iniquity, to bring them to the true knowledge
of God and themselves, and to open their eyes, that they may see what danger
they be in if they should dye without repentance and faith in Jesus Christ,
which is not said to come by nodding, but by hearing.

But to return to the Salt you had from a Kings Storehouse, touching the
diligent standing before Kings: know ye that it is not so to be understood, as
though none were diligent or careful in their places, but those only that are
in Kings Courts: but to show that wise Kings do not place such near unto them,
as give themselves to idleness and wantonness: but such as be diligent and
careful in searching out from time to time what is best to be done to the
glory of God, for the safety of their Prince, the peace of the Church, and the
profit of the Commonwealth: such are fittest to stand before Kings. This I take
to be that wise Kings meaning, and not that all those that stand before the
meaner sort are loyterers: for it is well known that many of them, thanks be
to God, be faithful laborers, though many times they be much crossed.


Chap. It may be if they would cross more, they should be crossed less.


Sal. God give us all grace to rejoice in him which was crucified, that is, was
fastened to the cross for us, and make us all willing, when need shall
require, to take up our cross and follow him, that is, to bear that which he
shall lay upon us patiently.


Chap. Amen, for if we will reign with him, ^* Tim. 11.12.
we must suffer with him, and not deny him: But tell me now what I have to pay,
or will you be ruled by me, if I tell you what you were best to take for each
measure of this kind of salt?


Salt. No.


Chap. Why?


Salt. Because the son of Sirach which was a man, Eccl. 37.11.
forbids to ask counsel of the buyer for the sale.


Chap. Does not the same man in the same place forbid also to ask Council for
religion of him that is without religion, or of justice of him that has no
justice?


Salt. Yes, what then?


Chap. Then we had need take heed whom we make our Teacher in matters of
religion, and our Counselor in matters of justice.


Salt. No doubt of that.


The eleventh Chapman.
NOw serve me.

Salt. What salt would you have?


Chap. Such as is fit for one that is ready to give his word, or become suerty
for such as speak him fair, suspecting no fraud, nor considering his own
ability.


Salt. If he be ^uch a one, it may be you come too late for him, if the
Sergeants have had him by the back already; many make no conscience to leave
their suerties in the briars, when they have had their own desires: therefore
men must join discretion with their kindness, lest by bringing themselves in
bondage to set others free, they deserve the name, not of kind friends, but of
kind sooles, it were good for a man to eat a bushel of salt with one ere he
come to be his suerty.


Chap. What mean you by that?


Salt. I mean he should be well acquainted with him before.


Chap. It is fit for a Christian to carry a charitable mind.


Salt. True but yet he must remember, that all is not gold that glistereth.

Some make thee believe, they love thee at the heart,
Which laugh in their sleeue, when thou feel'st the smart,
H^^^l'd by thy father, ere suertie thou be,
Except thou had rather, thy country to flee.

Chap. Sir I came not for your raw rimes, but for your Canonical salt.

Hold then: P^^^. ^. 1. 2,
My son, if thou be suerty for thy neighbor, and have stricken hands with
the stranger, thou art snared with the words of thy mouth.

Do this my son, 3
and deliver thy self, seeing thou art come into the hand of thy neighbor:
Go and humble thy self, and solicit thy friends.

Give no sleep to thine eyes, 4
nor slumber to thine eyelids, deliver thy self as a Do from the hand of the
Hunter, and as a Bird from the hand of the Fowler.

Be not of them that touch the hand, nor among them that are suerty for debts:
Prou. 22.26.
If thou have nothing to pay, why causest thou that he should take thy bed
from under thee.


Chap. I perceive then that that suerty which suffers his word to run
beyond his wealth, is in great danger, else he should not be compared to
hunted Does, and silly birds, for whom the Fowler sets his Nets.


Salt. He is so compared you see, and the rather because many Creditors,
wanting compassion, regard no circumstances; as whether their debtors be young
beginners, or men of long continuance; whether unacquainted with cousening
tricks, or such as by long experience have been taught to take heed; whether
they be such as break through poverty, or such as shut up windows of
policy, to bring their Creditors to take 10. pounds for 20. pounds, and so
enrich themselves by other men's losses: which to do is sin, and shame,
seeing the Apostle says: Owe nothing to any man, but love. Romans ^3.8.


And the Almighty forbidding to steal in the eighth Commmandement, condemns
all fraudulent dealing: But if some green head being more kind to others,
then careful for himself, and more fed with promises then fearful of
perils, be drawn into a desperate suretiship, out of the which he can by no
means rid himself being never so willing: In this case, if the Creditor deal
with extremity, take him by the throat, or at least by the coat, and cast him
into prison, he shall show himself to be no good Christian, because he
wants charity, without which if a man had al faith, so that he could move
mountains, he were in the Apostles judgment just nothing. 1, Cor. 13.2.



Chap. It may be I shall meet with some such Creditors ere it be long,
therefore I will crave some salt to season them ere I go; but first I pray you
let me hear your mind touching those words, (all Faith:) may a man have all
faith, and want charity; does not faith work by love, Galla. 5.6. 1. Cor. 13.9.
and love believe all things?


Salt. No doubt but faith when it works any thing sincerely to show it self
by works, as by good fruits, unto such as are desirous to know what they are
before they keep company with them: Psalm. 119.63.
(For the godly are companions with such as fear God) does work by love: And
when the love of a true Christian, is said to believe every thing (meaning that
is to be believed:) otherwise Solomon says: Prou. 14.15.
The fool believes every thing (meaning without examining) that love
undoubtedly believes through Faith: so that Faith working by Love, and Love
believing through Faith, must needs keep house together, not to save charges,
as many do, but to the end their hospitality may be the greater, I mean,
that they may work the more effectually.


Chap. I think you say true: but yet you have not showed me your mind
touching these words: If a man have all faith.


Salt. What mean you to be so desirous to know my mind, which am but a poor
Salter? Ache men of greater judgment.


Chap. Do not you remember what any of those have said in this matter?


Salt. When M. Sherwin in the Tower, the last of August, 1601. did very
vehemently urge those words, All faith, all faith, without charity is nothing
worth, one of his favorites said afterward in a certain phamphelet, here
silence was the answer, But how truly say the grave and learned men which
conferred with Master Campion, See the first days conference with Master
Campion.
let himself see, for it was straight answered, Master Sherwin you may see
the Apostle speaks there of faith in working miracles, even by the words of
the Apostle himself, who says, If I should have all says, so that I could
remove mountains, and have no charity, I am nothing, and when he cried still,
omnem fidem, all faith, and that therefore it must contain our faith also,
else we had none at all, It was answered by us, if you will not believe us, yet
let S. Chrisostomes exposition be of some authority with you, who calls it
faith, not of doctrines but of miracles.


Chap. Are there more faithes then one?


Salt. Peter Martyr on the Judges says there are three kinds of faith found,
for there is a faith which consists of human opinion and persuasion,
whereby those things which are written in holy Scriptures are believed to be no
less true, then ye Histories of Liui, Suetonius, and those things which are
written, of the new Islands. This kind of faith, as touching many things, is
common to the Turks and Jews: There is another faith, whereby we being stirred
up, by the heavenly inspiration, do lively and with efficacy cleave to the
promise of the mercy of God, by this faith certainly is attained
justification. The third faith is called the faith of miracles, whereby we are
neither changed nor made the better by a hair, for as much as it is the moving
of the Spirit of God, werewith men are stirred up, to desire miracles, utterly
believing that it is the will of God, they should be done, and that which is
required should have success, wherefore whilst they lean unto this faith,
sometimes they obtain that which they desire, which I therefore speak,
because not always they do so, neither are they always illustrate with that
inspiration.

If so be thou will demand (says he) how this kind of faith can be proved,
let Chrysostom answer, which upon the 17. of Matthew makes mention of it,
There Christ says: If you have faith so much as is a grain of mustard seed,
you shall say to this mountain, throw thy self into the sea, and it shall do
it.

In expounding these words, this Father says, because at this day these things
are not done in the Church, shall we therefore say that Christians are
destitute of faith, God-forbid that we should judge so evil of the people of
God, the faith which justifies is present, but that which is called the faith
of miracles has now ceased. This kind of faith also is showed by the words of
the Apostle. 1. Cor. where he says, although that I have all faith, so that I
can remove mountains, and have not charity, I am nothing, neither let that
trouble us, in that he says all for ye distribution is to be drawn to ye faith
of miracles. But yt is more manifestly proved by ye same Epistle, where ye
Apostle makes mention, of free gracious gifts, saying, to some is given the
word of wisdom, to other the word of knowledge, to some the power to heal,
and to other some faith in the same Spirit, etc. That faith cannot in this
place be understood, whereby we are justified, for it (meaning the justifying
faith is not reckoned among gifts, which are privately distributed to some, but
is common to all true Christians.


Chap What if I should not content my self with that exposition of Saint
Chrysostom and others, but still urge the words (all faith) if you were to
answer, would you not have a care to satisfy me?


Sal. I have a care? if such men cannot satisfy you, how should I hope to do
it?


Chap. If you would say nothing, I would go home, and say you were silent.


Salt. And I might go home and say you were troublesome and froward, but rather
then you should put me to a non plus, I would shape you another answer.


Chap. You Are a Salter and not not a Tailor, and therefore you should rather
say, you would season, then shape me an answer.


Salt. No man uses that phrase, besides I must be sure that mine answer must
be of some force to season you in this pointer I make that promise, least if
it should have no strength, the learned say I have answered insulse,
vnsauourly, indiscreetly, but such as it is take it.

The Apostle seems to me to labor to set forth the excellency of charity,
which is the badge of true Christianity, and to the end he might stir up men
to be more careful to possess it he speaks by way of supposition, supposing
that which cannot be; saying yt I may utter it Paraphrastically, If I had all
faith, not only that faith by which men work miracles, but also (if it were
possible it might be separated from charity) that faith by which we apprehend
Christ Jesus, our justification and righteousness, and had it without love, 1.
Cor. 13.4 5 6 7 8
it would profit me nothing toward long suffering bountifulness, the
audiding of envy, boasting, disdaining, etc. no more then either feeding of the
poor with all my goods does profit me, if I do it for vain glory not of
compassion, pittiyng the miserable estate of the needy, or yielding my body to
the fire, not for love of truth (which cannot but be in him that has the
justifying faith) but because I would be reckoned in the number of the
Martyrs, if I say it were possible to have all kind of faith, and had not love,
I were nothing. Thus you see a man might make a shift to say something to such
as will needs have all faith to comprehend the justifying faith also: but I
like S. Chrysostomes exposition best.


Chap. But if men been so froward that they will not admit his exposition, then
some other must be framed, and that of yours would (perhaps) be the better
liked, if such as so earnestly urge Omnem fidem, all faith, if in some other
place the same Apostle does presuppose a thing impossible.


Salt. In the 1. to the Galath. he says: Though we (that is, Gal. 8.^.
if it were possible) that we, or an Angel from Heaven preach unto you
otherwise then that which we have preached, let him be accursed.


Chap. I pray tell me what you do note in those words: Though we, or an
Angel, etc.


Salt. You shall hear what Saint Austin (expounding that Chapter) says: the
truth is to be beloved for it self, not for the man or Angel by whom it is
set forth, for he that loves it propter annuntiatores, for their sakes which
show it, may also love lies, if perhaps they will bring any of their own.


Chap. I perceive this Father would have truth to be liked, and lies to be
loathed for themselves, and not to be received or refused according as we like
or dislike the men that bring them.


Salt. True: yet this fault is too common, to hear or not hear the Sermons,
to read, or not read the writings, to receive, or not receive the Sacraments
at the hands of men, but as we like them; it is great weakness that the faults
of men, but greater weakness that the coats and colors should drive us from
hearing and receiving that, which in it self is sound and faultlesse, wholesome
and harmless: the word of God is most pure, the Sacraments full of comfort,
though we be sinful men, and unworthy to minister such holy things. The
teacher and hearer are to pray one for another, that the one may minister, the
other receive, in some measure, worthily, and as is fit for their calling, lest
both smart for their negligence herein.


Chap. Some say where teachers vary, it is hard for the unlearned to judge what
Doctrine is to be followed, and which Teacher is true.


Salt. None are allowed to set forth any doctrine that is not warranted in the
word of God: if any do, he which is called the truth, shows how we shall
know the true teacher in these words: If any man will do his will.


Chap. Does the mean the Popes will?


Salt. I marvel why you interrupt me, I am sure you are not so ignorant, to
think there were Popes in our Saviors time. He means by his will his
fathers will, Ioh. 7.16.
yt sent him, as appears by the verse aforegoing.


Chap. Say on then.


Salt. If any man will know his will, he shall know the doctrine whether it
be of God, or whether I speak of my self.

He that speaks of himself seeks his own glory, but he that seeks his
glory that sent him, the same is true, and no unrighteousness is in him. Now
al-be-it our Savior speaks chiefly of himself, in whom is no
unrighteousness, yet he sets down these as notes, whereby we may know,
both who shall find the ^^ue doctrine, even he that does his will, and also
how we shall know the true teacher, which is not he that seeks his own
glory, but the glory of him that sent him.


Chap. But how shall we know the Fathers will?


Salt. The voice that came out of the cloud at the transfiguration, Math. 17* ^
(where Moses the Minister of the Law, and Elias, a chief man among the
Prophets appeared, as it were to resign the right, and to show that Christ,
whose face did then shine as the Sun, etc. was he that must fulfill the Law,
and the Prophets: that voice I say, did make known the Fathers will, saying:

This is my beloved son in whom I am well pleased, hear him. If then we
will give ear to the Son, he will teach us what we should do: It is the
will of his Father we should hear his Son, and his Son teaches us in his
Testament, that we must amend our lives, believe in him, and love one another.
But by digressing to speak of all faith, I think you have forgotten all
cruel Creditors, for the seasoning of whom you said you would crave some Salt
ere you went.


Chap. I would have some, not only for them, but for all such as are so
carried away, with hatred that they cannot frame themselves to forgive such as
have offended them, though when they say the Lords prayer, if the searcher of
hearts could be mocked, they would make him believe they forgive, like good
charitable people.


Salt. Here is very good Salt for such, if they would taste it, and not spit it
out again, as many do, whatsoever their sick taste likes not.

Then came Peter to him, Math. 18.21.
and said, Master, how often shall my brother sin against me, and I shall
forgive him, unto seven times?

22
Jesus said unto him, I say not unto thee, unto seven times, but unto seauenty
times seven times.

^3
Therefore is the kingdom of heaven likened unto a certain King, which would
take account of his servants, and when he had begun to reckon, one was brought
unto him which ought him ten thousand talents: and because he had nothing to
pay, his Master commanded him to be sold, and his wife, and his children, and
all that he had, and the debt to be paid.

The servant therefore fell down and besought him saying: Master, appease
thine anger toward me, and I will pay thee all. Then that servants master had
compassion, and loosed him, and forgave him the debt, etc. to the 32. verse,
where it is said, that:

Then his master called him, and said unto him: o thou evil servant, 32
I for gave thee all that debt, because thou praiedst me, oughtst not thou also
to have had pity on thy fellow, even as I had pity on thee? So his master
was wroth, and delivered him to the Iaylors, till he should pay all that was
due to him.

So likewise shall my heavenly Father do to you, Note.
except you forgive from your hearts, each one to his brother their trespasses.

Blessed be the merciful, Math. 5.7.
for they shall obtain mercy.

Be ye courteous one toward another, Ephesians. 4.3^.
and tender hearted, forgiving one another, even as God for Christ's sake
forgave you.

Whatsoever you would that men should do unto you, even so do ye to them,
for this is the Law and the Prophets.

If you do forgive men their trespasses, your heavenly father will also
forgive you your trespasses. Math. 6* 14*


^^
But if you do not forgive men their trespasses, no more will your father
forgive you your trespasses.

Now therefore as the elect of God, ^ol. 3.11,
holy and beloved, put on tender mercy, kindness, humbleness of mind,
meekness, long suffering.

Forbearing one another, and forgiving one another, 1^
if any man have a quarrel to another: even as Christ forgave, even so do
ye.

^4
And above all things put on love, which is the bond of perfectness.


The twelfth Chapman.
NOW come I.

Salt. For whom?


Chap. For one that is very curious in washing his hands, and in cleansing the
outsides of all his vessels, but if one look into the inside of them, he shall
find them so foul and filthy, that it would loath a man to eat any thing
that comes out of them.


Salt. I have some for you, besides that which I delivered to the eight
Chapman, and that is this.

Woe be to you Scribes and Pharisees, Mat. ^3.25.
hypocrites, for ye make clean the utter side of the cup and platter, but
within they are full of bribery, and excess.

26
Thou blind Pharisie cleanse first the inside of the cup, and platter, that the
outside of them may be clean also.

Woe be to you Scribes and Pharisees, 27
hypocrites, for you are like unto whited tombs, which appear beautiful
outward, but are within full of dead-mens bones, 28
and of all filthiness: so are ye also, for outward ye appear righteous
unto men, but within ye are full of hypocrisy, and iniquity, ye lay the
commandments of God apart, and observe the traditions of men. Mark. 7.28.



Chap. This is somewhat a biting Salt.


Salt. It is such as is fit for the men you come for, therefore if you like it
take it, and give place to another.


Chap. I like it well, but I would have some more of it, for such men cannot,
have too much of this kind of Salt


Sal. Then you make a great difference betwixt this Salt, and that which is
commonly set on the Table, the which although it be commodious and necessary
for many things: yet S. Augustine says thus of it. Salem immoderatius
acceptum, De moribus Manicheorum cap. 8.
quis non venenus, esse clamauerit? who cries not that salt immoderately taken
is poison?


Chap. But store of Canonical Salt, well given, and well taken does not poison
but season, therefore I pray you let me have some more.


Salt. Every one will deceive his friend, Ier. 5.4.
and will not speak the truth, for they have taught their tongues to speak
lies, and take great pains to do wickedly, etc.

Therefore thus says the Lord of Hosts, behold I will melt them, 7
and try them, etc.

8
Their tongue is as an arrow shut out, and speaks deceit, one speaks
peaceably to his neighbor, with his mouth, but in his heart he lays wait
for him.

9
Shall I not visit for these things, says the Lord, or shall not my soul be
aduenged on such a nation as this?


Chap. Past grace be they that make light of this Salt, but I will give place.


The thirteenth Chapman.
I am glad I have his room.

Sal. You would be more glad if you had all Rome.


Chap. What it has been in times past, I know not, but since I can remember, I
can see no such good come from thence, as should move any wiseman to be in
love with it, I cannot be persuaded that superstition, idolatry, gazing on
babies, roarinig Bulls conspiracies, undermining of states, monstrous cruelty,
etc. come from Peter's chair, such Babylons cannot but fall and come to
confusion, the English pillars of it begin to totter already, thanks be to
God, God grant that the Preachers and professors of the Gospel, may love one
another, and that every one may keep his standing, as contented in his place,
to help what he may, to bear up the roof of so much of the Lords house, as
is here amongst us.


Salt. Chapman I will be your Clarke this once, and say Amen to your prayer,
but tell me now what you come for.


Chap. I would have Salt to season one, that trusts to his riches, and is so
carried away with covetousness, that he thinks corn is never dear enough.


Salt. Take this, Iam. 3 24.
The Lord is my portion, says my soul, therefore I will hope in him.

25
The Lord is good to them that trusts him, and to the soul that seeks him.

26
It is good both to trust and to wait for the salvation of the Lord.

If riches increase set not your hearts upon them. Psalm. 62, 10*


Doublesse man walks in a shadow, Psalm. 39.6.
and disquieteth himself in vain, he heapeth up riches and cannot tell who
shall gather them.

And he that receives the seed among thorns, Mat. 1^.22.
is he that hears the word, but the care of this world, and the
deceitfulness of riches, choke the word, and he is made vnfiuitfull.

Children, Mark. 10.24.
how hard is it for them that trust in riches, to enter into the Kingdom of
God.

Riches avail not in the day of wrath, P^ou, 11.4.
but righteousness delivers from death.

The liberal person shall have plenty, (...). ^^, 25.
and he that waters shall also have rain.

He that withdraws the corn the people will curse him, Prou.
but blessing shall be upon the head of him that sells corn.

The grave and destruction can never be full, 22.9.
so the eyes of men can never be satisfied.

He that has a good eye he shall be blessed for he gives of his bread to the
poor. 27.20.


Hear this ye that swallow up the poor, Amos. 8.4.
that ye make the needy of the land to fail.

Saying, 5
when will the new month begin that we may sell corn.

And the Sabbath that we may set forth wheat, and make the Ephah ( that is
the measure) small, and the Shekell ( that is the price) great, and falsefy the
waights of deceit.

That we may buy the poor for silver, 6
and the needy for shows, yet sell the refuse of the wheat.

The Lord has sworn by the excellency of Jacob, surely, 7
I will never forget any of their works.

Shall not the land tremble for this, 8
and every one mourn that dwells therein?

When we have food and raiment, Tim. 16.8.
let is therewith be content.

For they that will be rich fall into temptation and snares, 6
and into many foolish and noisome lusts, which drown men in perdition and
destruction.

10
For the desire of money is the root of all evil, which while some lusted
after they erred from the faith, and pierced themselves through with many
sorrows.

11
But thou o man of God slay these things and follow after righteousness,
godliness, faith, love, patience, and meekness.

17
Charge them which are rich in this world that they be not high-minded, and that
they trust not in uncertain riches, but in the living God which gives us al
things abundantly to enjoy. Will you have any more?


Chap. Not at this time, only I desire to know what the Lord means by the
excellency of Jacob.


Salt. In that place which I cited out of the eighth of Amos. ver. 7. by the
excellency of Jacob is meant the Lord himself, for he uses not to swear by
any other, but in Chap. 6. ver. 8. it is taken for the power and riches of that
people, in which things they did glory, the words be these:

The Lord God has sworn by himself, says the Lord God of Hosts, I abhor
the excellency of Jacob, and hate his Palaces.


The fourteenth Chapman.
IF you have don with him, I pray you serve me next.

Salt. What kind of Salt would you have?


Chap. I would have Salt for an unseasoned Youth, that haunteth Harlots houses,
not regarding his Parents precepts.


Sal. If he regard not the Commandment of the eternal God, who says, Thou
shall not commit adultery, threatening to wound the hearie Scalpe of such as
go on still in their wickedness: No marvel if he regard not his Parents,
who cannot (if they would) wound so deep as the most Mighty, who can cast
Body, and Soul into Hell, unto that same gnawing worm that never dies, and
into that burning fire which no man can quench.


Chap. Well, let me see what else you have besides this.


Salt. I promise you if this will not serve, I know not what will serve; for
what will he fear that fears not Hell? But because you are desirous to have
more, you shall have more, but none more sharp.

My Son, Pro 6.20
keep thy Fathers commandments, and forsake not thy Mothers instruction.


Chap. What if some superstitious Father or Mother, (which think none to be
the true members of the Catholic Church, but such as follow the Pope, and obey
him in whatsoever he commands,) should charge their Son to go to Remes, or
Rome, and there stay till he shall be thought fit to return hither again, to
teach men how to work mischife, by blowing up, not one, or two, but the whole
Parliament House? Ought such a Son to obey such a Parent?


Sal. God forbid be should, or that any should be so sottish, as to think that
the wisdom of God ( that spoke by Solomon) should command to do that which
God forbad, when he said:

Thou shall do no murder, shed no inocent blood, touch not mine Anointed, do
my Prophets no harm.


Chap. Say on then.


Sal. Bind them always upon thy heart, Pro. 6.21.22.
and tie them about thy neck, it shall lead thee when thou walk, it shall
watch for thee when thou sleep, and when thou wakest, it shall talk with
thee.

23
For the Commandment is a Lantern, and instruction is light, and corrections,
for instructions are the way of life.

24
To keep thee from the wicked woman, and from the flattery of the tongue of a
strange Woman.

25
Desire not her beauty in thine heart, neither let her take thee with her eye
liddes.

26
For because of the Whorish Woman, a Man is brought to a morsel of Bread, and a
Woman will hunt for the precious life of a man. etc.

32
He that commits adultery with a woman is destitute of understanding, he
that does it destroys his own Soul.

And in the sixth Chapter after, he has set down the intising speeches of the
Adultresse: He says:

12
Thus with her great craft she caused him to yield, 7
and with her flattering lips she entised him: And he followed her straight
ways, as an Ox that goes to the slaughter, and as a Fool to the stocks for
correction.

22
Till a Dart strike through his Liver, as a bird hastes to the snare, not
knowing that he is in danger.

23
Hear me now therefore O Children, and hearken to the words of my mouth.

25
Let not thine heart decline to herwaies, wander thou not in her paths.

26
For she has caused many to fall down wounded, and the strong men are all
slain by her.

27
Her house is the way unto the grave, which goes down to the chambers of death.

Know ye not that your bodies are the members of Christ: 1. Cor. 6.15.
shall I then take the members of Christ, and make them the members of a
Harlot? God forbid.

26
Do ye not know that he which coupeleth himself with an Harlot is one body?
for two, says he, shall be one flesh.

17
But he that is joined to the Lord is one spirit.

18
Flee fornication, every sin that a man does, is without the body, but he
that commits fornication, sins against his own body.

Know ye not that your body is the Temple of the Holy Ghost, 19
which is in you, whom you have of God? and now are not own.

20
For you are bought for a price, therefore gloryfie God in your body, and in
your spirit, for they are Gods.

This I think may suffice to draw him from that haunt, but tell me one thing,
did you never hear this Youth speak of marriage?


Chap. I remember once I heard him say, that if ever he married, he would have
one that should please his eye, and bring good store of money, let her
qualyties and religion be what they will; therefore he had need be seasoned for
this point.


Sal. Here is for that matter.

Favor is deceitful, and beauty is vanity, Pro. 31.30
but a Woman that fears the Lord, she shall be praised.

As a Jewel of Gold in a Swines snowt, 11.22.
so is a fair Woman that lacks discretion.

Who shall find a verteous Woman, 30.11
for her price is far above the Pearls.

House and riches are the inheritance of the Fathers, 19.14.
but a prudent Wife comes of the Lord. 16.18


Pride goes before destruction, Pride.
and an high mind before the fall.

Thou shall make no covenant with them. Deuteronomy. 7.2.3.4
etc. ( speaking of the Hittites, etc.) Neither shall thou make marriages with
them: Neither give thy Daughter to his Son, nor take his Daughter unto thy
Son, for they will cause thy Son to turn away from me, and to serve other
Gods; then will the wrath of the Lord wax whotte against you to destroy thee
suddenly.

And Ahab the son of Omri did worse in the sight of the Lord, then all that
were before him: for was it a light thing for him to walk in the sins of
Jeroboam the son of Nebat, except he took Iesabell also the daughter of
Ethbaal King of the Sidonians to wife, and went and served Baal, and worshipped
him?


Chap. If the youth have any wit, or any care of himself, this may serve to
make him take heed whom he matcheth.


The fifteenth Chapman.
THen you may depart that I may have your place.

Salt. What lack you?


Chap. I would have some Salt to season certain servants, which are negligent,
froward, untrusty, and ^arelesse in their masters business, especially in
their Masters absence, when they ought to be most diligent and careful.


Salt. These are foul faults, much hurt has been done in this land by
negligence, (though not so much as was intended by devilish diligence, and
likely to have been effected, had not our good God, by their own letters
revealed it) servants and other have been too careless in looking to their
fire and candle.


Chap. Indeed (as you say) there has been a devilish diligence, of Popish
pyoners, and bloody vnder-miners in their lurking, working more then monstrous
mischief, their words smoother then Oil, Charity, Charity: but their deeds
sharper then swords: Crucify, Crucify: pleasant names, Catholic,
Catholic: piercing natures, Caine-like, Caine-like; but God turn their
hearts. But whereas you said much hurt has been done in this land by such as
have been so careless in looking to their fire and candle: many have found it
too true. Some stick their candle upon a wall, and so fall asleep before they
put it out: some go to seek this or that where there is straw, flax, or
powder, and because they more mind the thing they look, then the candle they
look with, on a soddaine mar all: some laying a heap of straw in the
Kitchen, making fire under a pan, being called away in haste, make great waste,
in that they forget to make all sure before they go: others being drowsy,
standing by, undo their masters and many others.


Salt. If they had water it would little avail. if they have so little wit,
that they put by the haire-cloth, thinking by their so doing to save a little
malt: for the flame flies up to the thacke, which not being lined with lath
and lime, is soon set on fire.


Chap. There is also much hurt done by carrying fire in wispes of straw, or
dishes not covered, especially when the wind is busy: some Stewards which
have kept Courts, have set down penaltties for such negligence, it were well
if all would do so.


Salt. Well, whatsoever faults the Servants have, it shall be good for them to
taste of this which now I deliver unto you.

A discreet servant shall have rule over a lewd son, Prou. 17.2.
and he shall divide the heritage among the brethren.

Who then is a faithful servant, and wise, whom his master has made ruler
over his household, Mat. 24.4^
to give them meat in due season, blessed is that servant whom his Master when
he comes shall find so doing.

46
Verily I say unto you, he shall make him ruler over all his goods.


Chap. This may seem to encourage a discreet and diligent servant, to
continue in well doing: I would have salt to season such as be not so quick
and diligent: for if they were, they should not need quickening: for that horse
which of himself will stir, needs not be quickened with the spur.


Salt. Why then take this, apply it where need requires.

But if that evil servant shall say in his heart: Mat. 24.48
My Master does defer his coming, and begin to smite his fellows, 49
and to eat and drink with the drunken.

That servants master will come in a day when he looks not for him, 51
and in an hour that he is not ware of, and will cut him off, and give his
portion with hypocrites, there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth.

Servants be obedient unto them that are your masters according to the flesh,
Ephesians. 6, 5.
with fear and trembling in singleness of heart, 6
as unto Christ, not with service to the eye, as men-pleasers, but as the
servants of Christ, doing the will of God from the heart, 7
with good will, serving the Lord, and not men. And know ye, that whatsoever
good any man does, that same shall he receive of the Lord, 8
whether he be bond or free.

Let servants be subject to their masters and please them in all things, Titus
2, 9.
not answering again: neither pickers, but that they show all good
faithfulness, that they may adorn the Doctrine of God our Savior in alll
things.


Chap. This is a good lesson for our country servants, which be ever gadding
to games, and wandering to wakes, and that on the Lords day, where either they
play away their money at Nine-holes, or else cudgel one another so long, till
some of them go home with broken pates, or loss of an eye, and then if their
Masters find fault with them, and tell them that they spoil their horses by
letting them stand so long without water and meat, they will give a snappish
answer, and at Midsommer give them warning to provide themselves of another
against Michaelmas, and how little care they have to adorn the doctrine of
God, appears both by this, that they will be covered in the Church, as if
they were aged, or sickly: and also by this, that of all places by their good
will, or rather bad will, they would not dwell where there is Catechizing.


Salt. If may be, when their own rod or cudgel has well beaten them, they
will become better, and in the mean time stand more in awe, if Minister,
Master, Constable, or Churchwardens do their duties: and so you may depart.


The sixteenth Chapman.
GLad am I.

Salt. And tell me why.


Chap. Because I have stayed a good while, I am weary with standing so long,
and here was no place to sit.


Salt. Come you for your self or for others?


Chap. I come not for my self, but for Traitors.


Salt. I have not for you, you must go to the Tower.


Chap. I have heard indeed that there is good rough Salt, it will search into
the bones, and through the bones, but that Salt is cast upon them that be
convicted, unless there be some pardon upon unfeigned repentance, I would
have some Salt as is good to preserve men from becoming such unsavory monsters
as stink of gunpowder, weresoeuer they go.


Salt. I think I have some here fit for that purpose, if it be well mingled
with herbe-grace,

Curse not the King, no not in thy thought, Eccle. 10.20
neither curse the rich in thy bedchamber, for the foul of the heaven shall
carry the voice, and that which has wings, shall declare the matter.


Chap. The Lord cause one of the chiefest of the fowls to declare dangerous
designs of late.


Salt. What call you that foul?


Chap. Eagle which mounted and made have to the Court (some say) as soon as
he espied a show of blood, upon a piece of paper, I mean, when he suspected
some bloody plot, or at least was amazed.


Salt. Blessed be God that made that Eagle make such speed after the sight of
the paper: there is good hope that the devil has but a short time, he
thareth so sore and would have roared more, if God had not stopped his mouth in
time, but if you will have any more of this kind of Salt here it is.

Let them be confounded and put to shame that seek after my soul, ^sal 35.4.
let them be turned back, and put to confusion that imagine mine hurt.

5
Let them be as chafe before the wind, and let the Angel of the Lord seatter
them.

6
Let there way be dark and slippery, and let the Angel of the Lord persecute
them.

7
For without cause they have hide the pit, and their net for me, without cause
have they dug a pit for my soul.

And David faid to Abishai destroy him not, 1. Sam. 26.9.
etc. for who can lay his hand upon the Lords Anointed, and be guiltless.

11
The Lord keep me from laying my hand upon the Lords anointed.

This know all that in the last days shall come perilous times, 2. Tim. 3.1.
for men shall be lovers of their own selves, covetous, boasters, proud, etc.

2
Without natural affection, truce breakers, false accusers, etc. Traitors,
heady, high-minded, etc. turn away therefore from such.

Then when Judas which betrayed him saw that he was condemned, Mat. 27.3.
he repented himself, and brought again the thirty pieces of silver to the
chief Priests and Elders.

4
Saying, I have sinned betraying the innocent blood, but they said, what is that
to us, see thou to it.

And when he had cast down the siluerplates in the Temple, he departed and
went and hanged himself.

And so did Achitophel in David's time, ^. Sam. 17.23.
when he saw his counsel against the King was not followed.


Chap. If we would believe indeed that these things are true, we should
instead of being slaves unto such sins, strive against them with all the
might we had, yea we should pray heartily for strength to withstand such
horrible wickedness, and hold this for a truth, that it is not nobleness, but
haughtiness, not piety but pride, not religion but rebellion, that makes such
kind of men, so stubbornely refuse to obey, such as the King of Kings has
placed over them.


Salt. If such Parents and Tutors, as are so addicted to Popery, would, instead
of feeding their children with beads and babies, call them to read some
chapter of the Bible, either in the old or new Testament morning and evening,
superstition, and rebellion would be loathsome unto them in short space,
especially if they would use prayer, and frequent the Church, in which such as
be wise will do what in them lies, to have wise and sober guides, least
through ignorance and ill behavior they rather offend then amend, such as come
to hear them.


Chap. It were great happiness, yea a great blessing of God indeed, if every
Teacher could do as he teaches, but there is no man living I think without
some fault, do none of the ancient fathers acknowledge this in their time?


Salt. You shall hear what one of them wrote more then twelve hundred years
past: who dare assign to himself, that he does all things that God
commands? Nemo prosus nemo, no man, no man, at all, predicamus, and non
facimus, we Preach and do not, you hear and regard not, merito omnes sumus sub
flagello, we are all worthily under the whippe does Teacher and doer, hearer
and contemner, we studdy to find fault one with another, we do not studdy to
sift our own works, one neighbor backebyteth another: one Clearke
backebyteth another Clearke, and one layman anther, certainly, I see men
accusing one another, but I see no man, just se excusantem, justly excusing
himself.


The seventeenth Chapman.
I Pray you sir if you have any Salt, (for so I understand you call the holy
Scripture) that is fit to season such as seek to charmers, Sorcerers, and
witches, let me hauesome.

Salt. Our Savior Christ called his Disciples (who were to season men with the
word) the Salt of the earth, and therefore I thought I might without offense,
call the word of God, Mat. 5.13.
I mean the holy Scriptures, Salt, and for your purpose take this.

And he ( meaning Manasseh who reigned in Judah, after his father Ezekiah) did
evil in the sight of the Lord, 2. Chron. 33.
like the abhominaons of the Heathen, 2
whom the Lord had cast out, before the children of Israel.

He cause his sons to pass through the fire in the valley of Benhinnon, he
gave himself to witchcraft, ^
and to charming, and to sorcery, and he used them that had familliar spirits,
and soothsayers: he did very much evil in the sight of the Lord, to anger
him.

And the Lord spoke to Manasseh and to his people, but they would not regard, 20
Wherefore the Lord brought upon them the captains of the host of the King of
Ashur, which took Manasseh, and put him in fetters, and bound him in chains,
11
and carried him to Babel.

You shall not use witchcraft, etc,

You shall not regard them that use witcraft, neither soothsayers, Leuit. 19,
26
ye shall not seek to them, to be defiled by them, 31
I am the Lord your God.

If a man or woman have a spirit of divination in them, or sooth-saying in
them, they shall dye the death, they shall stone the^ to death, their blood
shall be upon them.

In the Epistle to the Galathians, witchcraft is reckoned among those deeds of
the flesh, that hinder us from inheriting the Kingdom of God. Gal. 5.20.



Chap. Shall none in whom such works of the flesh have been found, be saved?


Salt. Yes if they strive to enter in at ye strait gate our Savior speaks
of in ye 13. of Saint Luke which is not only to say Lord, Lord, or to hear a
Sermon, or to come to eat and drink at the communion unprepared, but depart
from iniquity, to repent truly, to cleave to Christ unfeignedly, and to show
forth fruits of asound faith continually: but I never heard of any witch, that
thus returned.


The eighteenth Chapman.
IF you have done with him, hearken a while unto me.

Salt. What news bring you?


Chap. I come with no news, but to end an old quarrel if it may be.


Salt. Betwixt whom?


Chap. Betwixt two women, the one is called of some Cathara, the other for her
religion, is called Romana; and for her outward beauty, Rosamunda.


Salter. Rosamund? I have not heard of many, if any of that name but she that
was famous in the days of Henry the second.


Chap. Saving your tale: did not that king cause his eldest son to be crowned
in his life time, thinking it would have been an occasion of great quietness,
as well to himself as to the whole realm?


Sal. Graston, Graston in Abridg.
who had it from Fabian, does report so, adding, that as it proved, it was to
the utter destruction of them both.

It is a saying old and true: Man purposes, and God disposes, therefore it is
the part of all faithful and loving Subjects, to pray, as for themselves, so
for their Sovereign, that it would please the most mighty to protect and
direct him in all that he takes in hand. But fith you have put me in mind of
Rosamund, I will tell you what verses I read some forty years ago upon astone
cross (as I remember) not far from Oxford.

Qui meat hac or et, signumque salutis adoret,
Vtque tibi detur requies Rosamunda precetur.

Chap. I pray you do so much as English them.


Salt. Let him that sign of health goes by Pray and adore it reverently,

And that thou Rosamund may rest,

Let him in praying make request.


Chap. By your leave a little.

To worship cross Christ backnot me,
But take up cross when need should be,
To pray for dead I would not fail,
If I were sure it might avail.
Foolish Virgins came too late, Ma. 25.11.12

And so could not come in at gate.
Dead in the Lord are blessed for ay,
They rest from labor John does say. Reu. 14, 13.

But were there no verses upon that Rosamunds Tomb?


Salt. Some say these:

Hic iacet in tumba Rosa mundi non Rosamunda,
Non redolet, sed olet, quae redolere solet.
Which I English thus:

Entombed low now lies here,
A withering Rose, not Rosamund clear
Not well, but ill, now sauoureth she,
That was wont to smell most daintily.

Chap. Now hear me.

Though musk do make some Dames smell sweet
to carnal men as Rose,
Yet God does count all filth unmeet,
To come near to his nose.
He is provoked every day,
By sinners that transgress.
But if they make of sin a play,
God will them curse, not bless.

Salt. Well, let us leave that Rosamund to him that knows best what end she
made: Now let me hear what you have to say of your neighbor Romana.


Chap. She, when her anger is kindled, will call Cathara, Bookish: and Cathara
will call her Romish.


Salt. About what do they fall out?


Chap. About Churching, Crossing, May-Ales, etc.


Salt. Why, what says Cathara for Churching?


Chap. Nothing for it, but something against it; and to the end you may be the
better acquainted with their iarring, if you will go with me into my garden,
it is ten to one but we shall hear them chatting apace.


Salt. Where be they when you hear them?


Chap. They sit sowing at their own doors, when the Sun shines, and the
streets being narrow, and they overthwart neighbors may easily hear each
other.


Salt. Is your garden far hence?


Chap. No, it is here hard by.


Salt. Come on let us go, it should seem your Garden is near them, if you may
so well hear them: or else they talk very loud.


Chap. When they wax hot, they are three notes above La, and Law too,
forgetting that the field has eyes, and the wood ears.


Salt. But your garden is no wood.


Chap. No, but there be trees hard by, besides the Fence, which is sufficient
to keep them from espying me.


Salt. Is there never an ancient Matron in your Town, that labors to make
them friends?


Chap. Yes, there is a very good Lady, called Madam Make-peace, which takes
great pains to bring them to some quiet, and it is marvel but she will be
there anon: but now we are come into the garden, let us sit down under this
barbery tree.


Salt. Hu^ht, they be at it already.


Cathara. I marvel Mistress Romana, you make so much ado about these
matters, does it offend you, if after my lying in, I come to Church when I see
my time, and in such sort as I best like?


Romans Yea marry does it: why should not you come as your neighbors do?


Cath. So I do, is there any of them that ride to Church?


Romans No, if they dwell near, what then?


Cath. If they go on their feet I go so too.


Romans They go with the midwife and other women, who as they took pains with
her that traveled, so do they give thanks with her.


Cath. So they may at home.


Romans And why not in the Church?


Cath. So I do.


Romans I hear what you do: you follow your husband to Church, and so go to your
own seat, you go not up as you be commanded.


Cath. No more do my neighbors: for they should kneel near to the Communion
Table, but they (at such times) kneel near to the Ministers seat in the body
of the Church.


Romans It may be they are appointed to kneel near to the communion table, if
there be a Communion: but you never change your seat, no stranger can tell
whether you go forth to your thanksgiving, or no: for you use not the loose
kerchiffe, that men may know what you are.


Cath. If God see that my life be not loose, nor the Law require that
kerchiffe, why should I use it? it does me no good.


Romans What do you account them loose y^ use it: I have heard that some of you
talk much of Thamar, y^ sat veiled, I would you should know there be as honest
women use it, as refuse it.


Cath. I do not deny it, though, as I have heard you call them flirts that go
without it: but whereas you say no man can tell whether I go forth to
thanksgiving or no, I ask you whether it be fit I should draw strangers eyes
after me by any unwonted attire: what are you the better if a stranger know of
your Churching?


Rom, I think I am somewhat the better, because he that knows it, will say:
that woman is churched to day, God give her a good forth-gate.


Cath. And I pray you now should not we pray one for another, as well at other
times as then?


Romans Yes, but the weaker our bodies be, the more we are in danger.


Cath. That is one of your follies, you will go to Church at your Months end,
though you faint by the way: or else you will be churched, or rather housed at
home* your kerchiffe (in which you put such woman-hood, and which you put off
so soon as you come home) hanging dangling behind, will not keep the air
from your monthe.


Romans I cry you mercy I killed your Cushion, our kerchiffe is a great mote in
your eye: but some of your crew, ere a week be at end, will be washing their
buckes, and come skipping over the streets for fire, as if some Maid-Marrian
were running in have to borrow a glass.


Cath. What tell ye me of Maide-marrian, she is none of my crew, that Tomboy
and her Fellows, be encouraged in their fooleries, by such as you are; it is
you, and not we, that lend them Glasses, Ribands, Laces, with Cappe and
Feathers, and Calls for their faces: You suffer you Daughters to be May-ladies
so long, that shortly after you find their Laces to short: And then, arrant
Whore out of my doors, (when it is too late:) But all the while my Lady has a
Velvet Cap on her head, a brave borrowed Gown on her back, and a Nosegay in
her hand, You be as merry as Pyes, though the name of God be blasphemed, the
Sabbath, profaned, the Minister contemned, your Daughter defiled: All is well
so long as the Ale lasts.


To. Have you seen any of our Daughters in that case?


Cath. Did you ever see a Nose in a man's Face?

Madam Make-peace.

How now Neighbors, still iarring? have you not yet eased your stomachs?


Sal. Now there is a third Woman come, that is Madam Make-peace.


Maddam. Truly this is not well: Christian Women should strive to excel in
sobriety, modesty, and mildness of spirit; and not in nipping, and
quipping, and loudness of tongue: If you should is contend, and brawle with
your Husbands as you us one with an other, then in Salomons judgment, It were
better for them to dwell in the wilderness: Pro. 21.19.12.13.21.9.
or to stand in a house that is ever dropping on their heads, then to dwell
with you. I pray you agree, for shame agree.


Cath, Why Maddam? What would you have me to do? I have heard Midwiues bid
some Women put on the loose Kerchiefe, and it be but to honor God, and our
Lady; you know that it is no part of Gods honor, he is not honored with
Cloutes, he is to be worshipped in Spirit, and truth: And the best honor that
we can give to the blessed Virgin, the mother of our Savior, is to follow her
virtues. Mistress Romana which never comes to Church herself, is ever
snuffing at me, because I frame not myself to please her humor, she is ever
stumbling at Strawes, and leaping over Blocks.


To. If I stumble but at Strawes, I shall not hurt my Toes, and if I leap over
Blocks, I shall not break my shinnes.


Cath. You know my meaning; You catch at our Moates, and wink at your own
Beams.


To. I pray you Madam Make-peace, mark their Moates, when others be merry,
they must be mourning; when we fast, then they feast; when they ly-in, there
must be no white-sheete, for fear of superstition; their Husbands holy day
Cloak will serve the turn well enough; If we go to Church vayled, they ask
us if we be ashamed of that we have done. forgetting that some of their humor
will wash Buckes, ear their Child be Christened: If any woman follow her that
is Churched, then they say, our Lady must have her train; If there be a Psalm
read, (as they say your Ministers do read over when a woman is Churched,) then
forsooth the Psalm is abused; If the woman make her neighbors a dinner, they
say it pincheth the poorer sort. Moris-dauncers be Rogues, if they go to the
next Town: Christmas-pies be superstitious, in ye cold winter, when your
neighbors lacking food, should be refreshed, and wanting Wood, should be
warmed: Then up to London if not to save charges, or for some other cause, I
know not what. Thus you see their Moates, and Beams.


Cath. It were well, if these were your Beams: Kerchiefe, White-sheete,
Churching, Dinner, Morris-belles, Christmas-pies, Feastings, and warmings of
the Poor; There be other matters that I call Beams, you Whitson-lady, and
some of her Maids, were dismayded; your Morris-dauncers, and their followers,
profane the Sabbath; they have misused such Ministers as have reproved their
vices, by cutting off their Horse tails, breaking their Windows, plucking up
their Orchard Plants. They pour in as much drink in one day, as would suffice
a temperate man ten days: Look where is most misrule, there with you is the
best Christmas kept: If some of you could cut the throats of all that favor
not your customs, then they would keep, a merry Christmas, then swear,
stare, and a pox of all Puritanes.

I will stir your powder-plots, because the more they be stirred, the more
they will stink; yea they will stink in the nostrills of all such as follow
Saint Peter's counsel; Fear God, Honor the King: while Sun and Moon
endures: It is not your Keir-cheife, Belles, and Pies, that I stand so much
upon: It greeueth me to see how careful you be for such matters, and how
careless in coming to Church, in sending your Children to be Catachised, in
having an eye to them in their meryments, in exhorting them to take heed of
going forth with Dina, to see faces, and fashions, and to behave themselves
honestly, and soberly, in all companies, and to come home in due time: My
Neighbors going to thanks giving, with few, or many, shall not offend me, so
that you control not me for going as I think good: And whereas you have so
often told me of our washing of Buckes, and coming so soon into the street;
it may be some poor body wanting help, is driven to do that which is neither
healthful, nor seemly; but you have no reason to charge all of us with that
which is done by some few, and that upon necessity. But touching these, and
such like matters, let Madam Make-peace judge what is best to be done.


To. Content, but first here me a word or two: As you would not have me charge
all precise women, with that which is done by some of the poorer sort; so I
hope you will not charge all of us that have been brought up in Popery, with
those powder-plots you speak of, God forbid we should all have such murdering
minds.


Cath. If you have not, it is the better for you, but I pray you Madam speak
your mind.


Mad. My coming hither was to make you friends, but your iarres be so great,
and my brains so weak, that I doubt I shall need help, therefore I will go
home now, and to morrow (if God lend life) I will bring our Minister with me.


To. Whom do you mean, Master Guide-well?


Mad. So indeed I have heard you have used to call, not only him, but all
other of his profession, for you think none do well but Seminaries and
Jesuits.


To. When you come, bring Dame Cathara with you, and you shall find me, and a
Kinsman of mine, walking in my Garden.


Salt. Since they be gone, let us depart also.


Chap. Shall I have none of your Salt for these Women?


Sal. If the Minister, and Madam Make-peace can do them no good, I know not
what to say to them: and so fare you well.


Chap. And you also.

Now retourneth Madam Make-peace, with the Minister, and Cathara.


Mad. God be here, and peace.


To. You are welcome.


Mad. I have brought him whom you call Master Guide-well with me.


To. I would you had brought Master Doe-well also.


Mad. He comes limping after, he is not so quick-footed, you know, as Master
Guide-well.


To. I would he were, and my Cosen here as quicke-tongued: But what do you
call this Man?


Mad. We call him Master Guide-well.


To. I pray you Master Guide-well talk with my Cousin a little.


Guide. May I be so bold Sir as to crave your name.


Tract. My name is Tractable.


Guide. If your nature be answerable to your name, I hope I shall not find you
obstinate.


Tract. Obstinacy is a Companion of Heresy. I may err, but I would not be an
Heretic.


Guide. If you may err, then a Catholic may err.


Tract. An ancient Catholic said so.


Guide. The Catholic you name, was ancient, and learned indeed, but if his
own Books be discerned from those which are fathered on him wrongfully (as
some hold) you shall find him differ in many things from your self, and such
other latter superstitious Catholics.


Tract. Does any man doubt of any books, that bear the name of Saint
Augustine?


M. Guide. As the learned do hold many of those books to be dubij, M. Perk. in
Prob. Pa. 28.
such as are to be doubted of: so do they affirm many of the^ to be spurij.
plain bastards, and not only do they doubt of many books that bear his
name, but of many that carry the name of ancient Christians: namely Dionysius,
and if you list to see what reasons are set down to prove those works of the
heavenly Hierachy, etc. not to be framed by Dionysius Aerop. read M. Perkins
his Prob. I name this Dionysius, Page 8.9.10.
because I have heard some find great fault with such as deny those Hierarchies
to be his. See P. Mart. on Iud. c. 1. confer. R. and Page 485. whit. in disp.
Page 432.



Mad. I pray you talk of those matters some other time, I requested you to
come hither with me, to help to make peace, betwixt these two women, which
have iarred a long while about Churching, and other matters appertaining to
women.


M. Guide. If it be woemens matters. I hope you, Madam, being a grave Matron,
and not altogether unlearned, may serve to end this quarrel without me.


Mad. My learning is little, yet this I re^ember I have learned of Solomon,
Prou. 6 16.
that ^^ere be seven things which God abhors: ^^rst, haughty eyes: secondly,
a lying tongue: ^^irdly, hands that shed innocent blood: ^^urthly, a heart
that imagines wicked en^erprises: fifthly, feet that be swift in run^ing to
mischief: sixthly, a falfe witness that ^^eaketh lies: seventhly, a rayser of
conten^ions among brethren. Now by the last of ^hese seven I gather, that if
the Lord abhor ^uch as raise contentions among brethren, ^r Christians, which
as S. Paul says, should ^oue as brethren, then no doubt he fauou^eth and
blesses such as labor to make them friends, according to that saying of ^ur
Savior, Blessed are the Peacemakers, Math. 5.9.
etc. I therefore believing this to be true, ^o for my part exhort you both,
if I may be ^o bold in the presence of our Minister, to ^emember, that as God
is one, so he would have us to be one, and not rent in sunder: Ezekiel. 11.19.
He does promise this as a blessing, to give ^his people one heart, and a new
spirit. 2, Cor, 13, 11,
And the Apostle bids us to be of one mind, and to live in peace, that the
God of love and peace, may be with us: But yet you must note, neighbor Romana,
that we cannot be of one mind with you, if you do any thing that is contrary to
the Lords mind: we cannot agree with you therein. Esai 56.7. Mat. 21.13.
Psalm. 100.4.
The Lord calls the place, where his people assemble to hear his word, to
praise him for his mercy, and to call upon his name, etc. the house of prayer.
And we are commanded to enter into his gates, with praise, since then we go to
Church, to hear his word, to call upon his name, to show our selves thankful
for his blessings, etc. What should hold you or any other, from joining with us
in such holy exercises? or how can you find fault with Cathara for going
thither with one or two? when your self goes thither, neither with few nor
many, or with what conscience can you find fault with her, for omitting some
trifles, when as you omit matters of weight? Do not you think you may ere, as
well, or rather as much as your kinsman Master Tractable, or if you think you
may err, why do you not come and pray with us, that it would please God to
bring into the way of truth, all such as have erred and are deceived?


Romans Have they such prayers, cozen?


Tract. So they say.


Romans But what should I hear if I came among you?


Guide. That Christ his Sheep hear his voice. Ioh. 11.


Romans I would hear that voice from his Vicar the Pope.


Mad. Did you ever hear him? or do you think you shall ever hear him?


Romans No, but I have heard them that came from him as they say.


Mad. If God send his word home to us, what need we go beyond seas to fetch
it? why do you judge so hardly of our Ministers, as to think they will not tell
you what Christ said.


Romans Why what did he say?


Guide. He said, I am the way, the truth, Ioh. 14.6.12.36.
and the life, he said, while you have light believe in the light, that you may
be the children of the light: He said, as Moses, lifted up the Serpent in the
wilderness, 3.14.15.
so must the Son of man be lift up, that whosoever believes in him, should
have everlasting life, and I will raise him up at the last day, This is the
will of him that sent me, 6.40.
that every one that sees the Son and believes in him, should have
everlasting life, etc.


Cath. To my remembrance I heard one Preacher, say, that to see, in that place
does signify plainly to know, and that the obedience of faith is joined in
the children of God, with that feeling which they have of ye divine power in
Christ.


Romans I think Maddam, Make-peace and you dame Cathara, do spend as much time
in reading the Bible, and hearing of Sermons, as my cozen and I do in reading
Sir Thomas Moors books against Frith, and his Vtopia, wherein he girdeth at
such as maintain Sheep to devour men.


Guide. Our Savior Christ, said: search the Scriptures for they testify of me,
Ioh. 5, 39,
and to the Sadduces which deny the resurrection: he said, Mat, 22, 29:
ye are deceived, not knowing the Scriptures.

Saint Luke says: he opened their (meaning his Disciples) understanding, Luk,
24.45,
that they might understand the Scriptures, and before in the 27 verse: that he
began at Moses, and at all the Prophets, and int^rpreted unto them (that is
to Cleophas and his companion) in all the Scriptures, the things which
concerned him: And Saint John says, Ioh. 20, 31,
These things are written that ye might believe, that Jesus is the Christ, the
Son of God, and that in believing ye might have life through his name: S.
Paul says, Rom, 15, 4,
whatsoever things are written, are written for our learning.


Tract. But Sir Thomas Moors books, and the Golden-legend, and such like are
written, ergo, for our learning.


Guide. Soft Master Tractable, you are too forward, for you minor or
assumption, if I had been disposed to make a sillogisme, I would have done it
without your help, if the Apostle had meant whatsoever was written in any
book, you had concluded well, but he meant not so, for if he had, then we
should read for our learning Huon of Bordeaux, Beuis of Hampton, all books of
fables, errors, and lies, whatsoever, but he speaks of ye holy Scriptures,
for immediately after the former words, he has these, that, we through
patience, and comfort of the Scriptures might have hope. And when he says, as
it is written, I have made thee a father of many Nations, and again, now it is
not written for him only, Genesis 17.4.15.6.
that it was imputed to him (Abraham) for righteousness, but also for us, etc.
he means written in Genesis.

And when he writes to the Corinthians touching the Death and Resurrection of
Christ our Redeemer, he says, 1. Cor. 15.3.4
that Christ dyed for our sins, according to the Scriptures, Exo. 12.6, 7*
Ps. 22, 15.16 17.
and that he was buried, and that he arose the third day, Esa: 34, 53. Zach,
13, 7,
according to the Scriptures.

And Saint Peter writing to those that had obtained like precious faith, etc.
says: We have also a more sure Prophetical word, to the which you do well
that ye take heed as unto a light that shines in a dark place, Dan. 9.26.
Jonas. 1.17, 2. Pet. 1, 19.
until the day dawne, and the Daystarre arise in your hearts: not meaning that
the words of the Prophets in themselves were more firm, or of greater credit
then the Gospel of Christ, or that voice of God the Father: Math. 17.5.
This is my beloved Son in whom I am well pleased, hear him.


Tract. Saint Peter says, he heard that voice when he was with him in the
Holy mount: but he says nothing of these words hear him.


Guide. No more does he mention his own words, spoken a little before that
voice came.


Romans What words were those?


Guide. Master, it is good for us to be here, etc. we may not think that Saint
Matthew reports an untruth, because Saint Peter spoke not all at once, there
was a voice also from heaven when Christ was baptized, but then neither Matthew,
Mark, nor Luke mentioned those words, hear him. But to return to the matter
we have in hand, you see by the places I cited, that for the guiding of our
faith, and bringing of us to the true knowledge of our salvation, purchased by
Christ, we are sent to the Scriptures: therefore. Mistress Romana, and you
Master Tractable, if you will build surely, build your faith on ye holy
scriptures, let no men's writings carry you any whither, without this good guide:
If you would take as great delight in reading the Bible, as you do in ye books
you speak of, and pray God heartily, and in all humility of spirit, to give you
such mesure of knowledge, as may suffice to bring true comfort to your soul,
and therewithal be willing and diligent in hearing the Word taught, which is
a special ordinary means to plant in you a sound Faith in Christ, our Wisdom,
Righteousness, Sanctification and Redemption, I doubt not but in short space
you should see how fowly you were deceived, in thinking you might go to heaven
by observing men's Traditions, stumbling in ye dark without the word of God,
which the Prophet David calls a Lantherne to his feet, and a light to his
paths. Ps. 119.105



Romans If I should give ear unto you M. Guidewell, and such as you are, would
you bring me to any other faith, the^ that which is called Catholic?


Guide. The sum of the ancient Catholic faith to be received of all that
will be saved, is set down in the Creed, called the Apostles Creed, which
begins thus, I believe in God the Father Almighty, etc. And in the other
received Creed, Whosoever will be saved, etc. Which Creed is read diverse times
in our Churches yearly.


Romans Is there no mention in that ancient Creed of praying to saints, of going
a Pilgrimage, of worshipping of the Cross, and Images: of Purgatory, praying
on Beads, and such other matters, as are received of us which go to Mass.


Guide. Ask your Cozen.


Romans What say you Cozen, are they.


Tract. No, what then? shall we not use Baptism and the Supper of the Lord,
because they are not mentioned in that Creed?


Guide. Christ commanded the use of them, but not of the other: yea rather he
forbids the other, for that they are repugnant to that which he commands
and teaches.


Mad. Most of your side M. Tractable are found to be far more forward in
observing that which man requires, then that which the Almighty commands:
Many, especially the ignorant sort, talk much of the Catholic Faith: but if
one should ask them what is the true justifying faith, how it is wrought in
us, and to what end it is given us, I fear they would make but a simple
answer.


Romans If one should ask you Madame, what would you answer?


Mad. Master Guidewell is present, therefore it is fit that he should answer.


Guide. Nay pray you let her hear what you can say.


Mad. This then, under correction, I say, that Faith is a sure persuasion
wrought in the hearts of the elect by the Spirit of God, together with his word
truly taught, reverently heard, and well understood: by the which faith the
soul believes, that it repenting, and steadfastly cleaving unto Christ her
head and Savior, has all her sins thoroughly remitted, and is reconciled to
God, to the end she should bring forth the fruits of Repentance, and in love
do the works of a sound faith, to the glory of God, the good example of
others, and the assuring her self of her effectual calling, and so of her
election to life everlasting.


Romans I promise you Madam, I take it to be far more easy to kiss a
Crucifixe, to hear a Mass, to go to shrift, to say daily twenty Auo mary's,
besides De profundis, and to fast the Imber days from flesh, having other good
fare to serve the turn, then to learn and practice this which you have spoken
of faith and works, I had thought you Protestants had shut good works clean
out of your doors.


Guide. You, and others, are told many things which you should find false, if
you would be one of our hearers: for we teach that, as that son which will
dwell in his fathers house, which is bought for him, must go the right way unto
it* So, though Christ has bought a resting place for us in heaven with his
bl^ud: yet if we will enjoy it, we must walk the right way to it, dye to sin,
and lead a new life: 2. Tim. 2, 19. Romans 22 9. Ephesians. 2.10. Tit. 2.11.22.13.
we teach with the Apostle, that every one that calls on ye name of Christ,
must depart from iniquity, abhor evil, and cleave to good, for that God has
ordained good works, that we should walk in them: and that the grace of God,
that brings salvation to all men, has appeared, and teaches us that we
should deny ungodliness, and worldly lusts, and that we should live soberly,
righteously, and godly in this present world, looking for the blessed hope and
appearance of the glory of the mighty God, and of our Savior Jesus Christ:
therefore neighbor do not think that we shut out good works from the life
of a Christian, or that we commend that kind of dead faith whereof S. James
speaks that believes there is a God, but will do no good for Gods sake, do
not condemn us before you hear us.


Romans I have heard that you Protestants discern the just from the unjust by
the law of Faith, nnd not of works, did ever any of the ancient Catholics so
discern the one of these from the other?


Guide. Hearken what Saint Augustinesaith: Nostra Fides, etc. that is (says
he) the Catholic faith discerns the just from the unjust, not by the law
of works, Contra duas epistolas, pelag ad Bonifaciu^ lib. 3 cap. 5. Abac, 2,
but by the very law of faith, because the just lives by faith: By the which
discerning it comes to pass, that a man living without Man-quelling, without
Theft, without False-witnesse, without coveting that is another man's, rendering
due honor to his parents, be so chaste, that he contains from all coupling
even in wedlock, be very liberal in giving Alms, suffering injuries with all
patience, which not only takes not away which belongs to another, but
requires not his own being taken from him; or having sold all that he has,
and given it to the poor, possesses nothing of his own: yet with all these
his laudable manners, as it were, if he hold not the right and Catholic
faith toward God, he may depart out of this life to be damned.

Now there is another which has indeed good works out of a right faith, which
works by love: but yet he is such a one, as matcheth not the other in
manners, he sustaineth his incontinency with the honesty of marriage, he
renders and requires the debt of carnal copulation, not only for
propagation, 1. Cor. 7.
but also for pleasure: so as yet he lies with his only wife, (which thing
the Apostle grants to the married, secundum veniam, according to leave;) yet
he bears not injuries patiently, but in his anger is carried with a desire of
revenge; yet so, as being requested, he forgiueth, that he may say: Math. 6.
As we forgive our debtors; he possesses goods, and of them gives Alms, not
so largely as the other: he takes not away yt which is another man's: but
seeks to have his own, though not at the Common Law, Ecclesiastico iudic^o
non forens^^
yet by judgment Ecclesiastical.

This man, though he seem inferior to the other in manners: yet for the right
Faith which he has in God, by the which Faith he lives, and according unto
which he accuses himself in all his faults, prayseth God in all good works,
giving ignominy to himself, glory to him, and receiving from him both pardon
of sins, and love of well-doing: he departs to be delivered from this
life, and to be received into the fellowship of such as are to reign with
Christ: Why, but for Faith? the which, all-be-it it saves none without works
(for that is no reprobate faith which works by love;) yet by it also sins
are loosed, Abac. 2,
because the just live by faith: but without it, even those works which seem
good, are turned into sin: Romans 14.
For all that is not of faith is sin.

Thus far Saint Augustine, where we find him twice citing the Prophet
Abacuk, to prove that even the just man does live by Faith, and that the
Catholic Faith in his time, and which he calls our Faith, discerns the
just from the unjust, by the Law, not of works, but of Faith.


Tract. Yet that faith which which he speaks of, works by love.


Guide. True, for if it were idle or dead, it could not apprehend Christ, which
is our righteousness, nor assure us that we are especially called to Salvation
through him.


Romans You have brought all this out of Saint Augustine to move me to make more
account of faith, and to that end belike you would have me to be one of your
hearers: but if I should frame my self, or rather if God should move me to
hearken to your doctrine, you must have a care that your life be answerable
thereto, otherwise if you preach against swearing, tippling, dicing, whooring,
couenant-breaking, unmercifulness. etc. and be stained with any of these
foul spots your self, I assure you, though I make some account of Cappe and
Surplesse, and such like, yet I shall think that you deserve to be deprived
rather for being blotted with these deformities, then for omitting these
formalities.


Tract. All your talk is to me, and my Cozen, to have us come to Church; but
you say nothing to Cathara, which has no mind to be churched, to kneel at
Communion, to the Ring in Marriage, nor to have her child crossed after baptism.


Cath. How do you know what I do, your selves not being seen in the Church
of a long time, I believe if Tom Piper would play there once in seven days,
with his puplets, we should have you there weekly.


Romans How say you by that lo? your good word is ready at all times.


Madam. Well, let this prying into one another doing pass, and pray God to
give you charitable hearts one toward another, and remember that when the Lord
says, he will give his people one heart, as you have heard, he does promise it
a blessing, pray therefore that you may have an unity in the verity. We live
here (God be praised) under a Christian magistrate, which no doubt is grieved
to see his subjects thus divided: he would feign have an unity, and the same
declared by an uniformity, and that in some external things. In which though
he do not, yet your Priests seem to put a kind of holiness and religion;
and all (as I think) to draw you to feed on matters of better quality, that
will indeed nourish: But we see by a fearful experience, that the more our
church yields to the formal coats, the readier some are to cut our throats,
whether we mourn or pype, you will neither weep nor dance with us, God turn
your hearts if it be his will, that you may come pray, and praise God with us.

Truly Mistress Romana, your Papists are in a drowsy dream, you think you
see S. Peter (whom some of you make porter) stand ready to let you into Heaven,
for being so willing to destroy those which say with him, speaking of Jesus
Christ; there is no other name given under Heaven, Act, 4.12.
whereby we might be saved.

Awake yet at last, and shake off your blindness, and frowardness, least you
bring both your self, and your Children to confusion, they think they do well
in obeying you, but that can not be, unless you obey the Lord, and bid them do
that which he aloweth; you laugh at such counsel as this, because you take
your selves to be wise, and indeed, as it should seem, you are wise, some of
you, to plotte mischievous matters, and to keep it very close; but such are
not wise to do good, this is no sanctified wisdom, it is foolishness, yea a
damnable wickedness in the sight of God.


Romans All your talk is to me Madam, you say nothing to Cathara the Puritaine.


Mad. Though she be precise in some points, yet she prays for the King,
Queen, and Prince, she gives good care to the Teacher, she comes to the
communion, and I am persuaded there is not any one in the land of those whom
you call Puritances, which wish so many of you, as will not convert, gone with
bag and baggage, which in defense of the Gospel, and his Majesty would not
loose each drop of his blood, though some on the Stage have deryded them,
Eastward hoe.
saying their smooth skins will make the best Vellam.


Romans Did you see that Play plaide?


Mad. No, but I have heard of it.


Guide. Mistress Romana, you call your Neighbor Puritan: do you know who were
the ancient puritanes?


To. Though I do not, my Cousen does: Tell them Cousen.


Tract. Saint Augustine in his Book of Heresies, to one called, Quod vult
Deus: which in our tongue, is as much to say, as (What God will) rehearses
some 88. heresies, whereof the 38. was ye heresy of those, who are there
called Cathoroi, which we may English Puritans.


Guide. Will you call all those Puritans, which are any where called Cathoroi?


Tract. If I did, what then?


Guide. Then you must call Saint Paul Puritan, and those whom he calls
Clean, Puritans.


Tract. Why so?


Guide. In the twentieth of the Acts, where Saint Paul says, I am clean from
the blood of all. The Greek word which he uses, is Catharos: and when he
says, All things are clean, to the clean. He uses the word Cathara, and
Catharois: Yet I hope you will not picture him a Puritan.


Tract. The Catharoi, named by Saint Augustine, took to themselves that name,
Superbissune atque odiosissime, A^g. de here. sibus ad quod vult deum her. 38.
most proudly, and most odiously, as it were for some cleanenes: they admitted
no second marriage, they deny repentance, following the Heretic Nouatus. etc.


Romans I know not what those here in England hold in other matters, but sure I
am that some of them that are so called, having buried their first Wives, have
been married again, and therefore they are not Puritans in that point.


Guide. Of all generations that deserve the name of Puritans, they most deserve
it of whom Solomon speaks, Pro. 30.12.
saying, There is a Generation that are pure in their own conceit, and yet are
not washed from their filthiness. I trust you Neighbor Christianus be none of
those, yet I marvel why (touching this public testimony of thankefullnes)
you will not obey the order appointed, and so keep your self from trotting to
the three weeks Court to pay fees. You know, or should know, that a woman
after Childe-birth, when she first goes to Church, should kneel in some
convenient place, near to the Communion Table, (if there be a Communion)
otherwise, they use to kneel near to the Ministers seat, who is to exhort
her to give hearty thanks to God, and pray, and to the end she should
acknowledge help to come from God, who is able, yea and does, when it pleases
him, defend his from all evil, (which is meant as it seems by these words:
The Sun shall not burn thee by day. etc.) he is appointed to read the
hundred twenty and one Psalm: not that any should think it was appointed to
be read in time of the Law, when women offered either a Lamb, or two young
Pigeons, Leuit 12.
on the day of their purification, for that Psalm was made long after such
purifiyng began; but to teach women which were wont to call on the Virgin; that
the same God which kept David, and his company, in time of war, both day, and
night, in heat, and cold, is able to preserve them: Also as I said, for shall
we think that he which lays a burden upon a man's back is not hable to take
it off. The same God that said to the Woman, I will greatly increase thy
sorrows, and thy conceptions, Genesis 3.16.
in sorrow thou shall bring forth children, etc. preserved the same woman and
thousands more in their travel, none of all them ever calling on ye blessed
Virgiue for help, or desiring her to pray to God to help them, yea David says
to God; Thou art he that took me out of my mothers womb.


Romans How know you that none of them called on our Lady?


Giud. Because thousands of the^ brought forth, ere she did bear Christ.


Romans Is that true cozen?


Tract. Yes.


Romans But did not David make that Psalm to assure women that are purified, or
Churched, that the Sun shall not burn by day, nor the Moon with her
coldness hurt them by night:


Tract. If women were Churched by Moone-shine it might seem probable, Aug. in
Epis. Joan. tract. 1.
that it was made for them chiefly, but none are Churched in the night time, so
far as I know. S. Augustine touching ye burning of the Sun, etc. says, if
thou hold charity thou shall suffer no scandale in Christ, nor in his Church,
nor forsake Christ, nor his Church.


Romans On then M. Guide-well.


Guide. After the Psalm and the Lords prayer, there be certain prayers for ye
woman, ye God would save her, be unto her a strong tower from the face of her
enemy, and ye through Gods help she may both faithfully live and walk in her
vocation in this life present, and also may be partaker of everlasting glory
in the life to come through Jesus Christ our Lord.


Cath. I do acknowledge that it is the part, not of women only, but of all
other to give God hearty thanks, when he has delivered them out of any
danger, trouble, or whatsoever was grievous unto them: if a learned and godly
Minister, which conformed not himself to some order, set down touching the
wearing of some apparel, etc. that is much esteemed and in a manner
religiously regarded, by the Romish Salt-peter-men, should be put from his
Ministry and maintenance, and at last find such favor at the hands of the
higher powers, as to be restored again (which were much to be wished) such a
Minister, with his flock, had good cause to be thankful: In like manner if a
Merchant return safe from the seas, a Soldier from wars, a sick man from
deaths door: all these, and such like ought to praise God for his mercies,
but none of all these are appointed to kneel near the Minister, to hear that
Psalm. read, or any thanks to be given for their deliverance, there are indeed
in the latter communion book general thanksgiving for rain, for fair
weather, for plenty, for peace and victory, and for deliverance from the
plague, all which are fit and due.


Mad. If this were commanded to be done for those you speak of, I mean the
Merchant, the Soldier, and the sick man, unto whom you may add, if you list,
such as be crept out of debt, and such as be come out of prison, they had no
cause to refuse. I say nothing of the Minister, for if he be appointed to give
thanks for others, I hope he will not forget himself.


Cath. If he may give thanks for himself, why not we for our selves?


Mad. We may privately, but since we are not allowed to do it publicly, I
mean to read aloude that Psalm, and such prayers as the Minister is
appointed to read, we shall do well to be quiet, and to show our selves
obedient, because we are not called to make laws, but to obey them, it is more
fill we should consider what is commanded us, then what is, or is not commanded
to other.


Cath. But the woman that goes to her thanksgiving must offer the accustomed
offerings, and that me thinks is somewhat Leuiticall.


Mad. Alas neighbor, that is but some little help toward the Ministers
maintenance. You know in some places, they paid two pence halfe-peny, and a
crisom, for both which some Ministers take some sixepence, and so the women
are not troubled to buy crisoms.


Cath. If there should be no crisom, some would think all is not well.


Guide. Such as be ignorant and superstitiously addicted to external things,
might be weaned from their fond opinions, if they would come where they might
be taught; you for your part know that the book says nothing of crisoms,
vailes, coming with many or few, nor of making any dinner. wise and modest
women will have a care of their health howsoever they come, and if neighbors,
that have mourned with her that traveled, will rejoice with her also when time
serves, and accompany her going forth to declare her thankfulness in the
Church, which is required in the said book thrre is no cause why any should be
offended therewith.


Cath. But these Churching dinners pincheth the poor sort, their husbands
labor some three-weekes or a month, to get some noble, and that must be spent
upon one dinner to keep custom, and because they will do as others do, and so
after they have done groaning, their husbands must groan too.


Mad. If any forgetting their own abillity, will strive to be as plentiful,
as such as be far beyond them in wealth, they deserve the coat with four
elbowes, whether they dwell in town or country, in some places the wealthier
wives send the poor woman at such times, in a manner, sufficient for that
dinner, so that unless they will play the fool, she need charge herself but
little: and whereas Mistress Rosamond has espied some washing of bucks, and
fetching of fire very speedily, that might be remedied, if one poor
neighbor, at such times especially, would help another, it becomes women to
be modest and shamefast in all their behavior.


Romans Now let Master Say-well chide her for not kneeling at Communion.


Guide. I had more need chide you for nicke-naming me, and for not coming
thither at all, you know nothing what she does but by hearsay.


Romans I hear say, she despises your order.


Cath. That is not true, I despise none of the order.


Guide. It is evil to despise order, I mean any good order, Beza in the
treatise of the true and visible note of the Catholic Church.
some grave and well-learned Divines say, whosoever, where there is place for
order, despises that order, he declares by this very thing that he is not of
God, and therefore not to be heard.


Cath. I take it he means despising through pride.


Guide. But to say something touching kneeling, you know neighbor Cathara that
when the Minister delivers unto you the Sacrament of Christ his body which
was crucified for us, he prays thus: The body of our Lord Jesus Christ, which
was given for thee, preserve thy body and soul into everlasting life: which is
all one (as I take it) with this: The Lord Jesus Christ which suffered for thee
in the flesh, preserve, etc. Ioh. 3, 16.
Surely he himself says: So God loved the world, that he gave his only
begotten Son, to the end that whosoever believes in him should not perish
but have life everlasting: if then the Minister in saying: the body of our Lord
Jesus Christ, etc. prays that Christ which was given to the death for you,
preserve your body and soul, etc. may you not say amen to it and give thanks,
kneeling? you know when the Minister says, Lift up your hearts, the people
answer not, we lift them up to the board, but to the Lord, neither does he
afterward say, glory be to Christ in form of bread, but glory be to God on
high.


Cath. To receive a Sacrament is one thing, and to pray is another thing, we
do not kneel but stand, when the Minister says: I Baptize thee, etc, That
service which has no probable reason why it should be done, may seem blind
obedience.


Mad. It shall well beseem us (neighbor) kneeling before an outward show, of
the reverend regard we have of that Sacrament, and being so straightly required
and commanded, by some as make no idol of the same, to frame our selves to
obedience, and enterprete all things to the best. The Minister delivers unto
us from the Lord a pledge of his love, a Sacrament to confirm our faith in the
crucified Christ, on whom the soul feeds, and to whom the knee boweth, he
being in glory.


Cath. The Popish sort when they saw ye Sacrament thought their maker to be
really present in form of bread in a gross manner by means of
transubstantiation, and so bowed and knocked at the fight thereof. And therefore
I have refrained kneeling at that time, not as thinking we can bow too much,
or too often to God, but because I would be loath to do any hurt by mine example.


Guide. In time of Popery the Priests taught the people so to do, I mean to
worship Christ in form of bread; but the Ministers of the Gospel teach their
charge to worship him sitting in the glory of the Father. If Catechizing and
Preaching cannot turn the minds of the wilful, your sitting or standing
cannot do it.


Cath. But what say you to the ring given in solemnizing of Matrimony, and to
these words: With this ring I thee Wed, and with my body I thee worship.


Guide. That also must have a favorable interpretation; I mean we ought to
construe this to the best. That which is there spoken briefly and in few words,
if aany open them paraphrastically using more words, contains thus much.

I have taken thee before God and this congregation to my wedded wife, I have
promised to keep thee in sickness and in health, to love and to cherish thee
til death, and to the end thou may have some token to testify this my
promise made unto thee, I give thee this ring, promising to esteem of thee as
mine own body, and to honor thee, in bearing patiently with thy weakensse,
and in acknowledging that though I be thy matrimonial head, yet if thou fear
God, and believe the Gospel, cleaving steadfastly unto Christ the Mystical
Head of his Church, ^ Pet. 3.7.
thou art, as the Apostle says, heir together with me of the grace of life.


Cath. Why then he might say, if there must needs be a ring, I give this ring
in token that I take thee to my wedded wife, promising to esteem thee as mine
own flesh.


Mad. Hark in your ear neighbor, when we women are chosen Clearkes of the
convocation, our voices perhaps would be heard, for setting down of orders,
but until then we shall do well to be ordered by our governors.


Cath. Be it so, but why does the man endow his wife with his goods? In the
name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, in the name of which
Trinity, we are commanded to be Baptized not Wedded.


Guide. That also must be enterpreted to the best; thus: with all my worldly
goods I thee endow, The blessed Trinity approving this my doing.


Cath. But why do you cross my child, after you have baptized it, since Christ
gave you no such commandment.


Guide. Why do you ask me this question? (which am commanded to do it) rather
then those that command me, since you have no more commandment from our
Savior to ask me, then them? Truly, but that I see there be many iarres,
about these and such like matters, and much trotting to the Courts for the
same, I would not stay so long in answering you to these questions: I am
persuaded, I am bound to obey my superiors commanding such things as are not
contrary to the commandment of the highest power of all. If by desiring to
have my child baptized I declare that I am of this mind, that neither I nor my
child ought to be ashamed of Christ crucified, if crossing tend to the same
end, it is not contrary to that end.


Cath. But we must not add any thing to the word of God.


Gui. I grant as needful to salvation, but we cross, not to the end we would
have any think their children cannot be saved without it. If the matter lay
in mine own hands I would not trouble the minds of any that would have no
crossing, but things being as they be I must cross children, or else be crossed
of men. If a man be warned to the Court, he shall pay as much for not
crossing, as for committing adultery, I mean the fee: for the process is all
one. I assure you I love not to empty my poor purse for not stirring my
fingers to and fro, upon the child's forehead. It may be the Proctors and
Registers will say, I am not amicus curiae, for their profit, in laboring to
make you and others, not to be curious in these points, but to favor your
pursses: but I must crave pardon to speak my mind, to those that belong to my
charge. And this I say to you neighbor Cathara, and to all that be of your
mind: if there be any benefit in crossing, your child not having it loses it,
if there be none, he loses nothing if he have it, if there he any offense
given God will be angry, not with you but with the giver, if it be taken, you
are to blame none but your self, if God be not pleased with crossing, they
which command it, or do it must look to be shent, and not you that cannot
let it.


Cath. I read of late in a book called the Abridgement of that book which the
Ministers of Lincolnes diocese delivered to his Majesty, wherein I found not
only the names of many learned men set down, who misliked kneeling at
communion, crossing, and surplesse, but also certain arguments against the
said ceremonies, so that you may not blame me, if I be scrupulous in these
things, which such great Clearkes have rejected, as nourishing idolatry. There
be many things in use now which some say were not from the beginning.


Guide. That Abridgement was set forth as I take it, in the behalf of such
brethren in the Ministry as never used these ceremonies, to make known why
they cannot frame themselves to use them nor subscribe unto them. You are not
to wear the Surplesse, nor to cross after Baptism; and as touching kneeling
at Communion, though in ye Abridgeme^t, Aquinas, Harding, Bellar. B. Watson,
and others are said to make the practice of the Church in the use of this
gesture: one of their strongest arguments to justify that their Idolatrous
conceit of Transubstantiation, because else (say they) the Church should
commit idolatry, in kneeling before the Elements: yet I cannot see why kneeling
before the Sacrament, and not bowing to it, but to God, should more be counted
Idolatry, then kneeling before the Minister, as many do when he is praying.


Cath. I think none of the Popish sort, though they kneeled before the Priest,
did take him for God, as they did the Sacrament.


Guide. Whether they took him for a God, or a God-maker, I leave it to
themselves: but this I am persuaded of, that neither your self, nor any sound
favorer of the Gospel, do take the Sacrament for God, and therefore your
kneeling in the sight of it, and not to it, is no more Idolatricall then
kneeling before the Pulpit in the Church, or the picture of the King at home,
bowing neither to Pulpit nor Picture.


Cath. The superstitious sort kneeling before Images, and the Sacrament in
Churches, or their pictures and Crucifixes in their houses, do so fasten their
eyes upon them, bow so devoutly before them, and give them such a kind of
worship, as tends much to Idolatry, if it be not so altogether.


Guide. But whereas you said the names ^f many learned men are set down in that
Abridgement, which would have these Ceremonies removed out of the way as
stumbling-blockes, if I were adicted to them, as one that thought our Church
might not stand without them: I may say there be other learned men, which
think they may be well used of us, though they were abused in Popery: I might
also say, that even some of those that are named in that Abridgement, seem to
some to varry from themselves, though rightly understood I do think they do not.


Cath. What should move you to say so?


Guide. In one place I find these words: It is much less unlawful to man to
bring significant Ceremonies into Gods worship now, Abidg. p. 33
then it was under the Law, for God has abrogated his own, (not only those
that were appointed to prefigure Christ, but such also as seemed by their
prefiguration to teach moral duties) so as now (without great sin) none of
them can be continued in the Church, no not for signification. Of this
judgment were the Fathers in the Council of Nice, and Justin Martyr,
Bullinger, Lauater, Hospinian, Piscator, B. Cooper, B. Westphaleng, and others.
Do not yo^ see here, that P. Martyr is reckoned amon^ them which held, that no
significant Ceremonies ought to be continued in the Church?


Cath. Yes, what then?


Guide. Mark what is said in another place of the same book: Such men as hau^
been let on work in our Church to defen^ the use of it (meaning the
Surplesse) both i^ King Edwards time, and since, and wh^ were therefore best
likely to know the meaning of our Church imposing it, have avouched that it is,
and ought to be continue^ in the Church for signification sake, videlicet,
Peter Martyr, Hooker, D. Covell, Gardener, and Hacket, and others. Do not you
see that Martyr is there named among those which hold the Surplesse is to be
continued for signification sake?

If Peter Martyr writing on the Epistle to ye Romans allow of this argument, ye
significant Ceremonies of the Law are abrogated, ergo, it is not lawful for
man to bring in any significant Ceremonies into Gods worship now: and in his
Common places avouches, that the Surplesse is to be continued in the Church
for signification sake, he may seem not to agree with him self.


Mad. As simple as I am, me thinks I ^^uld reconcile those 2 places thus: In
the ^^rst place he denies that any significant ce^emonies, especially of the
Law, are to be ^rought in now as parts of Gods worship, and in the later he
grants, that the Surples ^^ay continue for signification, so it be rek^oned
for no part of Gods worship, though (...) be worn in his service. But
howsoever (...) be, you see neighbor Cathara, that as ^ome learned men refuse
the Ceremonies, (...) other learned men, which are in authori^y command the
use: Heb. 1^.^,
neither our Minister ^or we are bid to obey every learned man, ^ut such as
have the oversight of us, whose ^ules and orders we are to interpret to ^he
best, that so with more quietness we ^ay obey.


Cath. I have seen the reasons of such ^s mis-like the Ceremonies, but I do
not ^emember the reasons of such as speak for them.


Guide. Have you not heard the latter Canons?


Cath. They spoke of Dedicating the Child by the sign of the Cross. I had
thought that had been done by baptism.


Tract. The Cross is of great antiquity.


Guide. The brazen Serpent, In (...)
which being lifted up, as Saint Augustine says, did figure the death of the
Lord upon the cross) was of greater.


Tract. I speak not of things before the incarnation of Christ: do not you
read those words in the New Testament: 1. Cor. 18.23
Whosoever will follow me, let him forsake himself and take up his Cross and
follow me. And these words: The preaching of the Cross is to them that perish,
Gal. 6.14.
foolishness. Ephesians. 2: 16,
And these words: God forbid that I should rejoice, but in the cross of our
Lord Jesus Christ. And these also: That he might reconcile both unto God in
one body by his Cross.


Guide. Yes, we have read all this, and some of us have read an Homily also,
that bears the name of Saint Chrysostom, in praise of the Cross: in which
the Cross is named 53 times together: I will not recite all, but give you a
taste of them, as it is turned into Latin by Tilman a Monk.


1 Cruxspes Christianorum, 2 Cruxresurrectio Mortuorum, 3 Crux dux Coecorum, 11
Crux victoria aduersus Diabolum, 23 Crux custos infantium, 24 Crux caput
virorum, 26 Crux lumen in tenebris sedentium, 51 Crux panis esurientium, 52
Crux fons sitientium, 53 Crux velamen nudorum. The Cross the hope of the
Christians, The resurrection of the Dead, The guide of the blind, Victory
against the Devil, The keeper of Infants, The head of men, The light of such
as sit in darkness, The bread of the hungry, The wel-spring for the thirsty.
The covering for the naked.
If you apply this and the rest, which is found there, to the bare sign of the
Cross, and not to Christ, and his suffering on the Cross, you will have Saint
Chrysostom to rob Christ of his glory: for all these things belong to Him.
And so likewise these words of our Savior, and of S. Paul, in which we find
the word Cross: If we think they meant the bare sign, or a cross made of
Wood, Stone, Copper, or whatsoever, we shall be found gross interpreters. For
to take up our Cross, is to prepare our selves against persecutions and
affliction, and to bear it patiently when it comes: and the other places are
to be understood of Christ crucified: for to preach that salvation is to
besought in Jesus Christ, which was fastened to a Cross with nails, is
foolishness to them that perish through want of faith in him. If was Christ's
passion on the Cross, wherein ye Apostle reioiced. Through an earnest
meditation thereon, the world was crucified to him, and he to the world.
Christ has reconciled such as believe in him, both Jews and Gentiles, by his
Cross, that is, by his sufferings.

Tract. You say sufferings; Saint Paul says Cross.


Guide. If you will use words without their sense then the Cross has blood.


Tract. How so?


Guide. The Apostle to the Colossians says: Col, 1.19.20.
That it pleased (meaning the Father) that in him (meaning the Son) should al
fullness dwell, ^ee Rollocke how he expou^ death.
and by him to recocile all things unto himself, and to set at peace through
the blood of his cross, by the Son, both the things in earth and the things in
heaven.


Tract. Why do you say it pleased him? (meaning the Father) Erasmus has,
complacitum est Patri: it pleased the Father.


Guide. I said (meaning the Father) because the word (Father) is not in the
Greek, and Erasmus sets it into the text, to make it more plain, even as your
vulgar edition unto the words (all fullness) adds, diuinitatis, of Godhead,
Col. 1.19.
which is not in the 19. verse in the original, Col. 29. (...) and Aug per
sanguinem crucis, etc. Mundata sumt omnia peccat^^ ipsorum in epi. B. Joan, tra
1.
though it be in the 9 verse of the second Chapter. But as that Latin Edition
called Vulgata has in the verse 19 added Diuinitatis, Godhead: so in the 20
verse, I mean of the 1. Chapter, it does not set down as Erasmus does the
Latin of (...), by the Son. But to return to the words: Through the blood
of his Cross, if I should press you with those word, and say it is a proper
speech, as you urge the word Cross in the places you cited, then the Cross
has blood, but it is no proper speech.


Tract. The Apostle means Christ his blood shed on the Cross.


Guide. True, but the words are you fee, (...), by the blood of his Cross, is
set down more plainly in these words: Romans 3.2^.
Whom (speaking of Christ) he has set forth to be a reconciliation through
faith in his blood, etc.

Much more then being now justified by his blood, Rom 5.9.
etc.

By whom we have redemption through his blood, etc. Ephesians. 17. Heb. 9.14.


Unto him that loved us, and washed us from our sins in his blood. Ioh. 1.7.
Reu. 1.^


You see then that he calls the blood of Christ, the blood of his Cross,
Col. 1.20. speaking-more properly, verse 14. And so no doubt but ye same
Apostle in saying that he reioiceth in the cross of our Lord Jesus Christ,
meant his sufferings, and also the force, effects, and merits of his Death and
Passion, with all the Comforts, truits, and promises which we receive thereby,
as it is affirmed by the reverend and learned in the Canons. Can. 30.



Romans Howsoever the word Cross is to be taken in any of the places cited by my
cozen, I see no reason why I may not have the sign of the cross to put me in
mind of him that died for me: Why have you the picture of the King, Queen and
Prince in your house, but to put you in mind to pray for them? If you have no
Cross to bring Christ his death to your remembrance, then have you nothing.


Mad. Yes, Mistress Romana, we have the History of his passion, and the
Sacrament of his body and blood: after the giving whereof our Savior Christ
said to those that sat at the Table: Do this in remembrance of me: so we do
that to remember his love toward us, which he bids us to do. But who bid
you make Crosses, or who brought the first Cross into England, I cannot tell.


Romans Can not you tell Cozen?


Tract. Some write, that the first Altar, Polycro, lib. 5 cap. 12. ^erk proble.
page 38. and 84.
and the first Cross were erected in England by Oswald, in the place of the
battle agaiust Cadwall in the year 635.


Mad. Well, whosoever first brought it hither, it mattereth not, I see the word
Cross is much used in the New Testament: which word so often repeated,
together with the History of his passion, and our Communicating, may serve to
bring Christ his Passion into our remembrance, though we had no sign: yet
Master Guidewell, and many others besides him, do use that sign after the
child is baptized, not condemning others, which say they cannot do it with a
quiet mind, no more then he would have them to condemn him: what moves him to
do it, he knows best himself.


Guide. There be three causes that move me to use that signing.


Romans The one is you are loath to loose your maintenance. You had rather give an
Alms, then take one.


Guide. Indeed it is a more blessed thing to give then to receive: but you get
no fee of me, if you will be the Procter to tell my tale before you be
required.

First, I find that ancient Christians being godly men, and great Clearks, did
allow the use of it in Baptism.

Secondly, Canon. 30.
such as command it say it is no part of the substance of that Sacrament, and
that being used afterward (meaning after the Infant is fully and perfectly
baptized) it does neither add any thing to the virtue or perfection of
Baptism, nor being omitted, does detract any thing from the effect and
substance of it.

The third cause is, I see there be many of the superstitious Catholics (for
I will keep the name of the sincerer Catholics, unto our selves) so addicted
to shows and signs (though they say, we feed on bare signs) that they be
ready to judge all such as cross not, enemies to the Cross of Christ: and
therefore, for my part, I choose rather to use it, (the higher powers that
command it, not attributing such power unto it as our Adversaries do) then to
give any occasion to the Recusants to say the Governors would have us come to
Church, and when we come there, we shall see such as should exhort us to obey
in matters of substance, unwilling to yield to such things as themselves call
shows and shadows.


Mad. Indeed it is good we take heed we put no stumbling-blockes in the way of
such as be backward* But must we not have care also that we offend not such
as be forward?


Guide. We must not despise the least of the faithful, Math. 18.10. If a
Christian Prince command me to do that wherewith some weak brother being a
Subject is offended, because he thinks God is offended with it, what should
I do in this case, I cannot satisfy both? If I be willing to obey my Prince,
my weak brother is offended: If I refrain because of the the Subject, my
Prince is not obeyed. Who sees not that these things are troublesome?


Mad. You know we must so obey our Prince, that we put no occasion of falling,
or a stumbling-blocke, as the Apostle says, before our brother. Romans 14.13.



Guide. If to cross be a stumbling block, and I leap over it, and save my
shin, and another stumble at it, and break his shins, can I help it? it is
not a block of my putting.


Mad. Though it be not, yet perhaps some will say you should set your shoulders
to it, to help to remove it, because it may hurt others, though not your
selves.


Guide. Anumber of men far stronger then I, have been heauing at it a long
time, but I see they heave against the Hill: others stronger then they, by
reason they have authority, lift against them: as some think the use of these
things will drive back, so others think it will draw on. Experience (I
think) in time, will tell whose judgment is best. Though some stu^ble at
Christ, as the unbelievers do, yet Christ is the true Messiah; and if any
through weakness, or howsoever, stumble at the sign of the Cross, yet it must
needs be granted, it is appointed to be used as a sign of that cross, whereto
the true Christ, and not any counterfeit was fastened.


Romans Was there ever any counterfeite Christ?


Guide. Cooper and Fabian are set down by Grafton in his Abridgement, as
testifying that there was a Council holden at Oxford of the Bishops, in the
first year of Henry the third, 1220, where a certain man was condemned, which
taught that he was Jesus Christ. And to confirm ye same, he showed the token
of wounds in his Hands, Body, and Fee; and was therefore condemned, and
crucified on a Cross at Atterbury, besides Banbury-hill, till he dyed.


Romans I regard not the sign of that cross whereon that counterfeite died.
When I cross me, I think on Christ, and his Cross; and as I am in love with
that cross, so I tell you true, I cannot be weaned from any ceremony that is
in request with us.


Guide. I fear me you are more careful for shales then kirnels, for that
which feeds your senses, then that which feeds your souls; and more in
love with fables, and Frierly fictions, then with the doctrine of salvation.
Your teachers are no niggards of their old-wiues-fables. I speak not now of
crosses, but of other matters.


Tract. Can you show us any fable, or fained story that is allowed of our
Teachers? if you can let us hear it.


Guide. Master Harding in his answer to B. Jewels challenge, to prove private
Mass, tells this story out of Amphilochius, which seems to me scarce
current.

The holy Bishops, Basil, besought God in his prayers he would give him Grace,
Wisdom, and understanding, so as he might offer the sacrifice of Christ's
bloudshedding, proprijs sermonibus, with prayers and Service of his own making,
and that the better to atchieue that purpose, ye Holy Ghost might come upon him.

After six days he was in a trance, for cause of the Holy Ghosts coming;
when the seventh day was come, he began to minister unto God, that is, he said
Mass every day.

After a certain time thus spent, thorough faith and prayer, he began to write
with his own hand, Mysteria Ministrationis, the Mass, or the service of the
Mass.

Whom the heaven must contain, etc. Act.
On a night our Lord came unto him in a vision, with the Apostles, and laid
bread to be consecrated on the Holy Altar, and stirring up Basil said unto
him, Secundum postulatione^ tuam repleatur os tuum laud, etc. According to thy
request, let thy mouth be filled with praise, that with thine own words thou
may offer up to me Sacrifice* He not able to abide the vision with his eyes,
rose up with trembling, and going to the holy Altar, began to say that he had
written in paper thus.

Repleatur os meum laud et hymn^u dicat gloriae tuae. Domine Deus creasti nos
et adduxisti in vitam hanc et caeteras orationes sancti ministerij. Let my
month be filled with praise, to utter an himne to thy glory, Lord God which
have created us, and brougt us into this life, and so forth, the other prayers
of the Mass, Et post finem orationum exaltauit panem sine intermissione orans
et dicens. Respice domine Jesus Christ. etc. After that he had don the prayers
of consecration, and lifted up the bread praying continually, and saying, look
upon us Lord Jesus Christ out of thy holy Tabernacle, and come to sanctify us
that fittest above with thy Father, and art here presently with us invisible,
vouchsafe with thy mighty hand to deliver to us, and by us to all thy people,
Sancta Sanctis the holy things to the holy. The people answered; One holy, one
Lord Jesus Christ, with the Holy Ghost, amen.

After this, Master Harding goes ou saying, now let us consider what
follows pertaining most to our purpose, Et diuidens panem in tres parts,
vnam quidem co^municauit timore multo; alteram autem reseruauit consepelire
secum; tertiam vero imposuit columbae aureae quae pependit super Altar. He
divides the bread into 3. parts, of which he received one at his communion,
with great fear, and reverence; the other he reserved, that it might be buried
with him, and the 3. he caused to be put into a golden Pix, that was hanging up
over the Altar made in form and shape of a Dove. Out of the same Amphilochian
Story, M. Harding sets down this also, that one Eubolus and others the
chief of the Clergy, standing before the gate of the Church, whiles this was
in doing, saw lights within the Church and men clothed in white, and heard a
voice of people glorifying God, etc. what say you to this dream, M. Tractable?


Tract. Do you call it a dream? Verily Doctor Harding thought that this Story
would make Ma. Jewel and his consacramenta, ^es to stagger.


Guide. If you, and others of your side would read, and in reading note well,
what that reverend and learned Bishop has answered to D. Harding, you would
leave staggering, and go more steadfastly in the paths of the Gospel.


Tract. It may be if I come to Church I will read some of his answers at
leisure. But I would see what you your self have to say to this story, if you
remember not his answer.


Guide. In truth it is so long since I read that answer, that I not having now
that book, remember not what he says to it. For mine own part, I marvel, if
the Pope that lived in Saint Basils time were Christ's Vicar, and guided by his
Spirit, that he did not appoint such prayers and service to be used in the
offering of that Sacrament (so you call it) as all men that took him for
supreme head of the Church should be content with.


Tract. No doubt but he did.


Guide. If he did so, and S. Basil took him to be such a one as I said, I
wonder he should not content himself with that form of service which the
Pope allowed, but would offer with prayers of his own making. If the Holy
Ghost had taught the Pope before, what form of prayer should be used, what
needed the Holy Ghost to be wished for again, to teach S. Basil how to pray in
that service?


Romans Answer him cozen Tractable.


Tract. Though he misliked not the set prayers, yet he was desirous to use his
own.


Guide. Why should he desire that, if the prayers appointed were sound and
sufficient? or if the Holy Ghost did teach him to pray, how can they be called
prayers of his own making? Our Savior has taught us to pray, Our Father
which art in heaven, etc. Shall we call this a prayer of our own making?


Romans Answer him cozen, stick to him cozen.


Tract. What a cozening keep you? I will answer him when I see my time.
Though ye Holy Ghost taught Saint Basil, yet they might be called his prayers,
because it is said he wrote them with his own hand.


Guide. The the Pater noster or Lords Prayer shall be called Saint Matthews,
because he wrote it with his own hand, for ought we know to the contrary.


Romans Quick cozen, quick,


Tract. Your tongue is so quick in troubling me, that it puts me out of my
answer, if you have any thing else that you marvel at in this Story say on,
for I will stand no longer about this.


Guide. Since it is called a vision, a man might ask this question, in what
bodies our Savior and his Apostles appeared, whether the Apostles in their own
bodies, I mean such as they had when they lived, and were in Saint Basils time
very dust, or some other forms of bodies taken for that time, or some like
their own, though no resurrection of their own? Also what need they bring
bread with them to lay on the table, as if S. Basil were unprovided? Moreover
if he knew Christ to be there with his Apostles, why does he say he was there
inuisibly, or if he were there, why does he pray to him as sitting above with
his Father. None in the Scripture ever confessed him in respect of his Manhood
to sit at the right hand of God in glory, while he was here present in body:
For when he said: No man ascends, etc. but he that descends, etc. the Son
of man, which is in heaven. Ioh. 3.13. it is spoken in respect of the union of
his Godhead with his Manhood. After his Ascension, Steven said: He saw (not
with bodily eyes, says Augustine, De Can. verae vitae cap. 42.) the heavens
open and the Son of man standing at the right hand of God, Act. 7.56. But he
said not I see him there and here too, or he is there visibly and here
inuisibly, Paul says, Christ was seen of him, 1. Cor. 15.8. but he tells
how, he saw a light, Act. 22. and so did others which heard not the voice. If
you read Augustine on John you shall find him affirming that the Church had
his bodily presence but few days: Now says he, Aug. in Ioh. 12. tract. 50.
We hold him by faith, he is gone touching his bodily presence, but as
touching Spirit and Majesty he is with his Church to the worlds end.


Tract. I have heard this urged Plus milies, more then a thousand times: Christ
as he is God, may be where he will, and how he will. If we go forward with
this, we shall make no end of iarring; what have you else to say?


Gui. I wonder that if Eubolus and his company were at the Church door in the
night, would not go in seeing light, and one at Mass. Many things Master
Tractable have been seen in visions, and dreams, and yet no such going from
place to place. It should seem by these words, and stirring up Basil, that he
was a sleep till he was stirred. If after this presently he went to the
Altar, because he could not endure the vision, then he removed ere the vision
was ended. So did not such as are said in the Scriptures to have seen
visions. Act. 10.1^^ 17.18.19.20.21*
Peter went not down to the men which were sent to him from Cornelius, till the
vision was ended. But to let this pass, I pray you M. Tractable, tell me how
you would English Mysteria ministrationis?


Tract. How should I English it, but the Ministers of the Ministration.


Guide. If any of our side should English it the service of the communion, some
of your side would call them false translators.


Mad. I like not these words on your side and our side: I would we might once
stand all on one side.


Romans Madam you know the Church is a body: and a body has two sides; if it
have three, then indeed it would be a Monster.


Guide. Two sides do well become a natural body, and they do well agree
without grieuing each other. But two sides do as ill become a mystical body,
as two heads do a natural body. One head, one heart, one mouth, one mind, one
sense, one side, does best become the Church universal.


Tract, I pray you peace a little.


Mad. Peace as much as you will, so it go with piety.


Tract. What moved you Master Guide-well, to ask how I would English mysteria
ministrationis.


Guide. Because I would see whether you would have englished it, the Mass, or
the service of the Mass, as Master Harding does, who also englisheth these
words, Caeteras orationes Sancti Minesterij, The other Prayers of the Mass,
which you know should be translated, the other Prayers of the holy Minestery,
and afterward he translateth Post sinem orationum, after he had done the
Prayers of consecration. But you know it should be englished, if you will have
it word for word according to the Latin, after the end of the prayers, but if
you will have those words translated as Doctor Harding does, the^ after
consecration he lifted up bread, which agrees not with transubstantiation.


To. Answer to that Cousen.


Tract. Amphilochius might mean by bread, the form and show of bread, as also
when he said, dividing the bread in three parts.


To. Is that your best answer Cousen? a show of bread without substance, no
meal no flower, no do we baked remaining?


Guide. Though you do, yet there be others that do not. Christians should take
delight in the word of God, which was more sweet to David then the Honycombe.


Mad. Satisfy her mind this once, and it be but to let her see what weak
foundations they build on.


Guide. Doctor Harding in the foresaid answer speaks of a Gospel that
should be written in the Hebrew by Saint Matthew, in which it is reported that
when our Lord had given his Shroude to the Bishops Servant, he went to James
and appeared unto him. For James had made an oath that he would not eat bread
from that hour he drank of the cup of the Lord, until he saw him raised from
the dead. It follows a little after, Afferte, ait Dominus, mensam et panem.
etc. Bring the table, and set on bread, (quoth our Lord:) And by and by it is
added, he took bread and blessed it, and brake it, and gave it to James the
just, and said unto him, my brother eat bread, for the son of man is risen
again from the dead. No man can doubt (says Master Harding) but this was the
Sacrament.


Tract. To what end does he bring in this?


Guide. To show that the Communion was received under one kind, as appears by
his words following: Fol 42.
And Wine was there none given: for any thing that may be gathered. For it is
not likely Saint James had wine in his house: then (says he) for as much as
Egesippus who was not long after him, witnesses of him, that he never drunk
Wine but at our Lords Supper; Now tell me Master Tractable, whether this
Story go for current among you or no?


Tract. Why should it not be current? do you think there is no Gospel of
Saint Matthew, extant in the Hebrew?


Guide. I have the Gospel of Saint Matthew in Hebrew, with Munsters
Annotations, dedicated by him to King Henry the 8. From the which if that other
swerve, I dare not call it current. Did you ever read in any of the
Evangelists, that Christ gave away his Shroud?


Tract. No indeed.


Guide. Do not you find in S. Matthew, that our Savior being risen from the
dead, Mat. 28.1.9.10.16.
met with Mary Magdalene and the other Mary, and after that with the eleven
Disciples, which were appointed to go into Galilee, that they might see him
there? Mark. 1^.9.
Does not S. Mark say, that the first he met with was Mary Magdalene? I know
not whom he should mean by the Bishops man, unless it were Caipha's man. For
Caiphas (says Saint John) was high Priest that same year. Ioh, 18.13.
If he meant by that Bishop Saint James, he calls him so in some future
respect, for that he was called so afterward, and not as being Bishop when
Christ rose. If he were, what was Peter? but whosoever they mean by that
Bishop, I see no cause why I should not believe Saint John before all those
that write of any such giving of the Shroud.


Romans Why what says he?


Guide. He says that the other Disciple (meaning himself) did outrun Peter,
Ioh. 20.4.5.6.
and came first to the Sepulcher, and stooping down, saw the linen clothes
lie, and the kerchieffe that was about his head, not lying with the linen
clothes, but wrapped together in a place by it self: and what linen clothes
were these? were they not the same wherein Joseph of Arimathea, Ioh.
19.38.39.40.
and Nicodemus wrapped his body? If you will say Jesus returned to fetch them:
you make him forgetful, and like a traveler, who having left his cloak in
his chamber, after he has gone a little way, missing it, returns to fetch
it. What think you of this Master Tractable? does that tale of giving his
Shroud to the Bishops man agree with that which Saint John says of himself,
and Peter finding the linen clothes in the Sepulcher?


Tract. There seems to be some jar in these two Stories, but what have you
else to say of it?


Guide. This. If you will have it taken for a true Story, the^ our Savior said
not, bring an Altar, but bring the Table; which if he did, what should move
Master Harding in his Confutation, to call our Communion Table an
oister-boord? Again, if the Lord bid him eat bread after he had blessed it,
why do you say the substance of bread is gone after the blessing? Moreover if
Saint James drank wine at our Lords Supper, why do you say it is blood? Why
do you deny that Christ by a figurative speech called it his blood? Aug* de
Eecl* dogm ca, 75.
Verily Saint Austin says, Vinum fuit in redemptionis nostrae mysterio: there
was wine in the mystery of our redemption.


Romans If my cozen list to acquaint himself with your opinion in this, he may
at his leisure* if he think good, read that which your side have written
thereof at large, for I have not read their books: yet some of my friends.
have named some of your Writers unto me. I for my part, if my cozen would not
frown upon me, would gladly hear one more of these Stories which you make so
light of.


Guide. I think you had rather hear one of these, then ten Sermons.


Romans You may be sure of that.


Guide. Seeing you are desirous to have one more, you shall, to the end you may
see, with what fictions, called by some narrations, the Friars did use to feed
withal.


The words as I find be these.

THere was (says one of them) a woman, that was devout in our Lady service,
and many times for our Lady sake, and love that she had to her; gave away her
best clothes, and w ent in the worst her self: So it happed on a Candlemasse
day, she would feign have gone to the Church, but for she was not honestly
arrayed, she durst not for shame, for she had done away all her best clothes.
Then was she forry she should be without Mass that day; wherefore she went
into a Chapel that was nigh her place, and there she was in her prayers, and
as she prayed she fell a sleep, and then she thought she was in a fair
Church and saw a great company of maidens coming to the Church, and one was
passing all other for fair, and went to fore with a crown on her head, and
she kneeled down and all the other by her. Then comes there one with a great
burden of Candles, and first he gave the maiden a candle that had the crown
on her head, and so after all the other maidens that were in the Church, and
then he came to this woman, and gave her a candle. Then ^was she glad, and
then she saw a Priest and two Deacons, with two Serges brenning in their
hands, going toward the Altar reuershed to go to Mass. And as she thought,
Christ was the Priest, and the two Deacons was Laurence and Vincent, that bear
the Serges, and two young men began the Mass with a solemn note, Then when
the Gospel was read the Queen of heaven offered her candle first of all to
the Priest, and then all other after her: and when all had offered, the Priest
abode after this woman to come and offer her candle. Then the Queen sent after
her, and bad she should come, the Priest abides her, and the messenger bad
her come, and she said, nay she would not leave her candle, but keep it for
a great devotion. Then sent the Queen another messenger, and bad him say to
her that she was discourteous, for to tarry the Priest so long; and said, but
she would come with a good will and offer it: take it from her, and yet she
said nay, then would the messenger have taken it from: but she held it fast,
and so betwixt them two, the Serge brake in the middst, and half the messenger
had, and half the woman had with her, and so in this wrestling this woman woke
out of her sleep, and had half the Serge in her hand, and then she thanked
God and our Lady heartely that she was not without a Gospel that day, and
offered her candle to holy Church Et pro maximis reliquijs reseruatur it is
reserved for a great relic: And thus you have the whole fable, in the same
words that I found it set forth withal.

Romans Call it a fable or what you list. If I had that piece of candle, I would
burn some of it every Candlemasse day so long as it lasted.


Guide. Would you wish for such a substantial Relic, as was given in a
dream? what if your Church could not spare it? but if you had it: to what end
would you burn it that day?


Romans In the honor of our Lady, who offered her candle the same day she was
purified.


Guide. Who told you so?


Romans Do not you hear that the woman did dream that the Queen of heaven did
offer her candle first?


Guide. It is a weak building Mistress To. that is built on a drowsy dream.


Romans I hope you reject not all dreams. Joseph the son of Jacob dreamed, so
did another Joseph long after him, I mean ye Joseph to whom the blessed Virgin
was espoused.


Guide. These dreams are found in the Canonical Scriptures, and the things
that appeared, or were foretold in those dreams coming to pass, and nothing
required in them contrary to the word, do warrant us that they were not
illusions, nor rose of any natural cause, etc. but at the will and pleasure of
God.


Romans So might this Woman's dream come from the same cause.


Guide. Did you ever hear of any that dreamed, they were eating, drinking,
fighting, riding, etc. that when they awaked, found in their hands bread,
drink, a weapon, a boot or any such matter, unless they had it in their
hands when they fell on sleep, or rose up and took it? But to let this go, I
wonder you or any other should be so fond to think, that the blessed Virgin
enjoying the true light, is honored with lights of man's making; she requires
no such honor. The Angel bad John worship God; and our Savior says not that
he is worshipped with setting up of Candles, but in spirit, and truth, that
is, with a true Spiritual worship. In a word, we are not bid to make lights
for God, or the Virgin, but while we have light to believe in the light: But I
pray you tell me, do you know how this carrying of Candles on that day came up
first?


To. No not I, it may be my Cozen Tractable does. If you do Cousen I pray let
us hear it.


Trac. I am weary now with sitting here so long; If this company will come
again to morrow, you shall hear what I have read of it.


Guide. If it. please you Madam let us return to morrow.


Mad. If it please God I will, not so much to hear this, as some other talk
that you may fall into.


Mad. How where be you?


Romans Who is there?


Mad. Here is a Friar.


Romans You are welcome.


Mad. Why, because I come in ye name of a Friar? I think ye answer (here is a
Friar) so much used of those yt knock at men's doors, did rise of this, that of
all other men, Friars were most welcome in times past.


Guide. I think they were as welcome then as those which call themselves
Jesuits have of late been welcome to Recusants, but I see no reason why they
should be so welcome now, seeing it is very likely they have had a strong hand
in this monstrous intended murder, whereby some of their Scholars are fallen
into the pit they made for others. Their plot was by powder, and powder, to put
them in mind of their sin, and to forewarne them of their fall (as it is
said) scarred some of them in drying of it. And as Senacherib was slain by his
own sons, so these by their own plots wrought their own woe. When there is
some special matter to be noted, the holy Ghost, to the end of certain
verses, adds this word Selah: the which word some Hebrew readers say, is as
much as, O rem notatu dignam, eleuetur hic vox, O matter worthy to be noted,
let the voice be lifted up here. This word is used thrice in the 140 Psalm.
They have sharpened their tongues like a Serpent, Adders poison is under their
lips. Selah.

The proud have laid a snare for me, and spread a not with cords in my path
way, and set grins for me, Selah.

Let not the wicked have his desire, o Lord, perform not his wicked thought,
least he be proud, Selah.

Blessed be God, which has delivered our King and many others, out of cruel
Faux his bloody iaw, not suffering him to perform that wicked thought, but
marred all his mischeuous matches.


Mad. Amen, Amen. Truly mistress Romana me thinks if there were nothing else
to draw you from your Popish superstition: that same inherent cruelty, which is
in those that favor it, against such as will not play with puppets, as they
themselves do, might drive you out of that bloody Babylon, and cause you to
join with such as embrace the glorious Gospel of Jesus Christ sincerely.


Tract. You would have my cozen and me to go from the Catholics. Was not S.
Austin a Catholic, and were not all those, against whom he wrote, Heretics?


Guide. What if it were so? can you prove that we hold any opinions that S.
Austin suddenly confuted by the Scriptures? do you not know that the sum of
the ancient Catholic faith, so much as is needful to salvation, is
contained in that Creed, Quicunque vult, etc. Whosoever will be saved, etc.
and that this Creed is read oft-times in our parish Churches yearly?


Romans Come cozen come, let us sit down I pray you, and tell us how Candlemasse
day came up, for that was your promise yesternight.


Tract. Iacobus Passanantius in his additions to the Commentaries of Thomas
Valois and Nicholas Treuet, on the sixth book of S Austin de Ciuitate Dei,
cap. 7.


Guide. Stay a little. Tell me the first word, and the last of that Chapter,
that I may know whether you have read it your self, or had it at the second
hand.


Tract. Does every one that reads a Chapter, remember at all times the first
and last word of it? I promise you I do not: yet I remember the first word of
that Chapter is Reuocatur, and the last Obscoenitas.


Romans On Cozen, this is but to trouble your tale.

This Iacobus shows out of Ovid, that after Pluto the God of Hell (being
wounded with that dart which had the golden point) had by violence taken away
Proserpina, the daughter of the Goddess Ceres, and placing her with him in his
black Chariot, had brought her to Hell, and made her Queen of the same. Her
mother Ceres who could not stay Pluto with her outcries, and piteous moan,
sought her Daughter every where day and night with lights and fire-brandes,
which she had in Mount Etna.

By occasion of this Fable (faith he) there sprang up superstition in Rome. For
the women there representing this taking away of Proserpina by force, and Ceres
seeking her with lights in the Kalends of February, (which month was said to
be consecrated to the God of Hell Pluto, which by another name was called
Februus, from whom the month was called February) went about with lights over
Hills and Vallyes with Ceres, seeking Proserpina. Now to take away this
superstition observed in the Honor of the Queen of Hell the Church appointed,
that in honor of the Queen of Heaven, the second day of February, to wit, on
the feast of the Purification, the Faithful people should carry in their
hands lighted Candles. And hence it is (says he) that that day is called
Candelaria. We call it Candlemas.


Guide. And so one superstition gave place to another.


Cath. I perceive this custom or tradition, or whatsoever you call it, is
nobly descended, and of a very ancient House. Her Grandmother was the Lady
Fable, her mother was a great Lady in Rome called Madame Superstition, who was
very fruitful. She has brought forth many Sons, and many Daughters* many
Nephews, and many Neeces, which yearly after sheep-shearing, give her many
golden fleeces.


Romans Alack for you, are you come in with your neeces and fleeces? all is but
fables with you.


Tract. I think in a while they will say as one said: O quantum nobis profuit
illa Fabula dech. See the defense of the Apol page 273. printed 1570,



Guide. Stay betimes Master Tractable, least you mar all, for that is no
speech of ours, but a lesson that one of your late Popes, (as it is reported)
taught his Cardinals.


Tract. Whosoever taught it, it was a wicked lesson: for it was a naughty
speech, and sauoured of impiety.


Guide. You cannot for shame charge us with it.


Romans What the English of that speech is my cozen can tell, but I cannot, nor I
care not: but I see you are not greatly in love with traditions.


Mad. As to reject all traditions were rashness, so to feed upon them as
substantial food, and needful to eternal life, the written word being left
for that purpose, is mere folly, and a means to deceius us.


Romans All your talk Madame, is of the written word, and your Churches are
decked with nothing but Bibles, Paraphrases, the Creed, the ten Commandments,
and such like: but I see no Altars and Images, no Crosses, no Ashes, nor any of
our deckings, unless it be a surplesse, and that to many of you is as welcome,
as snow in. Harvest.


Guide. What say you mistress Romana, have we neither Crosses nor Ashes? had
the bodies of those which were burnt in Queen Mary's days, no Crosses, nor
Ashes?


Romans Yes, but not for the Popes sake.


Guide. You say true, for it was for Christ's sake that they suffered their
flesh, and blood, sinews, artires, and veins, bowels, marybones, and brains,
to be burnt to Ashes; which burning, though it were a cruel torment,
(considering who felt it,) yet nothing so horrible as fiery Fauxe his burning
would have been, because the other gave some warning, he would have given
none.


Tract. Truly I for my part do utterly mislike, that any religion should set
in her foot by such devilish devises, but my Cousen said your Churches wanted
Altars and Images.


Guide. What should we do with Altar, or super-Altars? we have no such use for
them now, as in the law: Christ Jesus our Sacrifice, has offered up himself
once for all, on the Altar of the Cross.


Tract. Did not he say: Leave thine offering upon the Altar. And again:
Whether is greater, the Offering, or the Altar which sanctifies the Offering?


Guide. He spoke according to the time. The Temple and the Altar were standing,
Christ was not come to the Cross.


Romans What say you to Images?


Guide. I say it is good not to be too far in love with them, least we make
Idols of them: As I fear me one Garnet did of that Image, which I my self,
with two or three more that were appointed to search that College, whereof the
said Garnet was a member some 40 years ago found in his study: the which
Image of Alablaster I having in my hand, standing in the said Garnets study, he
said unto me: I pray you handle it reuerendly. To whom I answered, That I would
handle it with as much reverence as was due to a stone, and so let it fall to
the ground before his face. What warrant he had so to esteem of it, I know
not: but my warrant even then, was this: thou shall not make to thy self any
graven Image. Exodus 20. Babes keep your selves from Idols 1. Ioh. 5.11. They
that make them are like ^o ^em, and all that trust in them. Psalm. 115.8. with
us, part of the 113. Psalm. according to their dividing it is the 16. verse of
Psalm. 113. to my remembrance. Gregory Martin, whom also I knew in Oxford,
would not have any of these places understood of Images of Saints, but of the
Idols of the Heathen. But all that lived here in time of Popery, or have
traveled where such Images be much regarded, must needs confess, that they
have been, and are made very Idols, and that a number go a whooring after
them, as the Heathen did after theirs. They that tare the Church books here,
and said, Up shall holy Cross, and you shall go down, were not far from
this. But howsoever other places of holy Scripture touching Images may be
understood of heathen men's idols, I can hardly be persuaded, that S. John in
the place I cited before, meant such only, because he wrote to such Fathers as
knew him that was from the beginning, and to such young men as were strong and
had the word of God abiding in them, and knew the truth. And in the fifth
chapter, v. 13. he says, that they to whom he wrote believed in the name of
the Son of God, and therefore it is very likely that such were weaned from
heathenish idols.


Romans But what say you to our Sencings Offerings, and such like?


Guide. You are so in love with such matters, that you give us occasion to
suspect, that you think God, and the Saints, are as well pleased with such
things, as the Heathen thought their Gods were with the blood of Beasts.
Touching which, Lactantius has these words.

Quid enim Coelestis in se boni potest habere pecudum sanguis effusus quo aras
inquinant, Lactan d^uero cultu ca. 2
nisi forte deos existimaut eo vesci, quod homines aspernantur aetingere etc.
For what Heavenly good thing can the blood of Beasts have in it, wherewith
being shed they pollute their Altars, except perhaps they think the Gods do
eat that, which men disdain to touch: and whosoever can make such a Feast,
(though he be a Cutthroate, an Adulterer, a Sorcerer, a Parricide,) he shall be
a happy man, him they love, him they defend, he shall have what he will;
worthily therefore does Perseus after his manner deride this kind of
superstition.

Qua tu, inquit, mercede Deorum emeris auriculas, pulmone? etc.

With what will thou hire,
the Gods thee to hear?
With Bowels of Beasts,
and other like cheer?
So it should seem that you think to win Gods favor by outward service,
and shows of devotion. If any of your family will go to Mass, and carry a
Crucifixe, he shall be your white son, he shall have a farm, but if he
look on a Bible, or go now and then to a Sermon, then out with the Heretic,
he has forfeited his lease.


Tract The carrying of a crucifixe is but a badge of our profession.


Guide. Our Savior you know said all men should know his Disciples by loving
one another.


Tract. May not one carry a Crucifixe, and love to a Catholic also?


Guide. You should love those also whom you take for your enemies. Christ says,
sinners love their lovers.


Tract. How do you know we love the^ not?


Guide. In that you go about to kill them.


Tract. May not heretics be put to death?


Guide. Do you account them Heretics, which hold that Athanasius faith is the
Chatholicke faith and shall men dye, ere they come to their answer?


Tract. Athanasius says: Christ descended into hell, what think you of that?


Guide. I do not only think, but steadfastly believe, that as he suffered so
far forth in soul and body for the redemption of his people, as his Father
thought was sufficient for such an holy redeemer as he was to suffer: So also
in such sort he has descended into hell, and locked up the power of the devil
(for he has the keys of hell and of death) and he has triumphed, Reu. 1.
having gotten the victory, that none which repent and believe in him shall
need to fear the fiery force thereof. Colos. 2.
If you will have me to reach further then this, I must crave pardon, and pray
you to go to such as have longer arms then I: That he descended into hell, is
an Article of our faith, and I believe it, though it be not in the Nicene
Creed.


Tract. Is not Christ he that entered into the strong man's house, bound him, and
spoiled him?


Guide. Yes, or else not only the poor man, that was possessed, might have
remained blind, and dumb to his dying day, but he and all of us had been
spoiled for ever.


Tract. Others besides Christ did cast out devils.


Guide. They did so, but it was in the name of Christ, which was the stronger,
and happy are they out of whom this stronger power by the finger of God, even
by the working of the holy Ghost, casts out that Devil, that makes them so
blind that they cannot see the way to salvation, by a lively faith in Christ
his merits: and so dumb that they cannot open their mouth with Paul, Ephe: 2.8*
to say, By grace ye are saved, through faith, and that not of your selves. It
is the gift of God, not of works, least any man should boast himself.


Mad. I remember those words in the second to the Ephesians, ver. 10.
where though he teaches them, ye we are created unto good works, which God
has ordained, that we should walk in the^, yet he says, we are saved by
grace, and so forth, as you have rehearsed.


Romans What do you talk now of faith, and works? my cozen spoke of descending
into hell, answer him to his question. Did not Christ bind the strong man,
that is the devil, in his own house, which is hell?


Guide. After the devil entered into Judas, where was his house then?


Tract. He was there as a guest for a time, but his dwelling house is hell:
what is your answer?


Gui. Besides yt which I have said already,


Guide. I answer, first that this is a matter in controversy among learned
men, whose books are extant, there you may see this sifted to the utmost.
Secondly, this I think a man may say without offense, that as he was able to
heal the Centurions servant, though he entered not into his house; So could he
make hell know that he had the key of it, though his soul did not take it in
his way from ye cross to Paradise.


Tract. It is a greater matter to bind the Devil, to lock him fast, and in
triumph to carry away the keys of death and hell, then to heal a sick man,
though he were at deaths door.


Guide. As with God there is great mercy to pardon the great sins of such as
be greatly grieved for them, having their repentance seasoned with the Salt of
faith, to keep them from desperation (which salt was not in Caine, and I^^das)
So no doubt there is such a mighty power in this Michael, Reu. 12.7.
as he is able to vanquish ye stoutest Dragon, be his force and power never so
great. I read of a battle in heaven, but none in hell. The Divine power can
bind and shut up Satan, by such a descending as we are not able to express.
For my part I believe that Article, touching his descending into hell, though
the manner how be not set down in the Creed.


Tract. That battle betwixt Michael and the Dragon may be said to be in
heaven, in respect of the Church Militant, who though she be on earth, has her
conversation with her Captain Christ in heaven A strong man is not bound and
spoiled without great strngling, a stronger power wrestled with him and
overcame him, Mat. 12.29.
and his binding and spoiling is said to be in the strong man's house, and what
is that but hell?


Guide. I deny not the binding, neither do I stand upon the place, but this I
observe, that though it be said in the Apostles Creed, and in Athanasius his
Creed: Aug. de simb. ad catherum. l^, 3, a^ side and simb oa, 5. in sol. 1, and
3.
He descended into hell: Yet they show not the manner how: and you know the
Nicene Creed has not these words. Augustine diverse times speaks of Christ
his death, burial, and resurrection, omitting the descension, but howsoever
that descending is to be taken, or wheresoever that binding was, this is
certain: Col, 2, 14, 15 Rollocke,
that Saint Paul has these words; Putting out the handwriting of ordinances
that was against us, which was contrary to us, he even took it out of the
way, and fastened it upon the cross and spoiled the Principalities, and powers,
and has made a show of the^ openly, and has triumphed over them in the same.


Tract. I know wherefore you bring this place, even to prove that wheresoever
those powers were spoiled, yer the show and triumph was open. But how do you
interpret those words, putting out the handwriting, etc. Some of the learned
intrepret them thus: The ceremonies and rites were as it were a public
profession and handwriting of the miserable state of mankind: for circumcision
declared our natural pollution, the purifyings and washings signified the
filth of sin, the sacrifices testified, that we were guilty of death, which
were all taken away by Christ's death.


Mad. Master Guid-well, you and Master Tractable may talk of these matters
another time, let us spend this time about that we came for.


Romans That is to persuade me to come to your Church, unto the which if I should
come, you think my being there would make me to be of your mind. I have
heard that all which come to your Churches be not faithful, zealous, and
honestalike, they differ much in many things. Since God is said to be no
accepter of persons, Can you show any reason why his word or his grace works
not in all alike?


Guide. I remember Saint Augustine unto some such question has this answer: Si
gratiae illuminatione sensus tuus, Aug. contra Delag ^ypon nost lib. 3.
heraetice, a tenebris insipientiae esset detectus, etc. If thy understanding,
O heretic, by the inlightning of grace were detected from the darkness of
foolishness, thou would believe those divine testimonies, which I spoke
before, or other innumerable found in holy Scriptures, not yet cited by me,
that God to no merits of man does give his grace: by which he shows himself
unto them to bring them to believe in him, and to serve him, and thou would
not enquire; yea thou would discuss why he works not that in all, (which
always well and justly works all things that he will, and no man resists
his will) for which he has done all things that he would: therefore I would
not have thee to ask me Metuentem and trementem iudicia eius inscrutabilia,
and incomprehensibilia, Fearing and trembling at his unsearchable and
incomprehensible judgments, why he works this to one and not to another;
because that which I read I believed and reverenced, without any discussing:
For what man is there that will reason with God? Romans 9.20
shall the thing formed say unto him that formed it, why have thou made me
thus? for the Potter has power over the clay, of the same lump to make one
vessel to honor, and another to dishonor. But ask him which said: No man
comes to me, except my father which sent me, draw him. And, all take not this
word, but they to whom it is given. Mat 10. Mat ^3. Mat. 11
And, to you it is given to know the Kingdom of God, but to others it is not
given. And no man knows the Son, but the Father, and he to whom the Son
will reveal him.


Romans I cannot tell what to say to those words of Saint Augustine, but if he
were here now, I would ask him what were true Religion, that I might embrace
it.


Guide. When he was here he said: Est enim vera religio, qua se vn^ Deo anima,
Aug. de animae quantitat^ ^^ 36
vnde se peccato velut abruperat, reconciliatione religat: For that is true
Religion, (says he) by which the soul does by reconciliation bind herself
again to God, from whom she had as it were, broken off her self by sin. In
his 8. book, and 17. chapter De Ciuitate Dei, he shows how true Religion
forbids those things which the Diu^ls love. And in the end of the Chapter he
says, that the sum of Religion is to imitate him whom thou do worship.
Since then the Religion which we profess, is not to draw you to the service or
worship of any Angels, nor of any creatures that sometimes lived here, much
less to the worship of things that never had life, as Images and crosses: but
binds us to the worship of one true living and eternal God, from whom we are
fallen by sin: the which God, our religion requires us to follow, with the
Apostle, which says: Be ye followers of God as dear children: I see no reason
why you should mislike ye religion here maintained.


Tract. Whatsoever your religion is, this is certain, that England had the
Christian Faith from Rome.


Guide. If it were so, which yet is denied of some, which, to omit others, cite
Nicephorus, who says, Simon Zelotes doctrinam Euangelij ad occidentem,
insulasque Britanicas praefert: Simon Zelotes carries ye doctrine of the
Gospel to the West Ocean sea* and so to the Istands of Britanie: yet it does
no mere follow, that they of Rome should now for that cause be more free then
we, from error: then it follows, that the Jews do more steadfastly cleave
unto Christ then we; because their Fathers had Moses and the Prophets, which
testified of him hundreds of years ere we heard of them. Though it be fit a
daughter should be ruled by her mother, being sober, and in her right mind: yet
there is no more reason she should be ruled by her, when she is besides her
self, then for you to send for fire to your neighbors house when it is
infected, because you did so (heretofore) when it was clear. Rome is not now
as she has been. Many learned men, not only Professors of the Gospel, but
such also as durst not but seem to favor them, have set down so many bad
things, found (as they say) in this new Rome, and charged her so often with
ambition, pride, whooredom, and covetousness, cruelty, superstition, heresy,
and idolatry, that in respect of most of these, I know not to whom I may better
compare her, then to that ancient Tyrus, to whom the Lord, by the Prophet says
thus:

Because thine heart is exalted, and thou have said: Ezekiel. 28.2.
I am a God, I sit in the seat of God in the midst of the sea: Yet thou art
but a man, and not GOD, though thou did think in thine heart that thou
wast equal with God.

Thou wast perfect in thy ways from the day thou wast created, 15
till iniquity was found in thee.

By the multitude of thy Merchandise they have filled the midst of thee with
cruelty, and thou have sinned 16
therefore I will cast thee as profane out of the mountain of God, and I will
destroy thee, covering Cherub from the midst of the stones of fire.

Thine heart was lifted up because of thy beauty, 1
and thou have corrupted thy wisdom by reason of thy brightness: I will cast
thee to the ground, I will lay thee before Kings, that they may behold thee.

Thou have defiled thy Sanctification by the multitude of thine iniquities, 18
and by the iniquity of thy Merchandise. Therefore will I bring a fire from the
midst of thee, which shall devour thee, and I will bring thee to ashes upon
the earth, in the sight of all them that shall behold thee.

All they that know thee among the people shall be astonished at thee: thou
shall be a terror, and never shall thou be any more.


Tract. God forbid the Mother Church should have such a fearful fall, as is
there threatened to Tirus, for if she should, then might we well say, she is
that Babylon, spoken of in the Revelation; and then would such Kings of the
earth as had committed fornication, and lived in pleasure with her, lament for
her, and standing a far off, for fear of her torment, say alas, alas,
the great City Babylon, the mighty City, for in one hour is thy judgment
come, and the Merchants of the Earth would weep and wail over her, because no
man would buy their wares any more.


Romans Hark in your ear Cousen, is any of the Merchants wares named there?


Tract. Yes, much of it.


Romans Is there any mention of Frankensence, and Oil?


Tract. Yes, in the thirteenth verse.


Romans I marvel at that.


Tract. Why so?


Romans Because these things are used in our Churches, and not among the
Protestants.


Guide. Speak out Neighbor Romana, that we may hear you.


Romans If you favored Rome, I would, but I think you would be glad to see her
fall.


Guide. If she be that Babylon that is spoken of in that Chapter: Heaven it
self, with the holy Apostles, and Prophets, Re. 18.20.
must rejoice when her judgment is come.


Romans Cannot you find in your heart to pray heartily with us, that if it be the
will of God, Rome may never have such a dreadful downfall?


Guide. Truly I pray God from my heart to amend all that is amiss wheresoever.
You know, we in the Church of England pray God to have mercy upon all men; by
which words, (as I think) men of all Nations, and of all degrees are
understood.


Romans I know not, for I never came there. The cause is this, you do not hold
the Pope to be Christ's Vicar general, you say he may err, you charge some of
them with grievous crimes, your translations are mislyked; besides this, such
as dame Cathera here can not abide to see one of the poor country Fellows
that drudge and droyle all the year, to shake their Bells a little at
Whitsontide; we Catholics though we fast* and pray in Lent, yet we love to be
merry at Christmas, and at our Wakes.

If that which Doctor Fulke, Bishop Iuel, Master Nowell, Doctor Reynolds,
and others, have written at large of the Popes, either touching their
supremacy, their erring, or their lives, will not satisfy your Cousen, and
you, I know not what to say to you; yet because you refuse not to confer with
me, I will tell you my mind plainly, and that in few words.

First for Christ's Vicar general, I know none worthy to be so called as the
Holy Ghost, whom Saint Austin calls the Porter, yea I cannot see how it can
belong to any besides. I prove it thus.

He whom the Son Christ promised to send from his Father, Nondedignater
spirit as sanctus esse os^oarius in Io tract. 4.
not only to Peter, but to the rest, to comfort them, and to abide with them
for ever, is only Christ's Vicar general. Io. 14.16.
But this was the Holy Ghost only. 1. Argument,
Therefore he only is yt Vicar. For to be thus sent, does nothing diminish his
deity.

He which is the Spirit of truth whom the world receives not, 2, Argu.
though he dwells with the faithful, is alone worthy to be called Vicar to
him, which is the truth. But such a one is the Holy Ghost. 3. Argu.
Ergo, he whom the Father sent in Christ's name to teach all things, and to
bring all things to remembrance that Christ told, is Chrsts Vicar general,
but such a one is the holy Ghost alone, therefore he only is Christ his
universal Vicar.

Tell us plainly, Master Tractable, can you or any man apply these things to
any Pope, or to Peter himself? if any of you would say yes, then it should
follow, that Peter should not need to have been comforted and confirmed
himself, ere he went about to confirm others.


Tract. But is it not some supremacy to be a strengthner of others, after he
himself was confirmed?


Guide. It is a good work, and a good fruit of repentance, when a man has
showed his weakness in denying his master, and that with cursing and
swearing, after his conversion to exhort them to take heed they confess Christ
constantly, lest with him they feel that, which made him weep bitterly. This
Apostle was forward in answering when our Savior asked any question, forward
in loving, and no doubt forward in feeding Christ's sheep, where he came, as
the rest did where they came. But that he had more authority to censure the
other two Pillars, James and John, then they him, I cannot find in the Holy
Scriptures.

I bring not this as misliking degrees in government, thought fit for the
better preserving of the safety and peace of any land, but as wishing you to
remember to show that Peter called himself and his fellows witnesses of the
resurrection of Christ, Act, 10.39.4^
but no Pastor of Pastors, or head of the universal Church.


Tract. Christ bade him feed his sheep. Ergo, that belongs to him and his
successors, more then to others.


Guide. Christ bad Peter to pay that for tribute for them two, as he should find
in ye Fish: he said not so to the rest: ergo, if your argument halt not, Christ
and Peter with his successors, to avoid offenses, are more bound to pay tribute
to Caesar then any others. I think you will not grant this willingly. Our
Savior knowing that Peter had denied him thrice, Aug. in Io, tract. 1 2 3,
though he promised to stick to him, though all the rest should forsake him,
bad him, if he loved him more then the rest did, to show it by his diligence
in feeding his sheep and his Lambs: yet ye know these words, Mat. 28.16 19
Mat. 27.5. Acts 1.11.22.26.
Go and teach all Nations, were spoken to ten others besides Peter, I say ten
others, because at that time there were but eleven, for Judas had hanged
himself before, and Matthias was not chosen to be a witness of the
Resurrection of Christ, with the rest, till after Christ was taken up from his
Disciples into Heaven.


Tract. Well, let us leave this, and return from whence we digressed. If you
will have the holy Ghost the Guide and Teacher of the whole Church militant
(for of that we spoke) where shall we find the holy Ghost, which is invisible,
guiding and teaching, that we might hearken unto him?


Guide. In the holy Scriptures, He shall testify of me, and you shall bear
witness also. Io. 15.26.27
which are in the mind, and in the mouth of every godly, faithful, sound,
discreet and zealous teacher, yt teaches according to ye same scriptures, not
seeking their own glory, but the glory of God, and the edifying of his people.
S. Peter says, speaking of prophecy in the Scripture, 2 Ephesians. 2. Pe^ 1.20.21.
See the 2. of Tim. 3.16.
that holy men of God spoke as they were moved by the holy Ghost. The Apostle
to the Hebrews citing these words of the 95. Psalm. To day if you will hear
his voice, says: the holy Ghost spoke them. S. Peter says, Heb 3.7. 2. Pet.
3, 16. 1. Cor. 7.40 Ioh. 14 17.
that S. Paul wrote according to the wisdom given unto him. S. Paul himself
says: I think that I have also the Spirit of God. Our Savior told his
Disciples, that the Spirit of truth should dwell with the^, and be in them.
Wicked men by the help of some Spiritual gifts prophecy, 1 Cor, 6.19.
and o^ and yet profit no more themselves then the bell that calls others to
hearing, and hears nothing it self. But if ye body of each faithful
Christian be the Temple of the Holy Ghost, which they have of God, then no
doubt he is also in that teacher, which has a care of these things following.
First, not only to lead into some truth, but into all truth. I mean, that is
revealed in ye word. S Paul says, Act. 20.
that he kept nothing back. For in fit time and place every thing revealed in
ye holy scripture, as occasion serves, is to be laid open in a discreet manner.
Secondly, as ye holy Ghost extolleth not the wisdom, power, and merits of man,
but glorifieth Christ: so does every good teacher (according to that is
measured unto him) endeavor to glorify the son of God, Ioh. 16.13.14.
yea the blessed Trinity, whose love is made manifest in Christ, not only by
his doctrine, but also by his deeds. Thirdly, as ye holy Ghost shows things
to come, so does ye true teacher tell what ye holy Ghost says shall be in ye
later days: 2. These. 2
for this is part of the truth, as to tell yt the man of sin shall be
disclosed. 1. Tim. 4.
Some shall speak lies through hypocrisy, 2 Timothy 3.
forbidding to marry. Some creeping into houses, shall lead captive simple
women. ^ou. 18.21.
The great City Babylon shall be Cast down. Reu. 21, 2.
The new Jerusalem shall be prepared as a Bride for her husband, etc. These and
the like things, such as be guided by God, according to their gift, have a
care to do.


Tract. But when men ^arre, and do not agree about the sense or meaning of some
hard places of scripture, is it not good, and great quiet to the Church, that
some one in authority should strike the stroke, and say: Let it be taken thus?


Guide. What if one man's exposition prove worse then ail the rest, shall we
build our faith for quietness sake, upon a false interpretation? Indeed it
were a blessed thing if any one might be found any where, that could and would
always hit aright, and never miss: but because you cannot name any such a one
on earth, the safest and surest way is for each Christian King, in his own
dominion, to call unto hin^ the greatest, godliest, and best learned, and so
they altogether to use the means, which the learned professors of the Gospel
judge to be best for the understanding of the darker places: and so through
Gods help, finding the truth, hold the people to it by such discipline as
shall be thought most fit for the glory of God, and the good of the Church.


Tract. By that means it may be, that each particular Church may yield to
that which the chief in that church shall affirm to be soundest: But yet one
particular Church may (for all that) dissent from another, as England from
Spain in many points, especially if any Church would (notwithstanding they
would seem to use that means) bow the sense to the opinion they have long
favored, and not their opinions to that sense, unto which the means you spoke
of (if they would suffer it) would draw it. And so men's affections ouer-ruling
the means, though there may be some unity in the particular, yet there will be
still a war in the universal: and therefore if you will have a general unity,
there must be a general Council, in which some godly learned men out of all
parts of Christendom must meet, and all show themselves willing to the truth,
and to embrace unity and uniformity. So might we have one translation, and one
interpretation throughout all Christendom, which though they differed in
Language, should be all one in sense.


Guide. If any in that general meeting will be froward, and labor to draw, as
you said, the sense to their opinion, they may all go home again, and
conclude nothing. It is well known, that latter Councels have undone that
which some former have decreed, and that there has been iarring and erring in
Councels.


Tract. Have Councels erred?


Guide. If one decree for the observation of any thing, and an other decree
against the same thing, one of these must needs err.


Romans You must needs grant that cozen.


Guide. Your cozen may see this proved to be true in the writing of sundry men,
if it please him.


Tract. Well, it may be that men seeing the inconueniency of such iarring and
varying will be wiser now, and take heed they decree nothing which others in
time to come shall have just cause to gainsay and undo. And they shall the
better effect this, if they begin with prayer, and some ancient godly man to
exhort the rest, that as they have the fear of God, any sound faith in Jesus
Christ, any true zeal, any love to Gods Church, any care to quiet men's
consciences, they should, (laying aside all bitter and biting words, all
partiality, all hunting after vainglory,) earnestly, carefully, painfully,
and charitably, confer and travel, to bring one sound Translation, one form
of sound doctrine and one good government in the Church in all Nations.


Guide. I doubt the Protestants will hardly be drawn to go among such, as not
only count them Heretics, but also hold that no promise, no faith is to be
kept with them. Your dealing heretofore with John Husse, and Hierom of Prage,
and your late Powder plots, are able to make any (were he never so willing to
seek peace,) to be a fraide to come among you. You talk much of Charity: it
is a monstrous charity that is still seeking for blood. Our loving Redemer
found fault with Peter for striking off a Servants ear: Mat. 26 51.
and did you think to please him with blowing up so many, not Servants, but
Masters, Lords, yea the Lords Anointed? Wretched Fauxe, neither thou, Mat.
5.36.
nor any man, can make an hair white, or black.


Tract. Good Master Guide-well talk no more of such Catholic conclusions. I
for my part am ashamed of them, and so I think are all such as have not their
consciences seared with a hot Iron: let such bloody devises return to Hell,
from whence they came; and let us now here what is thought of the Learned, to
be the best means to come by the true sense of the Scriptures, which as Saint
Peter says, P 3. 316.
are perverted by such as are unlearned, and unstable.


Guide. There be diverse means, which if they be rightly used, will no doubt
further us well in that search.

The first is Prayer; Ask, and it shall be given you.

The second is the knowledge of the original tongues, chiefly required in
translators: for except we understand the words, how shall we find the sense?

The third is the Word, to consider what is spoken properly, what figuratively.
Whit controuer. l. p 349. 350. 351. etc.
It is a miserable bondage of the Soul (says Austin,) to take the Signs for
the Things: That is, to interpret those things properly, that are spoken
figuratively.

The fourth is to consider the scope, the end, the matter, ye circumstance,
what went before, and what follows after.

If thou will enter into life (says Christ) keep the Commandments:
Here-hence our Adversaries do gather, yt we are justified by works, not marking
to what man our Savior Christ made that answer; even to him verily, which
leaning to the opinion of his own righteousness, demanded what things he
might do that he might obtain eternal life, such men as trust to their own
works, are worthily sent to the Law, ye so they may understand, how far they
be from perfect righteousness.

The fifth mean is, to confer one place with another, the obscure with such
as be more plain: Saint James says, Abraham was justified by works: Ia.
2.21.
Saint Paul says, Abraham was not justified by works, for then he should have
wherein to boast: Romans 4.2.
And that Paul spoke in that place of works which followed the calling of
Abraham, it is evident first because it is said; Abraham believed God, and it
was imputed to him for righteousness: which all men know to have been long
after his calling: Secondly, because Saint Paul comes afterward to the
example of David, who was an holy man, renewed by the Spirit of God and called
of God. We must needs therefore grant, that the word of Justification is taken
diversely. So that to be justified with James, is to be declared just, as
Thomas Aquinas himself upon that place grants, but to be justified with
Paul, is to be absolved from all sins, and to be reputed just.


Tract. There be some which think that Saint James spoke of justification, as
it comprehends sanctification: but go on.


Guide. The sixth mean is not only to confer like places with like, but also
unlike with unlike. Except ye eat the flesh of the Son of man, and drink
his blood, you have no life in you: let this place be compared with the like,
in the fourth of John: Whosoever shall drink of that water which I shall give
unto him, there shall be in him a spring of water, rising up unto life
eternal. This water is spiritual, Eademratie.
and the manner of drinking of it is Spiritual: And there is the same manner
of eating his flesh: for to eat and drink are alike. Therforeas that water is
drunk after a Spiritual manner, which makes that we never thirst: even so
ought the flesh of Christ to be eaten, and his blood drunk, but Spiritually:
Now for unlike places, compare that former place, Except ye eat the flesh of
the Son of man, etc. with the sixth commandment, Thou shall not kill, for if
it be a wicked deed to kill a man, much more to eat and devour. Therefore
Saint Austin says, that those words, Except ye eat the flesh, Aug. li. 3. do
doct. Chr. c. 16.
etc. are to be understood and interpreted figuratively, because otherwise
they should command an heinous and wicked deed.

The seventh help for the understanding the dark places, is, to have a care
that all our expositions agree to the Analogy of our faith. By Analogy is meant
a constant and perpetual sentence of the Scriptures in those places, which are
plain and easy, such as are the Articles of our faith, and such things as are
contained in the Lords prayer, and the ten Commandments: so that whatsoever
^pposition agrees not with this Analogy is false. For examples sake, our
Adversaries out of the words of the Supper, This is my body, pick a
Transubstantiation* giving this sense: this bread is changed into my body. The
Lutherans interpret them another way, to wit, under this bread is my body: and
here-hence they gather Consubstantiation. Now both these expositions dissent
from the Analogy of faith: which teaches, Christ has a body like to our
bodies, but such a body cannot either ly hid under the accidents of bread, or
be together with bread. Secondly, the Analogy of faith teaches, that Christ is
in heaven, therefore he is not in the bread, or with the bread. Thirdly ye
Analogy of faith teaches that Christ shall come from heaven to judgment, and
not out of a box.

The eighth means is, when we feel not ourselves skillful euough to use ye
means, to go to others that be more skillful, to read other men's books, to
ask counsel of the Comentaries and expositions of learned interpreters:
always provided, that we attribute not too much to them, and that we think
not their interoretations to be received, because they come from them, but
because they are either warranted by the authority of the holy Scriptures, or
underpropped with sound and substantial reason.


Romans You have led my cozen along with these eight means, but you have not
showed any fault or any error in any Pope.


Guide. I cannot show all at once, if we live we will talk of that to morrow.


The Dialogue.
Guide-well. HOe, Who sits next the fire?


Romans That do I, reading the Resolution, though it grieve you.


Guide. It grieueth not me, so that you take heed of that which swerueth from
the Analogy of faith, whereof you heard yesterday.


Romans I think you read none of the books which are written by those whom you
call superstitious Catholics.


Guide. Yes, more then you do of ours, we are to try all things, but we must
hold fast nothing but that which is good.


Romans I will hear what you have to say against any of the Popes, ere I try
what is in your books?


Guide. That which is written in the books of Bishop Jewel, Doctor Reynolds, and
others, show far more of their errors, and wickedness, then I mind to
rehearse, though memory and time did serve. If your cozen would buy those
books, you should hear their good dealings at large. But to what end would
you hear of error and sin?


Romans Because if I shall see that any of the Popes were very had, I will take
heed how I call them the Vicars of him, which was very good.


Tract. Why cozen? Judas was one of the twelve, though a traitor.


Guide. Do not you think that many of the Popes, which seemed by their deeds
rather to succeed Judas then Peter, cannot show so good a warrant, for their
lawful entrance into the Pope-ship, as Judas might show for his entrance into
the Apostleship?


Tract. Though they be not chosen to their office immediately by Christ, as
Judas was to the Apostle-ship, yet I think none take that room without
election.


Guide. When there were two Popes at once, which of them was Christ's Vicar,
which of their elections was most lawful?


Tract. Let that go, and let us hear what you have to say of any of their
errors of lives.


Guide. Vincentius Lyrinensis gives us to understand, that there was a time
when almost all the Latin Bishops favored Arrianisme: And if you would read
but Bishop Jewel his preface to the defense of the Apology, you shall find
these words: Where I say Pope Liberius was an Arrian herritick, Master
Harding answers or else you are an errant slanderous liar, judge thou us
indifferently, good Christian Reader, and let the liar have his meede. This is
not my judgment of Pope Liberius. It is written and reported by sundry others,
even by such as Master Harding cannot condemn for errant liers. Here will I
speak nothing of S. Hierome, for Master Harding utterly refuses his
judgment, in this behalf, and says he was much deceived, how be it errant
liar I trow he will not call him for his authorities sake. But Sabellicus
says, Liberius, vt quidam scribunt, ex confesso factus Arianus. Liberius, as
some men say, by open profession became an Arrian. Alphonsus de castro, says
in plain words: De Liberio Papa constat, fuisse Arianum: For Pope Liberius it
is well-known, that he was an Arrian heritick The same is avouched by Rhegino,
by Platina, by Cardinal Cusanus, by Anselmus, Rid. and others. Laurentius
Valla, a Chanon of the Church of Rome says thus, Papa Caelestinus sensit cum
haeretico Nestorio. Pope Caelestine agrees in judgment, with the heretic
Nestorius. The same reverend B. touching Pope Hildebrand, in the said preface
(says Nauclerius) hereof writes thus. The Clergy said that Pope Hildebrand
had defiled the Apostolic See with Simony, heresy, murder, and adultery,
that he was degenerate, and had forsaken the faith of Christ, and that
therefore he was for good causes justly excommunicate by all the Bishops in
Italy. Sigibertus Gemblacensis says, Pope Hildebrand in his time troubled all
the States in Christendom* and for his outrage and cruelty being banished and
driven out of Rome, in the end when he saw death approach, he made his
confession to one of his Cardinals, that he abused his Pastoral office, that
he had troubled mankind with malice and mischief, by the counsel of the
devil.


Tract. It seems strange to me, that the Cardinal should reveal that, which
the Pope confessed to him on his deathbed.


Guide. It may be he was moved in conscience to do it, to the end that such
Popes as succeeded might beware by his example.


Tract. Well go on.


Guide. Pope Honorius was a Monothelite. Confer. R. (...) H, 90,
Master Harding himself does not deny this, and others of this matter have
written thus: Then were two meetings of Bishops in Constantinople, which do
bear the name of the fixed Council; the former under the Emperor
Constantinus; the fourth about the year of Christ, six hundred and eighty;
the latter under his son Justinian toward a thirty years after. The former
was assembled against the herisie of the Monothelites: the Bishops of the West
Church, as of the East, The Monothelites said that Christ had but only one
will, and so by consequent but one nature,
were present, and they with one consent did all condemn Honorius. If you
Master Tractable be not acquainted with these matters, you may read more at
your leisure of Boniface the eighth, who is said to have entered like a Fox,
reigned like a Lion, and to have dyed like a Dog: Conf, R. and H, 229, and 240,
and of Alexander the sixth, which Pope is said to have bought the voice of many
Cardinals, etc. His covetousness is called insatiable, his ambition
unmeasurable, Onuph, in Alex^.
his eruelcy more then barbarous, and that he had a most fervent desire of
aduauncing, (by what means soeeuer) his children, of whom he had many, etc.
Such a Serpent held the seat of Saint Peter, for the space of ten years,
until his own venom killed him.


Romans How I pray you?


Guide. I will tell you how I find it set down by others. When he and his
son and heir the Duke of Valence, had purposed to have poisoned a Cardinal,
whom they were to sup with (as commonly they used not only their enemies, but
also their friends, yea nearest friends, which had riches, that themselves
might be enriched with their spoil) the Duke had sent thither Flagons of wine
poisoned, by a servant whom he made not privy to the matter, but willed him to
give them no man. The Pope coming into the Cardinals before supper time, the
weather being hot, he thirsty, called for wine: Now because his own provision
for supper was not come from the Palace yet, the servant of the Duke gave him
of that wine, which he thought his Master had willed to be kept for himself,
as the best wine, of which while he was drinking, his son the Duke came in,
and thinking the wine to be his fathers own, he drunk of it too: so the Pope
was carried suddenly for dead home to the Palace, and the next day, he was
carried dead, after the manner of the Popes, into Saint Peter's Church, black,
swollen, and ugly, most manifest signs of poison.


Romans If this be true, I must needs say it was Gods just judgment upon them.
But what were those heresies ye spoke of before, of Arrius and N^storius?


Guide. Saint Austin says, Aug. de (...). ad quod.
that the Arrians would not have the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, to be of
one nature, and essence, etc.

Nestorius, Vni. Lyr. ad ver^haer.
(as Vincentius salth) fayning to distinguish two substances in Christ, on a
sudden brings in two persons, and by a wickedness unheard of, would have
two Sons of God, two Christ's, etc.


Romans If my cozen had made these things known unto me, I think though diverse
labored to keep me from going to Church, yet I should have kept in some
froward speeches, as namely this, that I would be torn in pieces with wild
horses, ere I would come to Church.


Guide. I have heard that many have used that desperate speech, but I would wish
all those which mind not to provoke Gods wrath to their own woe, to ask
themselves what should move them so to say. Do they think that God will be
offended with them for hearing ye Minister say, Enter not into judgment with
th^^ servants o Lord, etc. or ye a sorrowful spirit is a sacrifice to God,
despise not o Lord, humble and contrite hearts; or that it is a sin to make a
general confession of our sins, to say the Lords prayer, to hear the
Psalms and chapters read, to pray in the Letany among other things, yt it
would please God to bring into ye way of truth all such as have erred and are
deceived, or to be present where all estates and degrees are prayed for, yea yt
it would please God to have mercy upon all men, to forgive our enemies, and at
the end of the commandments to say, Lord have mercy upon us, and write all
these thy laws in our hearts we beseech thee: Or when we come to the
congregation to say kneeling, O almighty God Father of our Lord Jesus Christ,
judge of all men, we acknowledge and bewail our manifold sins and
wickedness which we from time to time most griueuously have committed against
thy Divine Majesty, by thought, word, and deed, provoking most justly thy wrath
and indignation against us, we do earnestly repent, and be heartily sorry for
these our mis-doings, etc. After the Communion, to hear the Minister read any
of the prayers containing thanksgiving as in the book are appointed, or to
sing with the rest of the thanksgiving in Meeter, which begins

The Lord be thanked for his gifts.
And mercy evermore:
That he has showed unto his Saints,
To him be laud therefore, and.
The reading or finging of this tha^ksgiuing does edify and co^mfort the
faithful and humble co^municant, far more then ye hearing of an 100 Masses, in
a strange tongue, by which indeed the unlearned has no edifying at al.


Mad. What say you to these things Mi. Romana? is there any thing here that
should hinder you from praying with us?


Romans Ask my cozen.


Guide. Ask your cozen? ask your own conscience. What if your cozen should
tell you, that Peter brought men to the worship of Christ, by magical Arts,
and bad feats, as some feigned before S. Austins time, who wrote more then 1200
years ago, Aug. de ciuit, li, 18, c, 53, and 54,
would you believe it to be so, if your cozen should say so?


Tract. I would you should well know Master Guide-well, that I am so far from
having that opinion of Peter, that I hold him for a true Teacher, and for that
Shepeheard whom Christ appointed to feed his Sheep.


Guide. If you mean by Sheepheards the only Sheepeheard, I may not yield to
you, unless I should dissent from S. Austin who on the tenth of John says, Et
quidem, fratres, etc. And verily brethren, in that he (meaning Christ) was a
Sheepeheard, he gave it also to his members: for both Peter was a Shepherd,
and Paul was a Shepherd, and the rest of the Apostles were Shepherds, and
good Bishops are Shepherds.


Tract. Why then the Bishops of Rome, if they be good Bishops, they be good
Shepherds.


Guide. No doubt of that, but if you list to read, you shall find some too too
bad, and that many of them have erred foully.


Tract. As men, but not as Popes.


Guide. These be nice distinctions, and sophistical shifts. Has their Popeship
more force to keep them from error then Peter's Apostle-ship to keep him from
denying Christ.


Tract. That was before the holy Ghost sat on him, and the rest, at Pentecost.
see Austin, de cor. do. ad. Bon. ca. 27.


Guide. Then you go not about to excuse him, Sicut eum quidam (says Austin)
fauore peruerso excusare nituntur: As some men of a perverse favor endeavor to
do.


Tract. No, for I remember what the same Father says in the leaf foregoing,
Quid festinas Petre? nondum te solidauit Petra; Why art thou so hasty Peter?
the Rock, meaning Christ, has not yet staide thee, or made thee sound, but
did he any thing worthy of blame, after he wept bitterly, and after the
receiving of the holy Ghost, and after Christ had him feed his Sheep,
commanding him so thrice, as he had denied thrice, to the end (as I take it)
he might thencefoorth be as earnest in feeding, as before in denying? Did he (I
say) deserve blame after this?


Guide. Or else Paul was too blame to withstand him to his face, for
withdrawing himself, fearing those that were of the circumcision, and in that
dissimulation not going with a right foot to the truth of the Gospel. Gal.
2.11, 12, 13, 14,



Tract. That was at Antioch, not at Rome.


Guide. I did not say it was: you know there is no mention in all the Bible of
his being at Rome.


Tract. Well, though he failed in that point, yet his says in Christ failed
him not: Christ prayed it might not.


Guide. I do not say, that holy Apostles faith in Christ failed him, I say he
did something worthy blame in Saint Paul's judgment; but you would conclude
hereon, if his faith failed not, no Popes faith has failed; but if you would
read that conference betwixt Master Reynolds, and Master Heart, you should
not only see the reason, why this Argument is denied, but what soever is built
for the Popes supremacy, upon any these speeches, Thou art Peter. etc.
Whatsoever thou will bind, etc. I will give thee the Keys: I have prayed for
thee: Strengthen thy Brethren. Feed my Sheep. Or whatsoever is brought for
that purpose, fully answered.

And surely, whosoever will not acknowledge how that reverend, godly, learned,
and humble spirited man has taken great pains, and dealt faithfully in
searching for the truth of the matters there handled, is very unthankful,
and does what in him lies, to discourage that good man, He is not at ^est.
and all others, from dealing any further in these points. Every man according
to his hability should labor to bring the truth to light, and do as the
Shepherds did, Luke 2.17.
when they had found Christ; they did not hide the matter, but published abroad
the thing that was told them of that Child.

Search at Bethelem (Master Tractable) for Christ: Search the House of Bread,
for the Bread of life: Search the Scriptures (says our Savior) Do not feed
your Cousen with superstition. Controversies in high points, should not
separate Christians, nor keep any from that congregation, where no Idol, but
the living God is worshipped, and called upon, in the name of Christ. Do not
urge old objections, but seek for the answers, and when you have found them,
and find them sound and substantial, do not hide them from other, but make
them acquainted with them. What a number of you have contented your selves with
Masses, Pictures, Agnus-dei's, Crucifixes, and such like, and through your own
willfulness, robbed your selves of a number of Sermons, which you might have
heard in London, and in many other places of this Land, since that good Queen
Elizabeth came first to the Crown.


Romans We could not rob our selves of that we never had: There I caught you
once Master Guidewell.


Guide. Yea Mistres Romana, I know you, and my Lady, (such a one) are full of
your catches, you have wit enough to quippe, and catch, but I like not such
catching as catches a consumption, starueth your Souls, and purchases the
displeasure of the Almighty; such witness is wickedness in his sight.


Romans You say well Master Guidewell. But to tell you my mind in a word, I would
be more willing to come to your Church, if I did hear that M. Do-wel did use
to come thither.


Guide. If he do not, I pray you do you come, and learn both to believe
well, and do well, and then we shall find mistres Doe-well there.


Romans We are not to learn now, we have Sermons more then you know of, I
would be ashamed there should be any such fruits found in us, as are in a
number of you Scripture men.


Guide. It may be you are so seasoned now with saltpeter, that you cannot do
amiss.


Romans Tush, Let blood go, and talk of other bad fruit, as incontinency, or
such other.


Guide. Let blood go (quoth you) you were best indeed not to thirst for it: for
the Prophet faith, The Lord abhors the bloudthirsty and deceitful man.


Romans That is against men, and not women.


Guide. Do not dally with the Scriptures. Saint Paul says: Let a man examine
himselfes and so let him eat of that bread, etc. Will you say this pertains
not to Women?


Tract. The Greek word Anthropos comprehends both Masculine and Feminine.


Guide. Why then, what say you to those words in the first verse of the first
Psalm? Blessed is the man that does not walk in the Council of the wicked,
nor stand in the way of sinners, nor sit in the seat of the scornful. Is not
the woman that shunneth such company blessed, as well as the man? Though the
Hebrew word be Ish, the Latin Vir, a man, I think Iesabell had as fearful
a downe-fall as Achab. And whereas you, Mistress Romana think, that none of
your fide have been found so loose in life, as some Professors of the Gospel:
I could say something, if I either took delight in rehearsing other men's
faults, or thought the sin of some a sufficient argument to prove the
doctrine which all of that side hold, to be corrupt.


Romans You cannot find any such gross faults in any that be, or have been in
this Land of our side, as we do find among you.


Guide. There be too many faults every where, God amend us all. But since you
urge me so much, I will tell you what I heard a Son report of his own
Father, I protest I will speak no untruth, I heard this as I shall tell you,
with mine own ears.

In the year of our Lord God, 1581. on the fourteenth of October, there was a
Glocestershire Gentleman examined in the Towne-Hall of North-hampton. M.
Kirtland was then Mayor.
The cause why he was examined, was for that some of the Officers seeing him
and a Woman that was in his company. stay in the Town longer then Travelers
use to do, suspected that the Woman which stayed there so long in his company,
was not his own wife.

Being therefore questioned withal about this matter, he answered: Indeed I
am betrothed unto her, and I think that I may lawfully marry her, though she
whom heretofore I took to wife be yet living. The reason is, for that she (I
mean which was my first wife) was sometime my Fathers Harlot, by whom he had
three Children, and after that did enforce me, being four and twenty years
of age, to marry her, to the end I might be partaker of that which he was
minded to bestow upon her: that so he might stop two gappes with one bush.
So I married her, and after I had two Children by her, I was divorced from her
in Bishop Hoopers time: for the Lawyers said, it was not Matrimonium ab initio.

Afterward in Queen Maryes time, Bishop Brooks, who was great with my
Father (being both Papists) persuaded me to take her again. I did so, and had
seven children more by her, and then turned her up again, and kept company
with this Bridget Tailor, a man's daughter of Busheley.


Mad. What say you to this neighbor Romana, whose fruits were these? the
father being a papist, constrains the son to marry one, by whom he himself
had three children; and after the diuorcement, a popish Bishop persuades the
son to take her again.


Romans What say you, Ma. I promise you I was almost an ace out.


Mad. O you cannot hear on that side, now you are asleep: but let us pass
over other men's faults, and look to our own. If any professor of the Gospel
by his ill dealing be a stumbling-blocke in your way, go by it, and remember
that we are bid to be followers of God, as dear Children: And that our Savior
says: Happy is he that shall not be offendedia me. Ephesians. 5.1. Math. 11.6.
Let not men's faults keep us from hearing Christ's voice. Good sheep will take
their fodder though there be never so many pillards in the flock, or though
the shepherd halt.


Tract. Your translations be not current.


Guide. Speak the truth M. Tractable. Is not that translation best which
comes nearest to the Hebrew, in the old Testament, the greatest part whereof
was written in that tongue, and to the Greek in the New?


Tract. They being the Fountains, I see no reason why I should not say yes.
What then?


Guide. Can you show where our Translations do vary from the original in any
chief point of our religion.


Tract. I cannot call things to remembrance on a sudden: Genesis 34.3. Ios. 24.31.
yet this one place of the 7. of the Acts, I remember well where you translate
Hamor(...), Hamor the the son of Sychem. But the word (son) is not in the
Greek: besides Hamor is diverse times called in the old Testament the father of
Sychem.


Guide. If your Latin translation had not Filij Sychem, you might have been the
bolder to have found fault with ours, but whether Hamor were the Father, or the
Son of Sychem, it neither makes nor marreth our faith. It should seem that
as in that 7. of the Acts, Abraham is put for some of the house or posterity of
Abraham, to wit, Jacob: so it may be, that some which first translated tou
suchem, finding in the third of Luke these words, being as men, supposed the
son of Joseph tou Heli, tou Mathat, tou Leui, etc. of Heli, of Mathat, of
Leui, etc. meaning that Joseph was the son of Heli, and Heli the son of
Mathat, and Mathat the son of Leui, might also think that tou Sichem should
be translated the son of Sichem, forgetting that Chamor is found to be the
son of Sichem ten times in Genesis 34. and once in Joshua 24.32. Howsoever it
came to pass, you may not deny this word (son) in some translations to be
printed in smaller letters. And your vulgar Edition has a filijs Omor filij
Sichem of the sons of Omer, the son of Sichem. But what else do you
observe in our Translations?


Tract. In the Psalm 105. according to the Hebrew, but in our Latin
Translation, 104. we find these words, Lo maru eth debario thus translated in
the Psalter which you read in your Church, they were not obedient to his word.
But we read it thus: Et non exacerbauit sermones suos: that is says Ludane,
non infideles fecit, he made not his words unfaithful, he was faithful in
his word or promise. And Friar Titellman, sometimes a divine reader in Louaine
in his exposition which he calls Elucidatio takes these words to be spoken
either by God, or by Pharaoh, and in respect of God he gives this sense, non
irritos fecit, etc. the Lord sp^ke not in vain, but as he threatened Pharao by
Moses and Aaron, ita factum fuit, so it came to pass. But as they might be
referred to Pharaoh, he expounds them thus: Non amara, neque blasphema
loquutus est, He spoke no bitter nor blasphemous words, but sought for pardon,
and sending for Moses, he desired to be delivered from the Plague, meaning
here the plague of Darkness, Exodus 10.21. Psalm. 105.


Guide. You may see, if it please you to look on that English Translation,
printed Cum priuilegio. 1576. these words, Lo Maru, etc. translated thus: They
were not disobedient to his Commission. And in the Bible of the largest volume
printed 1585. those words are Englished thus: they went not from his words. In
both which translations the verb Maru is taken for the third person piurall,
and not the singular, as in your Latin.


Tract. But the first of the two translations named by you, do English the 22.
verse of the 37. Chapter of Isaiah thus: This is the word that, etc. He has
despised thee, and laughed thee to scorn, O daughter of Jerusalem, he has
shaken his head at thee. But it should be thus: The virgin, the daughter of
Sion has despised thee (meaning the King of Ashur) and laughed thee to scorn:
the daughter of Jerusalem has shaken her head at thee.


Guide. In the last of these Translations which I named, that ouer-sight of the
former is corrected. But I marvel that in searching for faults in
Translations, you cannot, or will not see whst a number of faults some of the
Learned have noted in your old Latin Translations, differing so much from the
Hebrew in the old Testament, and from the Greek in the New. D. Whit Co^. 1. q.
2. ca. 11. pa 137. 138.
A Learned professor of Divinity having occasion to search into these matters,
after he has set down many faults found in your old Latin Edition, and in
other places of the New Testament, so in the psalms: And coming at last to
the nintie psalm, he says Sunt huius Psalmi versus septemdecim, etc. There
be seauenteene verses in this psalm: and I dare be bold to say, there be
more faults in the Translation of this psalm, then there be verses in the
psalm.

And in the same Chapter he says: Itaque vere dici potest, non esse hos
Dauidicos Psalmos, quos illi in suis sacris lectitant, atque cantitant, sed
Graci Latinique interpretis errores. Therefore it may truly be said, that the
psalms which they usually read and sing in their Service, are not David's
psalms, but the errors of the Greek and Latin Interpreter.

It were here too long to recite all the faults he sets down in the
twelfth chapter of that second question, where he notes many places of the
New Testament corrupted in the Latin Edition. Toward the end of the Chapter
he says, he has chosen a few out of manny, if he should set down all,
he should make a Volume. If you list to buy the Book, it is Entitled:
Disputatio de sacra scriptura, etc.


Tract. Did not he which wrote that book find fault with them, Page 118.
which put ipsa for ipsum in the third of Genesis, verse 15?


Guide. Yes, for finding Hu in the Hebrew, and Autos in the Greek. He saw there
was no reason why it should be translated ipsae, she, as if not Christ, but
the blessed Virgin had broken the Serpents head. Speak your mind M, Tract.
did she or our blessed Savior dash the Devils power?


Tract. She brought forth him that did it.


Guide. We all agree in that, and therefore she may be well called blessed, being
preferred through the favor of God to such an excellent office.


Mad. Me thinks learned men that agree in this, that the holy Scriptures are
penned by the holy Ghost, and contain such things as are true, should leave
publishing one another ouersights, or whatsoever you list to call it, and
join together in Christian and loving sort, to set forth a sound translation.
It is an easy matter to espy here and theee a broken quarrel in the windows
of a great building: yea and of a little house too. But to build the whole
house, and so to build it, as it may please every man's eye that has skill in
building, is another manner of matter.


Guide Yea Madame, if charity had once so possessed our hearts, as to move us in a
brotherly sort to seek for the truth, and to worship the fountain of our life
and light, as he might be pleased with us, we might sing: Ecee quam bonum,
etc. Behold how good, Psalm. 133.
etc.


Romans Before we come to singing, let me hear what men of your side say of
Baptism.


Guide. A reverend Father of this Land, in one of his books says thus: Since
Children be defiled by Adam, B. B.
if they may not be washed by Christ, the disobedience of man shall be mightier
to condemnation then the grace of God, and the obedience of Christ to
justification, which the Scriptures reject as a wicked absurdity Wherefore the
Church absolutely and flatly may not assure salvation unto children unbaptized,
lest they seem naturally innocent, or generally sanctified without baptism,
albeit their parents desiring and seeking it, Note.
if they be prevented by natural necessity, we must leave them to the
goodness, and secret election of God, not without hope, because in their
parents there wanted not will, but an extremity disappointed them. And in the
Children the let was weakness of Age, not wickedness of heart. And so the
Sacrament omitted, not for any contempt of Religion, but by strictness of
time. In which cases Saint Augustine says, the want of baptism may be
supplied, if it please God, etc.


Tract. Does not your allowed Catechism hold Sacraments generally necessary to
Salvation.


Guide. Yes, for that which is ordained by Christ to confirm our faith, etc.
may well be counted needful to Salvation generally.


Tract. What says your Calvin? is he of no request with you now?


Guide. I know in what request he is. Just cap 15.
But thus he writes touching the matter we have in hand.

No small wrong is done to the Covenant of God, if we do not rest in it, as
though it were weak in it self, whereas the effect thereof hangs neither
upon Bapstime, nor upon any other Additions. There is afterward added to it a
Sacrament like a seal, not that it brings effectualnesse to the promise of
God, as to a thing weak of it self, but only confirms it to us. Whereupon
it follows, the Children of the faithful are not therefore baptized, that
they may then first be made the Children of God, which before were strangers
from the Church, Note. Not by ^a^ure, but by promise.
but rather that they be therefore received by a solemn sign into the
Church, because by the benefit of the promise they did already belong to the
body of our Sau^our Jesus Christ, etc.

And in the sixteenth Chapter he says, Baptism, besides this, that it is a
sign to testify religion before men, shows first the cleansing of sin,
which we obtain of the blood of Christ; then the mortifying the flesh, which
stands upon the partaking of his death, by which the faithful are regenerate
to newness of lif^, received into the fellowship of Christ. Further he says:
whatsoever agrees with Circumcision, agrees also with Baptism.


1. The foundation in both is one, to wit, Christ. 2. The promises whereupon
the power of the signs consist, are one, namely of the fatherly favor of God:
of the forgiveness of sins: of life everlasting. 3. The thing figured is all
one in both, to wit, regeneration.
Tract. What else have you of his?


Guide. Fateor oblatam scandali occasionem, Epist* and resp si infans.
etc. I confess there is an occasion of scandal or offense offered to all the
godly, if by thy slackenesse or negligence the infant depart without Baptism.
Wherefore not only are they not to be borne withal, which neglect baptism,
but they also are not to be allowed, which through a certain boasting, and for
ostentations sake do long protract the administration of an holy thing.

But the infant by that means is deprived of the sign of health, to with
Baptism, yet I deny that his state is any thing the worse before God, for
albeit Baptism be a seal of our adoption, yet we are written in the book of
life, both by the grace of God, and also by his promise. For tell me for what
cause our children are saved, but by that word, Ego sum Deus seminis tui, Gen*
17.7.
I am the God of thy seed: and except that word did appertalne unto them, they
were not to be admitted unto Baptism.

Now if their salvation stays it self on the promise of God, and that
foundation be fit of it self, we are not to think that all children do
perish, that depart this life without Baptism, for so under the commendation
of that sign of the grace of God, God himself should be wronged and reproved,
and we should derogate from his truth as if our safety propped with his
promise wear not sufficiently ^orne up. Since then there is no contempt of
Baptism found in thee, the want thereof could not hurt the infant, which
deceased before thou could conveniently offer it to Baptism.


Tract. Then belike he would not forbid such to be buried among Christians:
but says he nothing of baptizing of the children of those whom he calls
Papists?


Guide. Yes, I remember in a certain Epistle to a friend of his, touching that
matter he says.

The promise not only comprehends the issue of each faithful man in the
first degree, Page 322 in Folio.
but is extended to a thousand generations, whereby also it comes to pass
that the iuterruption of piety which was rife, or had spread far in the
Papacy, has not taken away the force and efficacy of Baptism: for the
original is to be regarded, and the nature of Baptism is to be esteemed by
the promise. We therefore doubt not that the progeny of great grandfathers
which were godly men do belong to the body of the Church, though their
grandfathers or fathers were Apostataes. These be the speeches of that Calvin,
whose doctrine Deane Gifford calls psuedneuangelium, a false Gospel, and
says that in many points, it is worse and more wicked then the Alcoron of the
Turks: See the exact disou. p^inted sidce the fifth ^f Nou. 1605. page 2. and 3.
but whatsoever any of them say, of this reverend learned man, if you list to
read any of his works, you shall find that he goes not about to draw men
to like of this or that point of doctrine, with show of words only, but
sets down his reasons also.


Tract. If he should not do so, his doings were but dotage, in the judgment of
Saint Austin, who says, Verba iactare, and nihil probare, Cont, lit, petil,
li, 2, ca. 34.
quid est nisi delirare?

To brag with words, and prove no jot,
What is it else but even to dote?

Romans I pray you one word cozen, since you have named Saint Austin, tell me,
whether he were of this mind, that all which are baptized are saved?


Tract. I know he thinks hardly of such as depart this life without it,
urging much these words: Except a man be borne of water, and the Spirit, etc.
taking ye word water, in another sense, then some do; but what he says
touching your question, is now out of my head, therefore I leave it to M.
Guid-well.


Guide. Writing against Chrestonius, he says: Baptismus est sacramentum nouae
vitae ac salutis aeternae, quem multi habent non ad vitam aeternam, sed ad
paenam aeteruam, non been vtentes tanto bono.


Romans I pray you English it I am never the nearer for the Latin.


Guide. What be you the better then, for hearing a Latin Mass, or a Latin
Mattins.


Romans It may be we have it in English now.


Guide. If you have you may thank the Protestants, which have so often urged that
of Paul, Let all things be done to edifying, 1. Cor. 14.
and again: yet had I rather in the Church to speak five words with mine
understanding, that I might also instruct others, etc.


Tract. Come I know what D. Harding says of that matter, but let that go and
English S. Austins words.


Guide: Thus it is. Baptism is a Sacrament of new life, and eternal salvation,
the which many have not to everlasting life, but to everlasting pain, not well
using such an excellent thing, And in his first Book against the same man,
Aug. cont, Cres gram li. 1. ca. 34.
he says these words.

Quod licet sanctum sit neque vllo modo praetermitendum, quoniam sacratissima
significatione praepollet, quam multi came tamen accipiunt, non solum boni, qui
secundum propositum vocati sunt, conformes imagini Filij Dei, sed etiam ij qui
regnum Dei non possidebunt, in quibus sicut dicit Apostolus, and ebriosi, and
auari numerantur.

The which thing speaking of visible Baptism although it be holy, and by no
means to be omitted, because it has a most sacred signification, yet very
many take it; not only the good which are called of purpose, conformed to the
image of the Son of God, but also such as shall not possess the kingdom of
God, among which, as the Apostle says, are reckoned both drunkard and the
covetous. In the twentieth one book of the City of God, he asks what it
avails any man to be baptized if he be not justified: Did not he which said
nisi quis renatus, etc. Except a man be borne again of water, and of the
spirit, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of God, say also: Except your
righteousness exceed the righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, ye
shall not enter into the Kigdome of heaven? Cur illud timendo, etc. why are
many through fear of the first speech careful to be baptized, and not many
through fear of the latter careful to be justified? and writing against
Petilians letters he says: Li. 2.19. Cont. lit. Pet.
that Baptism being but one, the just have it to salvation, the unjust to
destruction.


Romans Enough of that, now tell me I pray you, if he affirm any to have had
the holy Ghost before Baptism.


Guide. He affirms so much of that, as he has warrant from the Canonical
Scriptures: for in the said second Book, Ca 39.
against Petilian he says, In Centum viginti homines, Acts 1, 15. and 2.4.
etc. Upon those hundred and twenty men the holy Ghost came, without imposition
of any man's hand. But upon Cornelius, and those that were with him, Etiam
pruisquam Baptizarentur, A and, 10, 44,
Even before they were Baptized.


Tract. By the Holy Ghost (in those places) may be understood, some gifts of
the Spirit, as to Prorhecie, to speak with Tongues, etc. For in the 2. of the
Acts, the 4. verse, it is said, They were all filled with the holy Ghost, and
began to speak with other tongues, as the Spirit gave them utterance. And in
the tenth Chapter we read, that while Peter spoke these words (meaning those
words in the verse 43. To him also, give all the Prophets witness, that
through his name, all that believe in him, shall receive remission of sins.
with other verses before going) the holy Ghost fell on all them that heard the
word: For (says the 46. verse) They heard them speak with tongues, and
magnify God.

Since you are gone so far in this matter, I pray you Master Guidewel tell me,
were are all the Elect baptized, I mean since Christ his time, for before they
used Circumcision my Cousen says.


Guide. I might tell you many things, if I were one of Gods Priuy-Councell, so
far as his divine Majesty would suffer me. He knows who be his, baptized, or
not baptized; and whereas you say they used circumcision before Christ's time,
as I grant it to be true: So I may boldly say, that all the Elect before
Christ's time, were not circumcised. For I doubt not but Abel, Noa, and some
others, which left this life ere circumcision was spoken of to Abraham, were
and are of the number of the Elect. And who is able to prove, that all those
Children whom Herod commanded to be slain, were eight days old? if they
were not, then they dyed ere time of circumcision appointed by the law came,
and none of them all was baptized with water; yet I dare not say none of them
were elected.


Tract. They had the baptism of blood.


Guide. I read in the Scripture of baptizing with water, and with the holy
Ghost: And Saint Matthew says, Herod sent forth and slew: he does not say
baptized all the Male Children, in their blood: But since some ancient and
learned Divines have so spoken, I mean, do say there is such a baptism of
blood, it is not fit it should be gainsaide, unless it were against the
analogy of faith.

But what do you mean to ask, whether any since Christ's time died before
baptism, that were Elected? do you think none are saved that be not
baptized? John Baptist was in Christ's time, we do not read that he was
baptized: Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John say, that John Baptist said to others,
I baptize you with water: But we read nothing of his being baptized, nor of
those to whom Christ said, Go ye unto all the World, teach, etc. Some write,
that in the Primitive Church, they baptized but twice a year: Shall we say
that none that died betwixt those times were elected? I dare not say so,


Tract. If baptism be come into the place of circumcision, and God threatened
to cut off every Man Child that was uncircumcised, do we err when we say,
the uncircumcised are cut off?


Guide. I take this (under correction be it spoken) to be understood of such as
were of discretion, and understood who commanded circumcision, which in
Genesis is called the Covenant, and the Sign of the Covenant, and also knew
the covenant, and the Sign: Otherwise why are these words, He has broken my
Covenant added in the end of that verse you cited? Alas how can it be said,
that an Infant, or any that wants the knowledge of God, has so broken the
covenant of God, that he deserves to be cut off from his people. The Parents,
or other friends, that know what God required to be done the 8. day, and
despised it, may justly be said to have broken that covenant; If any list to
compare this 14. verse of the 17. of Genesis, with the 30. and 31. verses of
the 15. of Numbers, shall see that I have some warrant for this, which I say in
that 15. of Numbers, we read, that if any one Person sin through Ignorance,
he shall bring a she Goat of a year old, for a Sinne-offering, and the
Priest shall make an atonement for the ignorant Person, etc. Now mark what
follows in verse the 30. But the Person that does ought presumptuously
whether he be borne in the Land, or a Stranger, the same blasphemeth the Lord.
Therefore that person shall be cut off from among his People, because he has
despised the word of the Lord, and has broken his Commandment. That person
shall be utterly cut off, his iniquity shall be upon him: Here you see such are
threatened to be cut off, as break the commandment with an high hand, which
no infant does.


Tract. It is somewhat that you say, but I would know of you, whether you
think any of those which were circumcised in Moses time, to have been also
baptized?


Guide. What moves you to ask that question?


Tract. Because Saint Paul says: that all our fathers were under the cloud,
1. Cor 10.1*
and all passed through the sea, and were all baptized unto Moses, in the
cloud and in the sea.


Guide. Though Saint Paul so speak, yet I hope you think not, that the
seawater did so wet those fathers, as the waters of Jordan did wet those whom
John did babtize, or as that water in which Philip baptized the Funuch. Act. ^.
Nay they were not wet so much as the weak infants, which have a little water
powered on their heads: for it is said: the children of Israel went through the
midst of the Sea, upon dry ground, Exo, 1.22,
and the waters were a wall unto them, on the right hand, and on the left hand.
So that S. Paul in saying they were baptized unto Moses (that is as some
interpret by his Ministry) in whose time most things that were done, were
shadows and figures of things fulfilled in time of grace, meant as I take it,
that their passage through the sea without hurt, and so set free from their
enemies, which pursued them, was a figure of forgiveness of our and their
sin and of our and their deliverance, from the hands of that hellish Pharao,
and all that hurt us: whereof as we have a pledge and sure seal in Baptism,
so they by that cloud and passage. Saint Austin says, this was alius
baptismus, Cont. lit, Pet, li. 2. pa. 37.
another Baptism, in which the Apostle says our fathers were Baptized in the
cloud, and in the sea, when by Moses, they passed the red sea. For the law and
the Prophets, says he, until John Baptist, had Sacraments, foreshewing a
thing to come; but the Sacraments of our time do contest that to be come,
which these foretold should come. Some of the late writers say, that the cloud
and the passage through the sea were instar baptismi, as it were a Baptism,
that hereby the Lord which had taken them in his tuition did assure them, that
he would preserve them, and that besides the earthly commodity of keeping them
from the heat of the Sun, and of directing them in their journey, they had
in that cloud an argument or sign of the spiritual life, so that there was a
twofold use of that cloud, as also of their passing through the sea.


Trac. It should seem by these speeches of yours and others, that all good,
and bad, were baptized in that cloud, and sea.


Guide. Mark what I say. Albeit all the Israelites which saw the Egyptians
march after them, went through the midst of the sea, yet by those words (were
all baptized) only such are meant, as unto whom Manna was spiritual meat, and
the rock spiritual drink, as Saint Austin seems to grant. Aug. in Io* 6
tract. 26.
Then though all that entered into the sea, passed through on dry ground, yet
none but the faithful (which saw the promises a far of believed and saluted
them) were assured of full redemption, Heb. 11, 1^
and of washing away of the gu^lt of their sins by the Messiah, which was
then to come: And to the end Saint Austins mind in this point may the more
appear, I will set down some of his speeches, touching some words of our
Savior in the sixth of John: Ioh 6.44
Your fathers did eat Manna in the wilderness and are dead.

What cause is there (says Saint Austen to the Jews) why you should be
proud? they did eat Manna and are dead. Why did they eat and died, because
they believed that which they saw, and understood not that which they saw not,
therefore your fathers because you are like them. For as touching this visible
and bodily death (brethren) we also dye, that eat of the bread which came
down from heaven: And a little after, But as touching that death, (meaning
eternal death) whereof the Lord terrifying spoke, when he said: These men's
fathers are dead, Moses eat Manna, Aaron eat Manna, Phin^es eat Manna, and
many others there which pleased God did eat and died not, why? Quia visibilem
cibum intellexerunt spiritualiter, spiritualiter esurierunt, spiritualiter
gustauerunt vt spiritualiter satiarentur: Because they understood the visible
meat spiritually, they spiritually hungered for it, they spiritually tasted it,
that they might be spiritually filled with it, For we also hodie to day, or
now in the time of the Gospel, have received visible meat, but the Sacrament
(says he) is one thing, the virtue of the Sacrament is another thing, many
take or receive from the Altar and dye, and even in taking dye. And heere-hence
it is, that the Apostle says, They eat and drink to themselves, Iudicium
judgment, or damnation: For the Lords morsel was not poison to Judas, yet he
took it, and when he had taken it the enemy entered into him, not because he
took an evil thing, sed quia bonum male malus accepit, But because he being
a bad man took a good thing in a bad sort. Look to it then brethren, panem
caelestem spiritualiter ma^ducate, innocentiam ad altar portate: that is, eat
the heavenly bread spiritually, bring innocence to the Altar. Thus he
counsels such as mind to come to ye Altar, Tract. 26. de ca. 6.10.
which twice together in the same treatise he calls the Lords Table, saying:
the Sacrament of this thing, that is of the unity of the body and blood of
Christ some where daily, etc, is prepared in Dominica Mensa, in the Lords
Table, Et de mensa Dominica sumitur, and taken from the Lords Table. He
counsels such I say, before they come there, to mark what they say in that
prayer, Forgive us our trespasses, or debts, as we forgive them, etc. If thou
forgiuest (says he) thou shall be forgiven, come secure and safe, meaning with
a good conscience, panis non venenum est, the bread is not poison, but see thou
forgive, for if thou do not, thou lie unto him, whom thou deceiuest not:
thou may lie to God, but thou can not deceive God. But to come to that
which chiesly now I would show out of that Tract, touching these words: ^.5.
catabanon
this is the bread descending, or (as Saint Austin says) which descends from
heaven: This bread (says he) Manna, did signify this bread the Altar of God
signified: those were Sacraments in their signs diverse, but in the thing which
is signified paria sunt, 1. Cor. 10.
they are like. Hear the Apostle: I would not (says he) have you ignorant
brethren, that all our fathers were under the cloud, and all passed through the
sea, and were all baptized unto Moses, (your vulgar edition) has in Moyse,
citton Mosen. 1. Cor. 10.3.
in Moses, in the cloud and in the sea: and did all eat the same spiritual
meat. The same spiritual meat indeed, says Saint Austin nam^ corporalem
alteram, for another bodily meat, for the Manna: nos aliud, we another thing,
but the same spiritual meat, that we eat, sed patres nostri, non Patres
illorum, but our fathers, not their fathers, quibus nos similes sumus, etc. to
whom we are like, not to whom they were like; meaning though the unbelieving
Jews then, and such as abide not in Christ, nor have Christ abiding in them
now, (of whom he speaks afterward) had then, or have now the Sacrament of
the body and blood of Christ; which Sacrament he calls bodily and visible
meat, and says, it is pressed with the teeth in a carnal sort, and visibly;
yet they do not eats his flesh, nor drink his blood spiritually: for that is
done of them which abide in Christ, and in whom Christ abides. Read the whole
tract, M. Tractable.


Romans I marvel our Savior should rather say, Take and eat, etc. then look
on a Crucifix in remembrance of me.


Guide. Our Savior knew ye Images set up in the sight of the simple, and sooner
made Idols then bread that is eaten, unless any would be so bold to teach, and
so foolish to believe, that bread is God, because he called it his body.
Besides this, the Sacrament being a seal of the promise, and taken so soon
after these words: This is my body, which is given for you, etc. do stir us
up as much as such things may, by faith, to feed on the body and blood of
Christ, which worthily eaten and drunk, do nourish us to eternal life, as
Bread and Wine do strengthen and comfort us in this life.


Tract. Master Guidewel, you seem to speak many good things, but I would
hear one substantial Argument out of any one of the Fathers against
Transubstantiation.


Guide. Ye shall. Whosoever commends his body and blood in those things which
are brought together into one, consisting of many Corns, and many Grapes,
commends them not only in that which is called Accidents, as the form, the
color and taste of Bread and Wine, but also in the substance, and subject, in
which those Accidents have their being. But our Savior commended his Body and
Blood in such things as consisted of many Corns and many Grapes. Ergo he
commended them in things substantial and not in Accidents wanting their
substance.


Tract. I deny the minor.


Guide. If you deny that Christ commended his body and blood in such things as
consist of many Corns, and many Grapes. I have S. Augustine against you: for
he (on the fixth of John) says, that our Lord Jesus Christ commended his body
and blood, Aug. Joan 6. tract, 26,
in those things, which being many, are brought together into some one thing,
saying: Let them be the body of Christ, if they will live of the Spirit of
Christ. Aug. in Joan tract, 26,
Nam aliud in vnum ex multis granis conficitur and constat, aliud in vnum ex
multis acinis confluit: For one thing consisting of many Corns, is wrought, or
made into one: and another thing sloweth togegether into one, consisting of
many clusters. Now take the meat and drink spoken of in that sixth of John in
what sense you will: but tell me how we may have a thing that consists of many
Corns, that is bread without the very meal, or very substance of the very
Corn. I call it meal for their sakes who do not well understand the
difference betwixt the substance and accidents, although I know, that neither
the meal, nor the bread is seen, but ratione accidentis, by reason of the
color, etc.


Tract. I grant it is Bread and Wine before the blessing and consecrating, not
after.


Guide. This answer will not serve your turn, nor yet your saying. It is done
by miracle, and power divine, which is your vltimum refugiu^, your last refuge:
for Christ commended not his Body to his Disciples till after he had blessed
and broken, as you may see in that vulgar Edition, which you chiefly regard:
Et manducantibus illis accepit Jesus panem and benedicens, he uses the
present tense, because Latin Articles have no Participles, Preters, or
Aorists, as the Greek has, Fregit and dedit eis. And they eating, or as they
did eat, Jesus took bread, and blessing, or having blessed, he brake, and
gave to them, Et ait, sumite, hoc est corpus meum. And he said: Take ye, this
is my body. Where you see that transstation leaves out the word Comedite, Eat
ye, Mar. 14.22.
which Erasmus has, because he finds in that place of Saint Mark, not
only (...), but also (...), Take ye, eat ye.


Tract. But I marvel Erasmus translateth Eulogesas, cum gratias egisset.


Guide. It may be, for that he found the word Eulogesas having blessed but
once, to wit, in Saint Mark; Eucharistesas, having given thanks, Mar. 14.22.
Mat. 26, 26.27. Mar. 14.23. Luke 22.17.19. 1. Cor. 11.24
some some sire times, twice in Matthew; once in Mark before the giving of the
Cup, where your vulgar Edition also has gratias age^s giving thanks; twice
in Luke, and once in Saint Paul; I mean where all these speak of the Lords
Supper.


Romans I marvel why you call it the Lords Supper rather then the Mass.


Guide. Because it was instituted at supper time, and that which Saint Paul
calls Curiacon Deipnon, your vulgar Edition translateth Dominicam Coenam, the
Lords Supper.


Romans Is that true Cozen?


Tract. Yes.


Guide. He may not deny it no more then he may deny that Saint Austin says,
Locutio de genesis
Multum haec locutio notanda est, etc. This manner of speaking is much to be
noted, when some things signifying, are called by the names of the things which
they signify.

Herehence it is that the Apostle says, 1. Cor, 10.4.
and the rock was Christ, he does not say, the rock does signify; noting
that to be his meaning, that the rock does signify Christ, though he said,
the rock was Christ, even as, though it be said This is my Covenant, Genesis 17,
10.
it is the Lords Passover. Ex. 12, 11 Genesis 41.26.
The three branches are three days. Genesis 40.12. Eze. 37, 11 Reu. 1, 20, Reu,
12.15.16.
The seven Stars, are the Angels of the seven Churches. The seven
Candle-stickes are the seven Churches. The ten horns which thou saw, are
ten Kings. The waters which thou saw, etc. are people and multitudes. The
ten Horns, etc. are they that shall hate the Whore. The Woman which thou
saw, is the great City, which reigns over the Kings of the earth: Yet,
by is, and are, is meant, do signify.


Romans But what do you bring out of any Fathers, touching This is my Body.

Saint Augustine says, The Lord doubted not to say, Hoc est Corpus meum, Cum
signum darit Corporis sui, This is my Body, when he gave a sign of his Body.


Tract. I think you found these words in the conference had in the Tower, with
our Campion, the 23. of September in the afternoon, 1581.


Guide. Though I have seen that conference, yet I found these words not only
there, but in S. Austin his own book, against Adimantus, a disciple of
Manicheus, chap 12: The Manichies (as apeareth by ye chapter) would needs find
a ^arre betwixt that place in the old Testament, where blood is forbidden to be
eaten, because it is Anima, the life, or the soul of the flesh, and that place
of ye new Testament, where we are forbidden to fear them ye kill the Body, but
cannot hurt the Soul; herehence they reason thus, If the blood be ye soul,
how is it, that men have such power over it, etc. they cast it to Dogs, to
Fowls, they pour it on the ground, they mingle it with dirt, and mire: They
add also this, that the Apostle says, Flesh and Blood shall not possess the
kingdom of God. Then if ye blood be the soul (say they) then no Soul shall
be found able Regnum dei adipisci, to attain to the Kingdom of God. To this
cavil S. Austin answers, first in effect thus, That they cannot show in any
book of the old Law, where the Soul of man is said to be Blood. And
afterward, toward the middle of the Chapter, he has these words, For of that
which is written, Sanguinem pecoris animam eius esse, that the blood of a Beast
is ye Soul thereof; besides that which I have said before, ye it pertayneth
nothing to me, Quid agatur de pecoris anima. what becomes of ye soul of a
Beast, I may also interpet that precept, In signo esse positum, to be put in ye
sign, or to be understood of ye sign, as it S. Austin should say: whereas it
is forbidden in ye law, to eat blood, because it is the life, or soul: By
saying it is the life, he means it is ye sign of life, Nonenim dubitauit
dominus dicere hoc est corpus meum, cum signum daret corporis sui: For our Lord
doubted not to say, this is my Body, when he gave a sign of his body, and
touching that other place: Flesh and blood shall not inherit the kingdom of
God; After he has said somewhat of the change, which shall be in the
resurrection, where they marry not, but are as the Angels, he comes at length
to these words of the Apostle, For this corruptible must put on incorruption,
and this mortal immortality.


Tract. I should be more easily drawn to favor this your opinion, if I could
hear that Christ's Vickar did favor it.


Guide. You talk much of Christ his Vicar. Do you receive, or refuse any
doctrine, according as this or that man, of whom you have a good opinion
likes, or dis^yketh it? You should rather search whether the word of God,
whereon your faith ought to be grounded, does warrant it, yea, or no? As all
Kings, so all Bishops of Rome are not of one mind in every thing. If you tie
your faith to the Coach of men's opynions, then when that Coach runs eastward,
your faith must run with it, if that run westward, then your faith must
run with it, if that run westward, then your faith runs ye way, up hill,
and down hill, turning* and winding, as the Coach goes.


Tract. We tie not our faith to any Coach, but to the Chair where Christ's vicar
sits.


Guide. Then you must tie it to the King of Britains Chair, for he is Christ's
vicar here.


Tract. Have you read of any Bishop of Rome, that confessed so much?


Guide. I read, that in the year of our Lord 180. Lucius was ordained King of
the Britains, and that he in the 8. year of his reign sent by his
Ambassadors loving Letters to Elutherius, then Bishop of Rome, desiring him to
send him some devout and learned men, by whose instruction, both he, and his
people might be taught the faith, and religion of Christ: whereof Elutherius
being very glad, sent into Britain two famous Clearks, which brought with them
from ye Bishop a Letter, directed to the King, the Tenor whereof is this.

Bid cited by Graston in his Abrid. fo. 11,
Ye have received the Kingdom of Britain by Gods mercy, both the new
Testament, and the old, out of the same by Gods grace: by the advice of your
Realm, take a law, and by the same (through Gods sufferance) rule your
Kingdom of Britain; for in that Kingdom you are Gods Vicar.


Tract. I promise you Master Guidewell, I doubt whether the Pope will yield to
that now.


Guide. Whether he will or no, it is well known how far forth godly Kings,
named in the Scripture, have meddled in matters of religion. And such as be any
thing acquainted with S. Austin, know that he says: Contra Crescon. c. 51, l.
3.
In hoc Reges sicut eis diuinitus praecipitur Deo seruiunt, in quantum Reges
sunt, etc. Herein Kings, as it is commanded them by God, do serve God in that
they are Kings, if in their Kingdoms they command good things, and forbid bad,
not only which pertain to the society of men, Verum etiam quae ad Diuinam
religionem, but also to the religion of God.


Romans Well, for these matters, you and my Cozen may talk at more leisure if
you come again after dinner. I will crave your answer to one question more
before we part.


Guide. I would we might so part once, as we might depart friends, and
faithful, and loving brethren and sisters in Christ.


Cath. Amen.


The Dyalogue:
Mad. HOe neighbor have you not dined yet?


Romans Yes, but I did not look for you so soon, I have heard some of your
company say, that you Protestants sit very long meals, as if you made gods of
your bellies, and at last rise up iarring.


Mad. We sit longer or lesser while, as occasion serves, but you must not
think all ye sit long to be still cra^ming like belly-gods: if any man make
his belly his God, he must take heed, least the true God destroy him we his
belly and meat: 1. Co^^^
there is some time spent in talking especially at ye tables of ye greater
sort, in which talking if any bitterness arise from the gall, I doubt not but
their wisdoms do wish him that comes to take away, to put it with the
crumbs in ye voider.


Cath. We use besides table-talke to give God thanks for his blessing, at every
meal, praying for Christ his universal Church, for the King, Queen, Prince,
and the whole Realm, Do you do so M. Rousana?


Romans As though I were so precise? my cozen here sometimes after dinner or
supper will say, for this feast and many woe, Benedicamus Domino* It is not
good to be full of graces, least I loose the name of Catholic, and carry ye
name of a pictured P.


Cath. I pray God to give us all grace to take heed of falling from grace. We
cannot be too thankful to God for his benefits: our Savior Christ did use to
give thanks, Ioh. 6.11: Luke 24.30, 1. Cor. 10.3.
when he took bread, and Saint Paul says: Whether ye cate or drink, or
whatsoever else ye do, let all be done to the praise of God.


Romans Why then, we may praise God dansing.


Cath. It is one thing what you may do, another thing what you do: when your
sons and daughters dance together when you be abed, you see not their wanton
tricks.


Romans You cannot abide to see young men and maids dancing together, but I have
heard that many honest Matrimonies have been brought to pass by leaping and
dansing.


Mad. Master Guid-well is come now, let us hear what he will say to the
matter.


Guide. To what matters?


Mad. Mistress Romana says, she has heard that many good marriages have
been brought to pass by dansing.


Guide. It may be so, P. Martyr on Iudg^ca. 21.
but you shall hear what a learned Divine says to this: I was never of the
opinion (says he) that I would have Matrimonies co^tracted by these Arts:
wherein a regard is had only to the agility and beauty of the body: there are
other means much more honest, let us use them and leave these as little chaste
and shamefast: let us remember that albeit honest Matrimonies are sometimes
brought to pass by dansing, yet much more often are adulteries and
fornications wont to follow of those spectacles. We ought to follow the
examples of godly fathers, who now and then used dances, but such as were
moderate and chaste, so that the men danced by themselves, and the women apart
by themselves: by such kind of dances they showed forth the gladness of their
minds, they sang praises unto God, and gave him thanks for some notable
benefits which they had received.


Romans But may not these which toil and moile for us all the year, though they
be not so devout have their country sports, as thresh a hen at shrouetide, win the cock at seed-time, hal in rope at our end, cry harvest home, ring, and
shake a bell, which does delight them well, without a flout or a check? Surely
I cannot see, how those simple fellows may so justly deserve blame for this,
as they which sell a score of sheep for day worth seven pounds, and at the
years end take ten pounds; or as they which take a brace of Angels for an
hours pleading, and yet know in their conscience, that their clyent shall be
clyod, and go halting home: or as they which ask as much for the fine of one
Yard-land, as in times past would purchase two: or as they which take their
neighbors houses over their heads, by giving more for a lease then the old
tenant is able to make, though he should sell all to his shirt: or as they
which leave their own wives which be of honest and good name, to follow
strumpets, void of allhonesty and shame: me thinks we should first cast out
these great beams, before we meddle with those small matters,


Cath. I think there be not any here but can away with honest recreations in
time and place, but what if any of your dancers should come in their morish
attire, I mean disguised into the Church, and the fool with his babble set
them all on laughing? or what if such as be slack to come to be catechized,
or to ring the great bell to a Sermon, be very foreward to ring it to call from
plough to pancakes, and from thence to breake-bones, I mean to foote-ball,
where some have had their necks broke: Or what if your daughters with Dina,
stray abroad to see fashions, to their own hurt, and grief of their friends,
call you all this but a mote?


Romans The Constable must look to unlawful games, and the Churchwardens to
such as come in disguised.


Mad. Yea, and Parents too; must have a care of their family, if they love
them. The word of God does require yt parents should qeustio^ with their
children, when they ly down, rise up, and as they go by the way with them.


Romans Touching what?


Guide. Touching Gods commandments, and ye meaning of such things as is fit for
the^ to know, Deuteronomy. 11.13. Ex. 12.26.27. Deuteronomy. 6.20.
as you may see in Deuteronomy. and Exodus God in time of old bad his people remember
to keep holy the Sabbath day: And you know a great part of ye Lords day in many
places has been spent in dansing, and Beare-bayting.


To. No Beare-bayting on Sundaies now is there? have they so soon forgot the
fall of the Scaffold in Paris-garden? may be they have a little dansing.


Guide. Be it little, or much, Austin says, Aust. p. 5.32. Crist. Mat. ^.14.
See Peter Mar, on Ind. 21.
better dig all the whole day, then daunse on the Sabbath: And Chrisostom
says, whereas there is wanton dansing, there the devil daunseth together with
them.


Romans May not the Devil be said as well to be with Diggers, as with Daunsers,
if their digging be naught?


Guide. You mean such digging as was under the Parliament House, do you not? or
do you mean digging the poor clean out of doors?


Romans It is no matter what I mean, or what I think.


Ma. Though it were no matter to us which know not your thought, it is a matter
to. your self, if God know it to be naught, wherefore I wish you with all my
heart, to pray him which searches ye hearts and reins, to put good thoughts
in your head, good words into your mouth, good deeds into your hand, for this
is good and profitable both for you and us: pray also that you, and my
neighbor Cathara, may leave iarring and live in peace, not judging or
co^demning each other for trifles: we are to remember there is but one God, one
true iustifiyng faith, one Baptism, one Jesus that died for us, what hinders
us from being of one mind, or at leastwise from coming together into one house
of prayer, where we ought to pray together in the name of Christ, not only to
have our errors and sins forgiven but also for the assistance of his holy
Spirit, that finding what is indeed evil, in dourine or doing, we may slay from
it, as from a serpent and embrace with all thankfulness whatsoever we shall
find to be well pleasing to the God of peace, which would have us to live in
peace, that he himself whose comfortable presence is more worth the^ ten
thousand kingdoms, may be with us and remain with us for ever? And so I take
my leave, praying you not to set light neither yt which I have said nor by this
which I shall now say for a farewell.

Tread malice under foot,
as fit for currish dogs.
Take envy by the root,
and cast it to the hogs:
Let Christians live in charity,
and hatred clean forsake,
That seeking peace and unity,
the Lord our souls may take.

Guide. As Madam Make-peace has said somewhat to your coze^ of peace for a
farewell, so I think good to say something to you Master Tractable,
maruelling still why you or any other should refrain from coming to, or
separate your selves from our Church, if you be of this mind that they which
be not of one mind in all points ought to come to one Church, or that the bad
do defile the good, De vnico b^p. cont. Pet. c. 14.
In vna commnione Sacrame^torum (to use S. Austins words) in one communion of
Sacraments, then I see not how you may be free from the error of the Donatists
so long as you hold that opinion, as you may see your selves in S. Austin who
shows that the Donatists would have the better by a bodily disjunction,
Corpora disi^^ction^.
depart from the contagion of the evil, least all should perish together, But
Austine before in that chapter shows, that though Steven Bishop of Rome
dissented from Cyprian Bishop of Carthag^ touching Baptizing of such as had
been baptized of Heretics, which rebaptizing Ciprian allowed of, denying the
other to be the baptism of Christ; but Steven judged those that either did it,
or decreed it to be done, to be excommunicated, yet Ciprian abode with Stephen
In vnitatis pace, in the unity of peace.


Tract. I know these Catholic Bishops did dissent, the one from the other, in
this point, but unto which of their opynions (I pray you) did Saint Austin
lean?


Guide. He had reason to lean to Steven, as he did.


Tract. How know you?


Guide. By that which he says to Petilian in the second Chapter. Christi est
enim vnica hominis in baptismate cousecratio, tua est autem vnicibaptismatis
iteratio. Note
For the only consecrating or dedicating of man in baptism is Christ's, but
the iterating of that one baptism is thine own. I correct in thee that which
is thine, and acknowledge that which is Christ's, Hoc enim iustum est, vt cum
mala hominum reprohamus, quecunque in illis bona dei reperimus approbemus: For
this is just and right, that when we reprove the evils of men, we approve and
allow all the good things of God we find in them whatsoever.


Tract. Since these two famous Bishops, not-withstanding some dissenting, would
not break the unity and peace of the Church: Why be not you at peace with us?


Guide. The Author of the Apology of ye Church of England answers thus toward
the end: Neither do we eschew concord, and peace; but to have peace with man,
we may not have war with God. The name of peace is asweet and pleasant thing,
says Hilarious, but yet bewa^^ says he: peace is one thing, and bondage is an
other; for if all should be as they seek to hane it, ye Christ should be
commanded to keep silence, that the truth of ye Gospel should be betrayed,
that horrible errors should be cloaked, that christian men's eyes should be
bleared, and that they might be suffered openly to conspire against God: this
were not a peace, but a most ungodly covenant of servitude. There is a peace
(says Nazianzen) yt is unprofitable: again, there is a discord that is
profitable; for we must conditionally desire peace, so far as it is lawful
before God, and so far as we may conveniently: for otherwise, Christ himself
brought not peace into the world, but a Sword; wherefore if the Pope will have
us reconciled unto him, his duty is, first to be reconciled to God.


Tract. I have thought that the Pope has been very careful to win our
Souls to God, and therefore we should be at peace with him.


Guide. His care for our Souls I leave to God, but I see clearly, if that
which is written of some of them be true (as I have no reason to doubt) they
have great care to have our Gold and Silver. In the defense of ye Apology,
Def. of Apol, pa. 794.
I read thus. The Pope (says he, meaning Mathias Parisienfis) being diseased
with a spiritual dropsey (that is to say, with an unquenchable thirst of money)
shook out all the Priests purses, Anno. 1215.
and spoiled the Abbeys of all their Treasures: Again, The Pope made a decree
in Rome, 1246.
that the goods, and money, of all Bishops, and Priests, deceased within
England, should be taken to his use.

The Pope gave straight commandment to ye Bishops of England, that all
Parsons, and Vicars, being resident upon their Benefices, should pay to him
yearly, the third part of all the valewes of their said Benefices: And yt all
Parsons, and Vicars, being not resident, should pay unto him yearly, the one
full half part of their Benefices: All these payments to continue for ye space
of three whole years; which amounts at the least to the sum of an hundred
threescore and ten thousand pound.

The Bishops of England (after some great and forcible entreaties) agreed
together, 1247.
to give the Pope a contribution of eleven thousand marks.

At that time ye Pryor of Winchester, was forced to pay yearly three hundred
threescore and five marks, Bode^ Anno.
toward the furniture of ye Popes table.

The Pope made a straight decree, that all Bishops elect should imediatly
travel out of England to Rome, to atend upon his Holiness, as Mathias says,
Vt Romanorum loculos impraegnaret in ruinam regni Angliae: To stuff the Romans
purses, to ye decay of the Kingdom of England.

The Pope had the Tenthes of all the spiritual livings in England, during the
space of ten whole years.


Tract. Enough of this, for this may suffice to show that the Pope had a great
stroke here.


Guide. A great stroke in deed, and yet I said nothing of many thousands of
Florenes, which the Archbyshops, and Bishops of England paid to the Pope at
every vacation, for their Anuales of first fruits. If you list to see more of
this matter, turn to the 794. and 795 page of the Apology.


Tract. Not I, I had rather have peace of conscience, and that I knew in what
Church God is best honored, that I might join to that, and so live and dye,
that I may live for ever


Guide. Indeed that you speak of is more worth then ten thousand worlds. Since
the^ in our Church are found ye holy Scriptures, which teach men in whom to
believe, how to believe, and how to live, that we may live with Christ our life
and light, that lasts and lights ever, I marvel why you should not frame
your self to come among us. If the Bishop of Rome be have himself, like a
good Shepherd, feeding the Romans with sound fodder, it is the better both for
himself and them, if not, it is ye worse for both; howsoever he be, he is far
from us; but the Testament of Christ thanks be to God is near us, and we
find our Savior in that Testament saying: Where two or three are gathered
together in my name, there am I in the midst of them, Now what is it to be
gathered together in his name, who is called Jesus Christ, but to come in
sincerity believing in him, and with a mind to please him ye bears that name
confessing him to be our Jesus, that is, our Savior; to be Christ, yt is the
anointed King, to govern and defend us: anointed Priest to offer himself a
Sacrifice once for all; and a Prophet, yea greater then all Prophets, yea then
all Angels, as being the Son of God, Heb. 1.
by whom in the last days God has spoken, and made known unto us his will,
to come I say, believing in him, calling upon God for mercy in his name, to
come with a mind to obey his voice, to come with charitable hearts one toward
another, so far from seeking the destruction one of another, that though any of
us took another for his enemy, yet if we saw him hunger or thirst we should
so refresh him, and so pity his misery, that by our charitable dealing we
might do what in us lay, to quench the fiery coals of his wrath, and turn it
into hot burning love toward us. If thus we come together, we be gathered
together in Christ his name, and then he will be among us, and no doubt but
where such a head is, the body cannot want life, neither does any sound member
of such a body deserve to be, or wish to be cut off from ye whole. Good M.
Tractable be tractable, be not wifull, do not condemn the Doctrine taught in
our Churches upon hear say, come your self and you shall hear such as have
knowledge teach, that there is one true living and eternal God immortal,
invisible, only wise, which made al things by that logos or word, which was in
the beginning with God, being the only natural Son of God, Ioh. 1.14. I i^
before all worlds, which word, or Son at the appointed time, was made flesh,
that is, became man when he was conceived by ye holy Ghost, and borne of that
most blessed and most holy woman, the Virgin Mary, not by turning the Godhead
or divine nature (which he had before all time) into the manhood, but by taking
of the manhood (which consists of a reasonable soul, and humane flesh) into
the Godhead, and so in the same flesh without sin dyed for our sins, and rose
again for our justification, reconciling us unto God, sanctifying and
comforting with his holy Spirit all the Elect, Ephe, 1.
who^ the Father has chosen in him before the foundation of the world, that
they should be holy and without blame before him, in love, who has
predestined us to be adopted through Jesus Christ unto himself, according to
ye good pleasure of his will, to the praise of the glory of his grace wherewith
he has made us accepted through his beloved, in whom we have redemption,
through his blood, even the forginenesse of sins according to his rich grace,
etc. Which things as also the assuring us of our resurrection to life
everlasting (when the same Christ our Savior who now sits at the right hand
of Majesty on high shall come to judge quick and dead) are sealed to ye
strengthening and comforting of our souls. Not only in baptism, were we are
dedicated to the service of the blessed Trinfty, by dying to sin, and walking
to newness of life, but also in the Lords Supper, where by eating and drinking
that holy Sacrament, we are more effectually stirred up through faith to feed
spiritually on the very body of Christ crucified, and to drink his most
precious blood shed for remission of our sins. Which great love of his we ought
to remember with thanksgiving, until his coming again, endeavoring to assure
our selves of our effectual calling* and so of our election, by bringing forth
the fruits of that Faith which works by love: which is then done when we fly
from evil, and do that which is good, walking in our vocation as becomes us;
first calling upon God, without whose blessing and favor all labor and
watching is in vain; Psalm, 127
then having a care to give every man his due, whether he be superior, equal,
or inferior; to hurt none, Rom, 12
to do good to all, to rejoice in hope, to be patient in tribulation, to
distribute to the necessity of such as want according to our ability, especally
to the household of faith: to love without dissimulation, to pray for our
persecutors, Mat. 5, 44,
that it would please God to convert them, as he converted Saul, to take heed
of recompencing evil for evil, to remember that vengeance belongs to God,
to beware of being wise in our own conceit, to confess that none but God is
free from sin and error, Mat. 11.29.
and that those which be gone to rest, are free through Christ, of whom it we
that be here learn to be humble and meek, we shall through the same blessed
Savior, if we continue to the end, be exalted to that life and joy that has
no end. And so I leave you to God, to whom be all praise and glory now and ever
through Christ, who grant us all to farewell.


FINIS.

