A SERMON PREACHED AT WHADDON in Buckinghamshyre the 22. of November 1593. at
the burial of the Right Honorable, ARTHVR Lord GRAY of Wilton, Knight of the
most Honorable order of the Garter, by THOMAS SPARK Pastor of Blechley.

AT OXFORD, Printed by JOSEPH BARNES Printer to the University.

1593.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, AND HIS VERY GOOD LADIES, the Countess of BEDFORD,
and the Lady GRAY her Honors Daughter, and to the Right honorable, THOMAS,
Lord GRAY of Wilton, his very good Lord; Thomas Spark wishes all necessary
spiritual blessings, in Christ Jesus, with health and al prosperity to their
own full contentation and comfort.
SINCE the preaching of this sermon following (Right honorable) J know, you are
not ignorant, how earnestly I have been requested, to publish the same in
Print: considering therefore, that therein, there was set before us in that
Honorable person, at whose burial it was preached, such an example both of
living, and dying well, as being now by this means made further known, may
through Gods goodness, provoke many the better to imitate the same: and weighing
also with my self, that as his death was precious, in the eyes of the Lord,
so it was and is, my duty to do any thing that lies in me, to further the
continuance of his name, in blessed and everlasting remembrance; I have
yielded, as your Honors see, to this request. Indeed when J preached it, by
reason of the shortness of time, that then J was tied unto; that there might
also be time, without staying of the assembly too long, for the performance of
the solemn and Honorable funeral rites; J was driven to cut off much, that I
had thought to have uttered, and but briefly and lightly to run over sundry
things, which more at large, my purpose was then to have handled. Al which
now, I have thought good according to my first full premeditation, in print to
set down whereupon, in remembering what was said, and now in conferring this
therewith, some difference there will be found: But yet, that will be, not for
the substance or matters therein handled, at all; but only that some of them
are further prosecuted here, and urged, then for the reason aforesaid, they
could be then. And to you three jointly, I have been bold to dedicate it,
because as in nature, so in truth, I know the loss of this Honorable man,
touches you three, nearest: wishing and heartily praying you, with the reading
and meditation of the matters herein contained, to comfort your selves, and to
moderate your sorrow, otherwise, for the loss of such an one. For hereby you
shall (I hope) plainly perceive, that he was such a one, whom the Lord of
special favor toward him, has taken hence; and that therefore howsoever, we
have lost him, God has found hi^^ and that whatsoever we have lost, out of
all doubt, he has found both perfect peace, and joy in soul; and most sound
and quiet rest in body. And therefore in his respect, you shall hereby find,
that they that loved him most, have most just cause to rejoice. Jndeede in
respect of our selves, this sermon will lay before you, that there is just
cause of mourning, for all that he has left behind him: yet withal it will
show you, that the end and use hereof ought only to be this, to awaken us so
out of all security in our sins, as that we may, by hearty repentance,
and true turning unto God in time, turn away the fearful evils, that
otherwise the taking away so fast of such, threatens us. J trust therefore, if
your honors will voutchsafe to take the pains, seriously to read and to
consider hereof, that no small comfort and good, will in these respects arise,
and grow unto you, thereby. And this, J must needs say to your further
comfort, that the great concourse of people unto his burial, and the crying
and weeping of all sorts there, was such: as in my opinion it was a notable
argument, that, as he was doubtless, beloved of God, so was he unfeignedly
honored and loved of men. Herein also appeared an evident token of Gods favor
toward him, that as he had lived honorably, so it pleased the Lord, to take
him hence, according to his own usual, and often repeated request, (though ^e
had been a great man of war) in such peace, in his own bed, in his own
house, as he did; and withal to bring him, with such honor, as questionles he
was brought to his grave. For when the ways of men have not pleased the Lord,
we find often in the scriptures, that they both have been threatened, and
that so it has come to pass, that they should not have the honor of the
ordinary burial, meet and used to persons of their estate: as we may read
and see, Psalm. 79. verse. 3.1. King. 21.23. and 2.9.35. etc. and Ier. 22 18.
etc. And of the contrary, we find it very often noted in the same, as an
argument of Gods favor, toward them when men have so died, as that they
attained unto honorable and convenient burial. As we may find touching
Abraham Genesis 25.8. touching Jacob Genesis 49. and 50. verse. 29. etc. and 2.3. etc.
touching David 2. King. 2. verse. ^0 yea and touching Christ himself, Ioh. 19
ver. 38.39. etc. Greatly therefore in this respect, in my judgment, are you
Right Honorable Lady his wife, to be commended, especially things concerning
the world, standing with you now, no otherwise then your good friends know they
do; that you have thus honorably as you have, performed this duty unto him.
For though J am of the same opinion, that he was, that wrote that tract, de
cura pro mortuis gerenda, of care to be taken for the dead, commonly fathered
upon S. Augustine that ista omnia, id est curatio funcris, conditio sepultura^^
and pompa exequiarum, magis viuorum sunt solatia, quam subsidia mortuorum Cap.
2. that is, that al these things, the care had about the dead body, the manner
of the burial, and the solemnity of the funeral obsequies, are rather
comfortes for the living, then any helps of the dead; yet J am of this
judgment thereof, so they be done and used without superstition, and but as
is decent and sit, for the state of the person (as in this case J am sure they
were) they are commendable tokens and arguments, both of dutiful love and
regard, in those they leave behind, toward them: and also so many good
means, to show and nourish their hope, of a ioiful and comfortable
resurrection. Do we not read, even that our Savior Christ himself, defended
Marie Magdalens fact, when some of hls disciples murmured at it, in pouring a
box of very costly ointment on his head: in that she did it to bury him. Mat.
26. ve. 7 etc. And is it not reported, to the commendation, both of Joseph of
Arimathea, and of Nicodemus, that the one, to the dece^t burial of Christ,
bestowed upon him a sepulcher, and linne^ cloths to wrap his body in, and that
the other brought mirhhe and aloes, an 100. pound weight, that so with sweet
odours, according to the manner of the Jews, they might bury him? Ioh, 19.38.39.
etc. Surely Gen 50. it is recorded, that when old father Jacob was dead, and
the care of his funeral was committed unto his son Joseph, that not only he
caused by his phisitia^s, his body to be embalmed, but also with an Honorable
company and great solemnity, though to his very great cost, according to his
fathers desire, he carried it from Aegipt into the land of Canaan, to bury him
with his fathers Abraham and Isaac, in the cave and field that Abraham had
bought to bury in, of Ephron the Hittite: and this is written in his
commendation, and was indeed, both a notable argument in him of piety toward
his dead father, and also of hope that he had of the resurrection. And
therefore, though I wish, that al superstition and needles and indecent
superfluity be aba^doned in such cases, and generally in the burial of the
dead; yet I cannot but greatly like and commend, that such, decent and comlie
order be kept therein; that may according to every man's degree, argue and
nourish both these amongst al his welwillers, that he has left behind him.
And therefore once again, I cannot but rejoice, in all your behalfes, that you
were also of one mind, as I know you were, that this last duty should so
Honorably be performed unto the body of this Honorable Lord as it was, and
there in you may all take comfort. Further, it ought to be now, ground of no
small consolation unto you al three, that one, has had of him, that thus
Honorably lived an died, such a son in Law; the other such a husband; and the
third so worthy a father, as he was. For if it be matter of discomfort of the
contrary as every one sees by experience, and therefore will confess it is;
why should not this always be matter of reioicing to every of your Honors,
as often as either you remember him, or hear him remembered by others? And such a
near and domestical example ought both to comfort much, and also to provoke
to imitatio^ of the same: and I hope and pray God that it may: that so yet,
though to us he be dead and gone, yet his virtues and noble qualities, may
still live and shine, to the comfort of al his welwillers, in his, that he has
left behind him. Finally justly may it be a comfort unto you, and so to the
praise and glory of God, I would wish you al hartelie to take it so and use
it, that every one of you (to say no more) have so just cause, both before
God and man to comfort your selves one in another as you have: one that she
has such a daughter, and daughters son; the other, that the Lord in his
merciful providence, has given her both such an Honorable careful and loving
mother, and a good and toward son; and the third, that he has so virtuous,
religious and Honorable, both grandmother and mother. O how ought this to
abate and moderate your former sorrow, seeing now there is no remedy? And what
an excellent and strong means are you, and J hope will be, as long as you live
together, not only of comfort every way one unto another, but of
counsailing, directing, and strengthening, where most need is, one of another,
in a holy course? A threefold cord is not easily broken, says the Preacher,
Cap. 4. ver. 12. But the greatest comfort of all, that both you and all other
of Gods children in the midst of all the afflictions of this life, have, is
this; that that God whom you serve, remains for ever one and self same, that
he is al sufficient and an exceeding great reward to his, that his providence
howsoever things fall out stands immutable, and that therefore without al
question, howsoever we cannot perceive it as the first, al things, and
therefore even those things also, which seem unto us most to cross the same,
shall by his divine wisdom and power, turn to the good, and benefit of his.
Romans 8.28. With all these things therefore, once again, beseeching you to
comfort your selves, and one another: praying the Lord effectually you may so
do, and that all his good blessings to your own everlasting salvation may be
powered and continued upon every of you, and all yours for ever, J cease from
any further troubling of your Honors, at this time. As Blechley this first of
December. 1593.

Your Honors always most ready and willing to be as commandment. Thomas
Spark.

IN OBITVM CLARISSIMI HErois, Domini Arthuri Greij. (...).
O Curuae in terras animae, quaecunque piorum
Creditis extinctas vna cum corpore mentes.
O vanos questus; o pectora plena furoris,
St quando in superum seeds quos Ioua recepit,
Speratis fletu rursus deducere Coelo.
Debetis fateor lachrymas and Iusta sepultis;
Sed transire modum, scelus; and perijsse putare
Quos Christus seruat, mortem qui morte peremit.
At dolor extorquet luctus in funera tanti
Herois. Certe nostrae non infima gentis
Gloria defluxit, grauis inclementia fati
Cum tulit hunc terris, vt lucida viseret astra.
Is fuit ex atauis Heroibus editus Heroes,
Relligione pius, constantimente probatus,
Consilio prudens, justice animosus in armis.
C^llatis signis rigidos qui fudit Hybernos,
Quos per inaccessos saltus, vdasque paludes
Insequitur, subigens extremo Mart rebels.
Pro patria pugnans, sanctis arisque focisque,
(Turma Caledonias dum vastat Gallica terras)
Ore cicatrices, aduerso pectore fortis
Vulnera multa tulit, nunquam dare terga coactus.
Talis apud Graecos magnus celebratur Achilles.
Talis and Albertus cui magni nomen Achillei
Teutonis or a dedit, surgunt vbi moenia Brenni.
Hoc animo Decij, hoc olim caluere Metelli,
Qui se pro patria, pro liberate Penatum
Deuouere neci, quos laus aeterna moratur.
Ioannes Sanfordus.

Isaiah. 57. verse. 1.2. 1 The righteous perishes, and no man considers it
(...) heart: and merciful men are taken away, and no man understands that the
righteous is taken away, from the evell to come.

2 Peace shall come: they shall rest in their beds, every one that walks
before him.


THE occasion of this our present meeting (Right honorable, Right worshipful,
and well be loved ^roo^ Lord and Savior (...) and the consider (...) the ^aies
and cili^^^ (...) in we live, have for (...) me, to make chief of (...)
portion of scripture, at this time. For nat^^^^ standing that the Lord has now
taken from us to (...) self, this Right Noble, and worthy Lord, whose
^^^^nerall we are here now about, and the burial of whose body we are anon
to fee, and that ^^^wise he has, within these few years, taken (...) by
death from this land, very many of our most (...) Earls, Lords and Knights, as
it is wel^ (...) beside many others of all other sorts and estates of the best
disposition, and that the greatest part (...) that are left behind, are grown
is ^n (...) height in all sin and impiety: yet universally (...) where amongst
us, there is such a gross and senseles security to be seen, that doubtless, as
justly may we now, as Isaiah in his time, in the bitterness of our souls, cry
out and say, the righteous perishes, and no man considers it in heart, and
merciful men are taken away, and no man understands that the righteous is
taken away from the evil to come. Only this with him, in this case, we have
to comfort our selves withal, that howsoever the wicked and ungodly judge of
the deaths of such; that in very deed, the Lord thereby in his great love and
favor has taken them away, before the euel come, which he has prepared for
them, that hereby will ^ot in time, be drawn to repentance. And that,
howsoever whiles such lived in this unkind and wicked world, they could never
enjoy either sound peace in ^o^^e, or quiet rest in their bodies, for vering
and greuing themselves, at the ungodliness of others round about them; yet
every one that walks before God in righteousness, and mercy, and so is taken
away even thus walking, is sure immediately upon his death, to enter possession
in soul of an everlasting and most comfortable peace, and in body to rest
most soundly and quietly in the bed that the Lord has made therefore, until
at the last day, it rise again, and for ever to be joined with the soul in
most perfect and consummate joy in the kingdom of heaven. Wherefore seeing
these words of the prophet, and the matter therein contained, thus fit our
present business, I beseech you give me leave to do the ^e^ that I can to lead
you so into the due meditation thereof, that we all may make that holy and good
use thereof that we should, both to reform that in time which is amiss in any
of us, and to comfort and strengthen us in that which is well begun.

His words, in my judgment, contain and complaint or expostulation; and a
comfort or consolation. The complaint is against the ungodly alive, in the
behalf of the godly departed: and the com^^rt ^s, for the godly, against the
hand opinions of the ungodly of them. The matter in general that he comp^in^^^
of, is, the wonderful carelessness and security, (...) saw in the people of
his time; which in particular he notes they showed first, in not taking to
heard as they should, the deaths of most worthy men, and then in not once
understanding that the Lords end there^^ was, not only to show them great
favor in taking them away from the evil to come, but also thereby to threaten
some great evil, to be coming on apace upon the impenitent and secure, that
they less behind them. And let his words be well marked, and ^^e shall find in
the delivering of this comfort, he does first describe them, whom he would
comfort, and then sets down the comforts that belong to such and these he
describes in general, in the latter ver^e, to be every one that walks
before God; and in particular, in the other to be righteous and merciful
(...). Likewise the comfortes that herein he lays down for such, ere either
such as concern them dying, or dead, and of each kind he gives two: the first
are these, that the Lords end in taking them away by death, whatsoever the
ungodly think to the contrary, is in his favor to take them away before the
evil come, that he hasteneth to bring upon others: and that their death is no
perishing unto them, though the profane and wicked so think, but in truth a
gathering of them up from amongst the ungodly, with whom whiles they lived, to
their grief and trouble they were mingled; to join them to the blessed and
holy company of the Saints in heaven and the other two, that immediately upon
death they enter into fruition of, are these, that thereupon straight in soul
they enter into peace, and in their bodies, yt they rest in their beds, that is
in their graves, or places whatsoever, the Lord in his providence has
allotted them. This order therefore and method, let us now follow in further
handling and examining these words of the Prophet.

But that the better we may attain and find out his full scope and drift
herein, we are first to understand that these words of his, have their
necessary coherence, and connection, with the four last verses of the former
Chapter: which the better to lead the reader to see and perceive, Tremelius in
his translation of the Bible, has begun this 57. Chapter, where those four
verses begin. Mark therefore, I beseech you, that in the first of those
four verses that I speak of, the Prophet calls for the beasts of the field
and forest to come to eat, and devour, by which words, by a figurative
kind of speech, he denounces against that people some fearful destruction,
that should come upon them and great slaughter that should he made of them.
Therein doubtless having an eye to that, which should come to pass, when
Nabuchadnezer the king of Babell, should invade their country, and destroy
Jerusalem, temple and all; slaying whom he list, and leading the rest into
captivity. For Hieremie, another prophet, whom the Lord raised up unto that
people after Isaiahs time, respecting that judgment, tells them in his ninth
Chapter verse 22. that when that should be, their Carcasses should he as doung
upon the earth and be scattered as handfuls after the mower^ where there is
none to gather them up, and (...) again in his 34 Chapter, having plainly and
expres^^ly denounced this judgment against them, in like phrase to this, verse
20. he shows them, that when it should be executed upon them, their dead
bodies should be meat for the fowls of heaven, and the beasts of the field.
But that by thus calling the beasts together, as it were to a solemn ba^quet,
it is the use and fashion of the spirit of God in the scriptures, to understand
some horrible and dreadful destruction, we may most clearly see, Ezech 39.
verse. 18.19. and 20. and Revel. 19. verse. 17. Where it is evident that to
denounce such a matter, both the fowls of the air and beasts of the field
are solemnly called for, as it were, to feed at the Lords table to their full,
of the flesh and blood of kings, princes, nobles, captains, and of others of
al sorts. Wherefore it is most certain, that our Prophet here, by the like
phrase, gave this people of the kingdom of Judah to understand, that such a
judgment as I have said, was prepared for them, and hastening fast toward
them.

Now having done this thus, in the first of the 4. verses immediately going
before my text; in the other three, he lays down, that one special
prognostication, and hastening cause thereof was this, that they that in
respect of their places and maintenance therefore, ought to have been as their
watchmen to tell them of their sins, and to forewarne them of the judgments
of God therefore to come upon them, were such, as either for lack of skill or
will, in that respect were no better then dumb dogs, delighting in sleeping,
and that yet they were so covetous and ambitious, that they could never be
satisfied withal, giving themselves most securely to all delicacy and
volu^tuousnes of living. Whereby by the way, we may see, that when in any
kingdom it may justly and truly be thus said of such; that then even
thereby, that people have a most certain cause given them to fear, some
grievous judgment not to be far off. For how can it be, but when it is thus
with these kind of men, it must be as bad, if not worse, with them whom
these, both for life and doctrine should go before and guide? For if (...)
darkness, what else ca^ we looked for in the whole body? And if the sun have
given over shining, and be as it were quite set upon the top of the
mountains, what show can it make in the valleys? God of his mercy therefore
grant that we may, be every day more and more unlike the kingdom of Judah in
this point. Well, the Prophet having thus drawn one argument from the corrupt
estate of the watchmen in his time, that such a heavy judgment, (as I have
showed he denounced) was coming apace on, against the people of the kingdom
of Judah: having a desire fully to persuade them that it was so, the better to
awaken them and to draw them to repentance, if it were possible, to prevent the
same: in these words of my text, he gives them another most sure and certain
sign and token thereof. And it is this, that in so bad times, as those were,
wherein sin had so ouerflowed al estates, the Lords taking away by death, so
many of their best and godliest men (whereof the number was before but small)
was a plain demonstration, that such an euel was shortly to come upon those
whom they left behind the^. And the rather, because notwithstanding this was a
heavy judgment of it self, thus to have their most worthy men taken away, and
clearly showed that yet there was a heavier coming: (the people continued and
went on (...) in there old lewd course, in all security, neither feeling the
present blow, that hereby the Lord g^^e them, nor yet thereby taking any
occasion to think, that a further was threatened. Other arguments he could
have used to this purpose, but with these two, as though these two, were
insteede of all the rest, and were of themselves most sufficent, to persuade
this matter, he contents himself. Wherefore looking now into the days and
times wherein we live, if it be so, that we cannot deny, but that the manners
of men, and the falling out of things amongst us, give ground for these two
arguments to be urged and used against us, we may and ought to learn hereby,
unless we be disposed to show our selves to be a people, that nothing can
fear or draw from security, to true repentance; that it stands us upon
speedily, even hereby to take warning to look better to our selves and to our
ways, then hitherto we have done. As for the former of these arguments,
whether there have not bin and yet are, two many such in the place of watchmen
amongst us, as the Prophet has described, to ground that upon: I refer to
your own judgment, who perhaps know it better then my self: but touching
the other, laid down here in my text, I dare boldly affirm, that Isaiah had
never iuster cause to urge that in his time, then we have even now.

Wherefore now understanding as we do, upon what occasion and to what end
these words were uttered by him, let us according to the order and method
before therein observed, go on in the further weighing and considering thereof.
The righteous man perishes (says he) speaking in the singular number for the
plural, as it is evident in the next Clause, where speaking still of the same,
he terms them in the plural number merciful men. Whereby it is clear, that
this was spoken by hint in respect of such a time, of his prophesying, wherein
many such as here he speaks of, by one kind of death or other were taken
hence. But whereas, by the first verse of this book of his prophesies, it
appears, that he prophesyed in the days of Vzziah, Iothan, Ahaz, and
Ezechiah, kings of Judah, and some of the ancient Rabbis, and other Christian
ancient fathers, have thought, that he himself was sawn to death in the first
year of Manasses (the consideration whereof, has made many, to understand
that Hebr. 11. verse 37. where the Apostle speaking of the deaths of sundry of
the godly, in the time of the old testament, says, some were hewn a sunder,
or as some rather translate it, sawn a sunder, as spoken properly of the death
of Isaiah under this idolatrous tyrant) amongst the interpreters of this place,
they al are not of one mind, touching the time, in respect whereof, these
words were set down. For some refer them, to some time of the 16. years,
that Ahaz reigned, some to the first year of the reign of Manasses, and
others think, they were spoken in regard of some time of the reign of
Ezechiah. They that refer them to Ahaz, or Manasses times think, that the
Prophet here speaks, not only of such righteous and merciful men, as in
those times died ordinary deaths by sicknesses upon their beds, but especially
of such, as were put to death by those idolatrous and wicked Kings. And
indeed, likely enough it is, that in their times, many such for misliking
their proceedings, and not conforming themselves thereu^to, came to their ends.
For Ahaz, was so gross an idolater, that he burnt incense in the valley of
Benhinnom, and burnt his sons with fire (or made them pass through the fire)
after the abomination of the heathen, 2. Cron. 25. verse. 3. and he had Vriah
the priest one ready to follow his idolatrous and wicked commandments in any
thing 2. Kings 16. verse. 11. and 16. and of the other, the holy story, 2. Kings
21. verse. 1. etc. and 2. Cron. 33. verse. 1. etc reports as much ill, as may be:
and Josephus, for his part, in the 10. book of the antiquities of the Jews,
chapter the 4. writes most plainly, that he killed all that he could come by both
of the prophets and people that were godly. And they that refer the^ to
Ezechias time, either refer them to the time, when he was sick unto death and
yet recovered, as we read Isaiah 35. or to the time when he died indeed 2.
Kings the 20. verse. 21. For the sickness that he was so sick of, and yet
recovered, is thought of sundry learned men, to have bin the very plague,
whereof about that time, many such as Isaiah here speaks of, by all likelihood
died, though he escaped; and when he died such a one, doubtless, as he here
talks of, was taken away, and about that time, it may be, many others of the
best sort, died also. But forasmuch, as howsoever the righteous are taken away,
whether it be by the violent persecution of tyrants, by the plague, or by any
disease, or means else; yet the prophet might speak of them, whatsoever he has
done here: it is very hard for any man, precisely to determine, in respect of
what time of his life, he uttered these words. Wherefore in that point, to
leave every man free to his own judgment, by his own words so much is
apparent, that they were set down by him, in respect of such a time, when of
that small number that were such, as here he describes, in his opinion, so many
dropped away, by one kind of death, or other, that (the security and carelesnes
of the rest that notwithstanding considered) he had just cause to complain,
that no man would lay the deaths of such to heart, or once understand, that the
Lord thereby prognosticated a further evil to come. And uttering this his
complaint, it is further worthy to be noted, that he speaking in the sense of
the wicked, careless, and secure people in his time, he says, the righteous
perishes: thereby giving us to understand, that indeed, that was the fashion
of such, so to judge of those, who^ either they by their tyranny had dispatched,
or who^ god, otherwise by some painful manner of death (whereunto the
righteous, is as well subject as others) had taken hence. And indeed wisdom
the 3. verse. 2.^-3. it is said, that in the sight of the unwise, the righteous
(whose souls are in the hand of God and not torment shall touch them ver. 1.)
appear to die, and their end is thought grievous, and their departing from us
to be destruction, and again, Chapt. 5. verse. 4. they are brought in
confessing as much themselves, (saying we fools, thought their life madness, and
their end to have been without honor. And this doubtless, was some occasion of
grief to the holy Prophet, and so, some cause of this his complaint, that he
saw the wicked so ready, thus lewdly to judge and speak of the deaths of
such. And therefore to reform them in this point, and to make it appear, what
he would have al men to think of the deaths of such, what manner of death
soever it were, he, by and by, adds that such are but taken away, or
conveyed, or gathered hence, (for so the word is also translated of some) from
the evil to come. Further in that he says, no man co^sidereth it in heart,
that the righteous perishes: and none understands, that the righteous and
merciful men are taken away from the evil to come, it is evident that the
Prophet was of this judgment, that it was a thing to be lamented, sorrowed for,
and heartily to be complained of, if in such bad times as these were, whereof he
speaks, men should continue in security, notwithstanding the Lord seeks by
taking ye most worthy away from them, to drive them from the same; yea that it
was a strong argument, or sign, of some great evil, likely shortly to fall
upon them that would not thereby be awaken. Seeing therefore that even this
year, we cannot but remember, that the Lord has taken hence, first the Lord
Wentworth, the^ the Earl of Darby, and now as we see this noble and worthy
Lord Gray, al in their several places and countries, right excellent men, and
besides, we cannot be ignorant, that within these 8. or 9. years likewise, the
Lord has taken from us, a great number of the most worthy and noble Earls.
Lords, and Knights, that England has had many a day; and that also by wars,
the plagne, and other diseases, we have lost within a very small time, more
then we can number of very valiant, wise, and virtuous men; who sees not, that
in this respect we may say, as well as ever Isaiah did, the righteous and
merciful men are taken away? And as for the security of the rest, for all
this, surely I fear me, we are no whit behind the people in his time, and the
rest^^, in as great danger as they were, God of his mercy give us grace to see
our fault therein, and to amend in time.

Thus we having seen in general, what he ^^^plained of, and what drive him so
to do; the (...) we are to make thereof, is to be as careful a^ (...) that we
give none such as he was, any sin (...) to morn and complain of us, as he did
of th^^ people of his time. And the better that we may, as we ought indeed,
make this use of his complaint, let us (...) see in particular, how he proves
them to (...) as of whom in general, he had occasion thus (...) complain.
The first reason is, that none considered in heart, or as it is in the Hebrewe,
no man (...) heart that the righteous so perished and were taken away as we have
heard. The use of which phrase in the scripture is, to express a careful and
hearty consideration of a thing, and in this place doubtless thereby the prophet
means, that no man so sorrowed in his heart for the dropping away so fast of
the righteous, and merciful men, as there was cause, in respect of the loss
of such. Otherwise in another sense, there were enough then we may be sure,
that laid the deaths of such but too fast to their hearts: to harten and
harden on themselves in sin and impiety; for that by this means, they that
most bridled and curbed them, from bold and secure rushing and breaking out,
beyond all bonds of piety and honesty, to wring and wrong others, or to defile
themselves, were taken out of their way. And this the prophet himself, both in
the verse immediately going before my text, and in the next verse but one after
it, plainly shows he did perceive; for in the former of these two verses, (in
that I mean next before my text) he bringes in the wicked living in those very
times, when, the righteous died thus fast, hartening themselves in this manner,
saying, Come I will bring wine, and we will fill our selves with strong drink,
and to morrow shall be as this day and much more abundant, and in the other,
after that, in the very next verse after my text, he has given such their due
tyles, calling them witches children and sons of the adulterer and whore, he
faieth, unto the^, on whom have ye iested, on whom have you gaped and thrust
out your tongue? thereby as it should seem, describing the triumphing and
insulting of the wicked, that the righteous and most worthy men, that troubled
and crossed them in their ways were now as they thought, as water spilt upon
the ground. And surely, it is much to be feared, that even now amongst us,
there are in corners, and when they are where they may be bold, that in this
profane and wicked manner, lay to their hearts, to solace and there them
withal, the deaths of the most worthy men amongst us. But whosoever they
be, that thus take occasion, to make themselves merry from hence, from whence
they should indeed take occasion to mourn and lament, let them understand,
that the Lord by this our prophet Isaiah, having called that people to fasting
and mourning that were in his time, and they falling to feasting and laughing,
he tells them that that their sin, was declared in the ears of the Lord of
hosts, and that thereupon, this was his flat decree and sentence of them, that
that their iniquity should not be purged until they died. Cap. 22. verse.
14. Wherefore the better to make us to take to heart, the dying of the worthy
men amongst us, not in this wrong fence, but in the sense and manner that here
it appears the Prophet wished: let us now consider what reason he had to
complain, and to take this for one special particular sign of intolerable
security, that men would not mourn and lament, and so lay to their hearts,
the deaths of such doubtless, he knew, that such kind of men, were the bands
and sinnews, yea the very pillors, and buttresses, of the good estate, both of
the Church, and common weal; and that therefore the taking away of such
(howsoever secure and profane men made no reckoning thereof) was indeed a
heavy judgment of God upon all that they left behind them. For the wicked, are
thereby the more hardened, and hartened to al iniquity, so to hasten Gods
further judgments upon the land wherein such live, and the Godly are thereby
greatly weakened, in this wicked world before men, for lack of assistaunce by
such against the wrongs and oppressions of the ungodly. And it is evident that
he knew, this most perfectly, for in his third Chapter he having threatened the
people of his time, that for their sins the Lord would take from them the stay
and strength, though in the particularising wherein the stay and strength of a
city and country lies, he name bread and drink in the first place, because
(as it should seem) without the^ men cannot continue at all, yet by and by he
reckons, the strong man, the man of war, the judge, the Prophet, the
prudent, the aged, the Honorable, the counceller etc. As them, without whom
neither City nor country, can long enjoy any good being. For such being
taken a way, be shows, the consequent thereof is likely to be this, that some
as unfit as children and babes to rule, shall succeed them, whereupon would
follow great oppression one of another, and confusion. And it seems, by the
conference of these 2. places together, as he threatened that people for their
sins this judgment, about the beginning of his prophesying, so or he died, he
saw the same in great measure, in extention upon them. How could he
therefore, but in this respect mourn, in that all this not withstanding, he
could observe none, that mourned under the burden of this judgment, as they
should. For as it argues, a wonderful hard heart, either in child or
servant, that will not once melt or mou^n^, when the he a^ie blows of father
or master are sounding upon their shoulders, so cannot this be taken but as an
argument, both then and no we, of in^ollerable senselesnes, if in the daily
execution of this heavy judgment of God upon us, we should show our selves,
by our not taking or to heart at all, to be such as neither see it, nor feel
it to be a judgment, or any punishment upon us. Yea the very wicked themselves
(howsoever in their own foolish and vain conceits, they have cause to be
merry, for the death of such) ye indeed and truth, if they look well into
gods dealing with his own dear servants, in taking the^ away, through many
tribulations, and often in the end also, by painful and tormenting kind of
deaths, have just cause, thereby ministered unto them, to say and think with
Peter Epist. 1. cap. 4. verse. 17. ^ 18. if judgment begin at the house of God,
and the righteous themselves so hardly be saved, what shall the end be of them
that obey not the gospel of God, and where shall the ungodly and sinner
appear? For if these things be don to a green tree, says Christ, Luke 23.31.
what shall be done to the dry? But and if this will not serve, to make such to
bethink them of their own sins, and of the judgments of God due unto them
for the same, I would wish them further to understand, that when the enemies of
gods people, were so far off from taking out this lesson, by beholding the
miseries and afflictions of gods own people, that rather they took occasion,
because of their own flourishing estate in health and wealth for that present,
to insult and to triumph over them; that the Prophet Jeremy was commanded by
the Lord, to say unto al such, drink al and be drunken, spew and fall, and rise
no more, because of the sword that I will send amongst you, but and if they
refuse to take the cup at thy hand to drink, says the Lord unto him, then
tell them thus says the Lord of hosts, ye shall certainly drink, for lo I
begin to plague the city where my name is called upon, and shall you go free?
you shall not go quite. Ierem. 25. verse. 27. etc. Ahab and Iezabell, a while
made themselves merry, at the death of Naboth 1. Kings 21, but mark the
sequel of that story, and you shall find, that neither of them had any cause
to be merry, nor any of their posterity, ere the Lord had done with them for
it. Wherefore though the vngoldy for a time, live, wax old, and grow in wealth,
and their seed be established in their sight with them, and their generation
before their eyes, and their houses be peaceable and without fear and the rod
of God be not upon them, as Job observed it was with some of them, when it was
far otherwise with him, Cap. 21. verse. 7. etc. or though they find it to be
with them as David noted, when it was nothing so well with himself, Psalm. 73.
verse. 4. etc. that there be no bands in their death, but they are lusly and
strong, that they be not in trouble as other men, nor be plagued with others,
and that therefore pride is as a chein unto them, and cruelty covers the^ a^ a
garment, and their eyes stand out for fatnes, and they have more then their
heart can wish etc. Yet neither let this dismay the godly, nor be taken to be
any sound ground of confort for the other. Indeed it appears, that even the
very godly have sometimes been offended and troubled hereat, insomuch that Job
himself Cap. 21. verse. 6. and David Psalm. 73. verse. 2. and 3. Yea even Jeremy
Cap. 12. verse. 2. and 3. and Habacuk an other Prophet of the Lord, Cap. 1. verse
13. and 14. do most plainly confess as much, by themselves. Notwithstanding
certain it is, that David's rule is very sound and good in this case, and of
all the godly to be followed, which is, that they should not fret themselves
because of the wicked, nor for him that prospers in his way, and brings his
enterprises to pass, Psalm. 37. verse. 1. and 7. For let both the godly, the
better to preserve them from being any whit discouraged herewith, and the
other, the easelier to stay them, from triumphing hereby understand, that
though indeed it be found true by experience, through the corrupt and blind
nature of men, because sentence against and evil work is not excuted
speedily, that therefore the hearts of the children of men in them, are set
upon euel, Eccle. 8. verse 11. insomuch, that the ungodly, finding that God lets
them some times alone: therefore, as God complains Psa. 50. verse. 21. are even
ready to think, that he is like them, that yet all such shall most certainly
find in the end, that if they thus despise the long suffering of God, which
should provoke them to repentance, that they do but heap up vengeance
against the day of vengeance. To. 2.4. and 5. For it follows in the same
place of Ecclesiastes last cited, immediately: though a sinner do evil an
hundred times and God prolongeth his days, that yet he knew, that it should be
well with them that fear the Lord, and do reverence before him but it shall
not be well to the wicked, neither shall he prolong his days: he shall be like
a shadow, because he fears not before God, verse. 12. and 13. And likewise in
the 50 Psalm, to answer that wicked and blasphemous thought of the ungodly,
it presently follows, as spoken by God himself, but I will reprove thee, and
set thy sins in order before thee: whereupon most not ably and vehemently,
the Lord also further breaks out into this exhortation, Oh consider this ye
that forget God, least I tear you in pieces, and there be none that can
deliver you. Yea even Job himself after that a while he had troubled himself,
with musing upon the prosperity of the wicked, he could say, that in the end,
the Lord would divide their lives in his wrath, and that they should be as
stubble before the wind, and as chafe that the storm carries away, and that
God would lay up the sorrow of the father for his children, and when he
rewards him, he should see it. verse. 17.18. and 19. etc. And David also; how
much soever he was troubled before, at, and with, the prosperity of the wicked,
yet when once he went into the sanctuary of God, then he confesses he
understood their end, and that God had set them in slippery places, and did
cast them down into desolation, and that they were soddenly destroyed,
perished, and horrily consumed Psa. 73. ver. 13. etc. And the like might be
noted of Jeremy and Habacuk, who notwithstanding their reasoning with god
about his suffering the wicked to prosper, in the places before quoted, yet
through that cloud and mist, plainly show, in the very same places that they
saw and knew, he was righteous, had pure eyes and could not see and behold
wickedness, thereby giving such to understand, that howsoever it we with the^ for
a time, that yet in the end, the Lord would pay the^ home. Notably therefore is
it to this end, that is written in the 5 Chapter of the book of Wisdom, where
the wicked are brought in, bewailing their folly, for judging so badly, as they
had, of the lives and deaths of the righteous, and bewayling the vanity and
impiety of their own, when they had once found all their pomp and pleasure to
be, but as a shadow, a post, or as the flying of a bird, or arrowe in the
air, or sailing of a ship in the sea, which soddenly are past and gone, and
leave no tract behind them, and when they had learned by experience that all the hope of such, (which is most fearful) is but as dust, foam, and smoke,
which most easily is scattered and carried away with the wind and tempest. Cause
therefore without al question have ye very wicked, in the seeing the Lord take
away, and deal with the best me^ as he does, to tremble and quake before him, in
ye remembrance of their own sins, and so to take to heart, their deaths: and so
was this a sufficient cause, to move Isaiah, to complain, and to take it as
an argument, of most dangerous security, that he could find none of them, that
would thus do. So therefore we are to account it, if all this not
withstanding, we find it in this respect no better amongst us, a certain
sign of the like, and therefore to threatten us, as it did the^, some further
judgment.

The second particular proof of the security, that he co^plaines of in the
people of his time, comes now to be considered of, which he expresses, saying,
merciful men are taken away, and no man understands that the righteous is
taken away, from the evil to come: word for word in the original it is thus,
from the faces of evil, but the sense doubtless is, as our interpreter has
rendered it, and very well will the Hebrew phrase, and the use therefore in other
places of the scripture bear it. And certainly, by this evil, that he speaks
of, he understands ye very evil, that should come upon this kingdom, by the
invasion of the Babilonian. And yet I am not ignorant that some translate it,
from amongst the wicked, and therefore according to that translation, Enoch is
alleged as an example, because, as we read of his taking hence by God, when
he was but 365 years old, whereas some lived then, above 900, Ge. 5. ve. 24. so
it is said, in the 4 of Wis. ve. 10. etc. He pleased God, and was beloved of
him, so as, where he lived amongst sinners he translated him, and he was taken
away; left wickedness should alter his understanding, or deceit beguile his
mind. But though it may be, that God sometimes has ye end, in the taking of
some of his children hence; yet I cannot see, but that both, the circumstances
of the place, and the very words of the tert, lead us rather to the other
sense here, then to this. Wherefore so understanding it, thereby it is clear,
that the Prophet plainly understood, that the taking away so many merciful
and righteous men, as he saw then were taken hence indeed: was a most plain
descrying, of a great judgment, yea of such a one, as for the greatness and
terriblenesse thereof, was worthy not only to have one face, but faces
attributed unto it: to be fast coming upon that kingdom, whom the Lord,
bereaved of so worthy men. And that none could or would conceive thus much,
he takes it to be an other special and particular proof, of great senlesnes
and security in that people, and therefore worthy to be complained on:
wherefore where the like is found, there is the like collection to be made
thereof, and it is by the Lords faithful servants, to be reproved, and
complained of. Wherefore the better, either to preserve us, or to cure us of
this fault, let us hereby learn this lesson, when we see the Lord, gleaning
and gathering hence to himself, many worthy men from amongst us, the world
otherwise ouerflowing with great sin and impiety, that then, the Lord
threattens us, some very great judgment or punishment, and therefore let it
be, as a trumpet, blown in our ears from heaven, to awake^ us out of security,
in sin and ungodliness, that so, if it be possible, we may escape the same. And
if this will not serve, to teach us this lesson. and to make us take it out,
consider we but thus much further, that the Lord has given us very many most
notable proofs, and examples, of the soundness of the ground of this lesson:
For no sooner had God gathered to himself, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and the
very children of Jacob, Joseph and the rest, but as we read Exodus the first,
there rose up a new king in Egypt that knew not Joseph, that began monstrously
to tyrannyze over their posterity, in which misery, they continued ever after,
for many years, as long as they continued in that country. And it was not
long after, that God had taken hence, good and godly king Josiah, er that this
very evil here threatened, began to come upon his kingdom, for (as some
account) the 4. year after his death, Nebuchadnezzer the great sent by his
father, besigned Jerusalem, and took Iehoiakim captive, and carried him and
others with him captive into Babylon 2. Cr. ca. 35. and cap. 36. And before the
last destruction of Jerusalem, and the utter subversion thereof, by the
Romans, the lord, as it appears in the Ecclesiastical stories had gathered
unto himself, al his Apostles, save John. And Possidonius writes, in the life
of S. Augustine, that his city Hippo being besiged, and having bin, by the
Va^dals, Goths, and Hunnes, some 3. or 4. months: some ten months before it was
taken, burnt and consumed, and the people thereof most cruelly used, that the
Lord took him thence in peace, by the means of an ague, which they took as a
fearful sign, of that, which followed, because, as he writes, the day that
he fell sick, he made this prayer unto God, either to remove the siege, or to
give the people hability to bear it out, or to take him thence in peace to
himself, before it should be taken, Cap. 28. and 29.

Yea yet to press this lesson a little further, if in such bad and dangerous
times, the Lord always go not so far, as quite to take his out of this life,
but only in some other sort, call and severe them out from the wicked, it
portends, that some fearful evil is hastening apace upon them. For when God
had once shut up Noe and his family in the Arc, it was not long ere the flood
came and destroyed the whole world beside Genesis 7. and again we read Genesis 19.
that the angels had no sooner got Lot and his, out of Sodom, but it was
destroyed from heaven with fire and brimstone. And it is not apparent, that God
no sooner had severed under the conduct of Moses and Aaron, his people of
Israel from the Egyptians, that rather then an evil should not come upon
them, they ran upon it, and so were most fearfully swallowed up of the red
sea, in following after that people Exodus 14. whereas of the contrary we see,
howsoever ye sins of the old world grieved god much in the mean time, that yet
all ye while, yt is, for the space of an 100, and 20. years, that Noe by
preaching and the Arc making, was calling them to repentance, and so amongst
the^, the windows of heaven were fast shut, and the flood could not break in
upon the world of the ungodly Genesis 6.1. Pet. 4.20. And we read that God told
Abraham, yt if there had bin but to, righteous in Sodom, though the cry of
their outrageous sins had pierced the heavens, that yet for those 10. sake he
would have spared the city Genesis 18. ver. 32. yea we read in the next Chapter,
Zoar was saved for Lot his sake, and he was willed to hasten thither for the
Lord could do nothing to destroy the rest, before he was got safe thither, ver.
21.22. Yea yt is yet most of al to be noted, touching the prevention, of the
particular judgment here threatened. Jeremy, that prophesied in Iosiahs time,
is wild to run up and down Jerusalem and to seek and enquire to and fro in
the open streets thereof, to find out a man that executed judgment and sought
the truth and he is told by the Lord, that such an one found there, he would
spare it, Cap. 5. verse. 1. And indeed Act 27. we find that 275. souls that
were in a ship with Paul, in a most dangerous tempest, escaped all safe to
land from the danger of shipwreck, for Paul's sake that was in their company,
ver. 24. and 44. O if the ungodly and wicked that here hate the godly, because,
their ways and thoughts are so contrary to theirs, and as it were made to
reprove theirs, as it is well noted wisdom the 2. verse. 14. and 15. etc. had
but grace to consider and to remember these things. For then doubtless, not
only hereby would they take occasion, to be more thankful unto them, for all
the good they enjoy whiles they live with them, but also to account them so the
pillars that keep up from them the heatly judgments of God that otherwise
would fall upon the^, and crush them to fitters, that when they were gone once,
and taken from them, they could not but therewith as with a millstone be beaten
to dust and ashes. For how can or may, any such one, once imagine, God being as
he is, at such detestation with all sin, and knowing even the most secretest
always as he does, and being most able to punish it as be lift, that they
in such sins as they securely commit, could escape his hand one hour, if
it were not more for the regard and sakes of such, then for their own.

And yet I have not thus noted this, that the wicked should take any
encouragement to continue in security in this sin, as long as he causee any
godly men alive in the country where he dwells: For they may go on so long,
and so far provoke the wrath of the Lord against them, and the whole land for
their sakes, in despysing all ordinary means, both sweet and sharp, that the
Lord sends them to draw them to repentance by, as that the Lord may say unto
such as he did afterward by Jeremy in his 15. Chapter. verse. 1. though Moses
and Samuel stood before me, yet my affection could not be toward this
people etc. And after that again by Ezechiel. Cap. 14. ve. 14. Though these
three men, Noe, Daniel, and Job, were amongst them, they should deliver but
their own souls by their righteousness, says the Lord God. And this his
people to their smart, found most true by experience, for though they had as
it is most clear by the stories of those times, and the writings of the
Prophets Jeremy and Ezechiel, not only them two, and Baruch, and sundry other
very godly and virtuous men, when this evil began first to break in upon
them, yet all these could not stay the Lord from executing his fierce wrath
upon the^, as you may see Ier. 39. and in the last of the Kings, and
Cronicles. And Ezechiel, gave them the reason, why it could be no otherwise,
saying, Cap. 24. verse, 13.14. Thou remainest in thy filthiness and wickedness:
because I would have purged thee and thou wast not purged; thou shall not be
purged from thy filthiness till I have caused my wrath, to light upon thee. I
the Lord have spoken it: it shall come to pass, and I will do it, I will not
go back, neither will I spare, neither will I repent. According to thy ways,
and according to thy works shall they judge thee, says the Lord. He might
well then say, that the Lord would have purged them, and that they would not be
purged* For what should the Lord have done to his vineyarde, which was that
kingdom of theirs, that he had not done: as this our Prophet Isaiah, most
notably shows them, Cap. 5. verse. 12 etc. He had bestowed upon them his holy
word and law, he ceased not early nor late, no not when the judgment was in
sight, to raise up unto them, most faithful Prophets to tell them of their
sins, and to teach them how to prevent Gods judgments, by true repentance: he
gave them very many good kings, and namely Josiah, even a little before the
appointed time for this evil, who was inferior to none that was before him, to
purge the Church of al corruptions, and sometimes be thought to awaken them by
foreign wars, as in Afa his time, in Iehosophats and Ezechias his reign, and
sometime by dearth and famine, and sometime by the pestilence, and notably by
the judgment executed upon their neighbor kingdom of Samaria: and yet
neither any of these, nor all these together, nor any other good means, could
cause them to shake of their senseles security in sin: and therefore what
should the Lord do else, but give the^ over, as he had threatened into the
hands of that sterce, cruel, and merciles nation, of the Babilonians?

Now (well-beloved) you know the proverb, happy is he whom other men's harm may
make to beware, and we know and are taught Romans 15. ver. 4. that whatsoever
things are written before time are written for our learning: and therefore I
assure you, we had need to take these things to heart, and to learn in time
to mourn for our sins, and both to feel the present judgment of God upon
us already, in that of late we have lost by death, so many worthy men as we
have, and to fear and tremble at that which this farther does threaten us.
What means has the Lord omitted to win us to true repentance, that he
ever used to that people? Is not the light of his word shining now amongst us
under the new testament, worthily in respect of the more lightsomenes thereof,
usually by Paul compared to the day light, when as theirs in comparison
thereof, is called the night which is now paste? and have not we as many
faithful and painful ministers, thereby laboring to direct us a right as ever
they had? and has not the Lord bestowed now of late sundry princes,
especially her Majesty, whom now we enjoy (and I pray God long may) upon us,
very careful to purge both the Church of corruptions, and the common weal of
disorders? And to go on to the rest, we cannot have forgotten, but that by
drough, dearth, and pestilence, we have been and yet are by the last, as
earnestly summoned to repentance, as ever they were, and without wars we
have not quite been: the Lord has caused the earth, about some fourteen
year ago fearfully to tremble and shake under us, and now agaiue the
satterday after this Noble Lord Greye left this life, sure I am in many
places of this shire and somewhere else, it shook as sensibly and terribly as
before. And as for our neighbor countries round about us, we know and in
some sort feel, that the heavy hand of GOD has lien fore upon some of
them a great while. And we have found, that such has been the cankred
malice of the cursed sea of Rome, and of the confederates thereof against us
that along time, by all treacherous devises that they could invent, they have
sought to set us together by the ears amongst our selves, and to queuch they
care not how, the light of our Israel, that is, to bereave our dread and
gracious Queen of her life. Finally as yet I hope, it is fresh in most of our
memories, how when these enemies of ours saw, that by their secret practices,
they could noe way prevail, the Lords name for ever be blessed for it: then
they brake out into open hostility, first in Ireland, and sense in coming
with a hudge and mighty navye, which they counted, and therefore called,
invincible, with a full purpose to invade our land, and to satisfy their
bloudthirsty minds upon us. Indeed we must needs confess, to the glory of
God, that by the valiant worthy and faithful service of this honorable Lord,
whose body now lies here before us, and by gods blessing thereupon, their
courage in Ireland was so pulled down, and their combseut, that never since any
more of them have had any heart, to give any like attempt there again: and as
for their navy, the Lord of heaven, led it such a procession about our country,
that most, both of the ships and men, he has scattered and confounded in the
bottom of the sea. Yet we may be sure his malice that set them thus on work
against us, is not so abated, but that when strength is recovered, and fitter
opportunity espied, we shall taste of it, if they can. Wherefore if all this
notwithstanding we will still continue secure, and careless in sin and
ungodliness with the Jews, and so join with them in the cause to provoke God
in his wrath to bring a further evil upon us, what reason is there but that we
shall, we cannot tell how soon, taste as deeply of the same, some one way or
other. He is the same God now that he was then, and he can punish sin as well
in us as in them, and there is no reason in the world but that we should
think, if we be iumpe with them in sin, we shall be made just and iumpe with
them in the punishment for the same. In the name of God therefore, let us take
heed, that th^s, hearing Gods curses be no^^^ted against us for out sins;
that we bless not our selves in our hearts; saying, we shall have peace,
although we walk on still according to the stubbernesse of our hearts, so
adding drunkenness to thirst, as it pleases God by Moses to speak to his
people of Israel in that time, Deu. 29. ver. 19. For if we should do so, in
the words there immediately following the Lord tells us what we shall
surely trust unto, namely, that he will not be merciful to any such, But his
wrath and jealousy shall smoke against such, and every curse written in the
book of the law shall light upon them, and he will put out their name from
under heaven. Wherefore to conclude this part, let eve^^ of ^s learn to do as
Ieremi has councelled us, Lam. 3. verse. 40. that is, search and try our ways
and turn unto the Lord, lifting up our hands and hearts unto him in the
heavens, for mercy to us and out Land, for as he faith in the twenty two verse
of that Chapter, our manifold and great sin^ considered, so we have cause, to
say also, it is the Lords mercies that we be not consumed. And further, let
Ezechiel teach us this one lesson more, that not only ^ee our selves, every
one for his own particular must thus turn to God, from all our sins; but
that we must cause others so to turn, or else he will not once promise us
that iniquity shall not be our destruction Cap. 18, verse. 30. For every man is
bound to do what lies in him, to draw on those that any way by his vocation in
Church, or common weal, he has a charge of. And (but that I hasten to the
consolation) I should here teach you, that this conversion of ours to God,
must be speedy without procrastination, constant without interruption, hearty
without dissimulation, universal without exception, humble without ostentation,
and yet faithful without all distrust or doubting. For thus has the word
taught it ought to be, if we would have it to be acceptable before the Lord,
to put of his judgments from us, that otherwise by our sins we have
deserved. But let thus much suffice touching the Prophets complaint, and the
use, that we are to make of it: and now let us proceed to the comfort or
consolation that he gives in these words of his.

Wherein, as I have said, we are to consider whom be comfortes, and therefore
how he describes them, and then how he comforts them, and therefore what the
comforts be that he sets down for such. He describes them in general, to be
every one that walks before God; in the latter verse, and in the former more
particularly to be righteous or merciful men: of these things therefore now
orderly, as they are preposed let us consider. By walking by an usual
Metaphore in the scriptures we are to understand living, and having our
conversation, in which sense, says God to Abraham Genesis 17. ve. 1. walk before
me, and be thou upright, that is, ^ot and have thy conversation. And 1.
Corint. 9. by a like metaphore, the life of a Christian, is compared, to the
running of a race, the consideration of which metaphors, may and ought, to
teach us, that as it is our duty, according to Christ's counsel, Luke 13.24.
to strive to get into this way, wherein we must walk, and run, and that
betime; ^e cause it is written, Eccl. 12. verse. 1. remember the creator in the
days of thy youth, whiles the evil days comes not, nor the years approach
wherein thou shall say, I have no pleasure in them: so likewise, when we are
got in, that we may neither stand still nor go back, but that we are to
walk, and run right forward, taking heed, that neither we run round about,
nor ^ow of this side, now o^ that. And therefore we have a r^^t given us. Heb.
12. verse. 13. to make straight steps unto our feere, and there also we are
^arned, to take heed of al halting in this way, lest so we beturned out of the
way. Thus therefore to walk, or to run this race, importes, that therein
there is some difficulty, and that there had need be good pains taken
thereabout. Whereupon the Apostle Paul in the foresaid place to the Corint.
9. having said, so run that ye may obtain: to provoke us not to think it
much, though so to do, cost us some pains, he first tells us, that they that
strive for ^asteries, though they do it to obtain a corruptible crown, yet
abstain from all things that might hinder them, and then he lays before us
to the same end, his own example, how that he, the better to run this
race, bett down his own body, and brought it into subjection, verse. 25.27.
And Hebrews. 12. verse. 1. most plainelye he calls upon us, to cast away
every thing, that presses down, and the sin that hangs so fast on, and
so then says, let us run with patience the race that is set before us etc.
Wherefore the difficulty hereof considered, we had need every one, to run
unto God for help in this case, saying, with David, Oh that my ways were
directed to keep thy statutes, teach me O Lord the way of thy statutes,
direct me in the path of thy commandementes, Psalm. 119. verse. 5.33.35.

Now touching this our walking, seeing it must he as I have said, or else it
is not that, that here the Prophet requires in those whom he would
comfort; sure we may be, that there is prescribed us by GOD (who would have
us to walk before him, that is so, that he may take pleasure and delight in our
walking) some perfect rule, from which we may not decline, either to the
right hand or left: and this surely is his own revealed will and ^oorde. For
that is an ancient rule of God in matter of his service, ye shall put nothing
unto the word which I command you, neither shall ye take ought there from,
as we read Deuteronomie. 4. verse. 2. and therefore says he Esaias. 8. To the
Law and to the testimony; if they speak not according to this word, it is
because there is no light in them, ver. 20. And therefore even kings, are
commanded by the Lord, to read in the book of the Lord, all days of their
life. Deuteronomie. 17.19. And Joshua particularly, to meditate therein day and
night, that it might never depart out of his mouth, that he might observe and
do according to all things written therein, never turning from the rule
thereof, either to the right hand or left: Joshua the first verse. 7. and 8.
And we may be sure God is, at the same point still, and ever will be, and
therefore both Isaiah, the 29. verse. 13. and Matthew. 15. verse. 9. as Christ
has alleged it, we may see, that both in the old testament, and new, God
has counted them but vain worshippers, how near so ever they draw unto him
in words, whose fear is taught by the precepts of men, teaching for
doctrine men's precepts, all which kind of worshipping or serving of God,
Paul condemn under the name of will worship, or voluntary religion, though
otherwise it carry never such show of humbleness of mind, and of not sparing
the body, as you may read Colos. 2. verse. 23. very will therefore has David
taught us, first, that a young man may redress his way in taking heed
thereto according to Gods word: and after, that his word was a light unto his
path and a lantern unto his feet: Psalm. 119. ver. 9. and 10. Whereupon
afterward in the same Psalm ver. 133. ^e makes this prayer unto God saying,
order my steps O Lord, according to thy word, and so no iniquity, shall have
dominion over me. I say therefore unto you with S. Peter, as newborn babes, if
so be you have tasted how bountiful the Lord is, desire that milk, that is
that instruction, to direct you in this walk, that is (...) that is, that
comes from the word, or is according to ye word, for that will Peeter only
warrant you to be (...), y^ is without deceit, sound, and good, 1. ep. 2.2. And
mark, that ye same S. Peter, tells the Christians in his time, that they were
by Christ redeemed from the vain conversation, received by the traditions of
the fathers, 1. ep. Cap. 1.18. For thereby you may perceive, that walking, or
conversation may be vain that has for the warrant of it, both fathers and
their traditions; so can none that has ground from ye word of the Lord. But
then may some say, where is this word of God to be found, that all this while
you commend unto us, to be the only sound and safe rule to walk by? To this I
answer, this treasure and pearl is only to be found in the field of the
Canonical scriptures of the old and new testament, and therefore no where else
to be sought for. And therefore, as it may be observed, throughout all the new
testament, Christ and his Apostles, whither they were to confirm truth, to
confute error, or to exhort to godliness, or to dehorte from the contrary, still
fetch their light and ground, from the ancient scriptures. And Paul speaking
only of the scriptures, which were written when Timothy was a child, 2.
Timothy. 3. verse. 15. says, that they were hable to make him wise to
salvation, and after adds, not only that the whole scripture is given by
inspiration of God, and is profitable to teach, to improve, to correct, and to
instruct in righteousness, but also so far, as that even thereby the man of
God may be absolute, being made perfect unto all good works. And it is
evident by Christ's saying John. 5. unto the Jews, search the scriptures, for
in them ye think to have eternal life, verse. 39. that this was the common
opinion of the Jews of them, that they were sufficient to direct them to
salvation. How can we then think, but that now much more, the whole new
Testamente being joined unto the former, containing as it does both a most
lightsome exposition of the former, and also consummating the same, we have
cause so to account of them? Sure I am, whatsoever our late Romanistes think,
and write to the contrary, because if this principle be once received, they
know well enough, their opinions wherein we stand against them, can no
longer have any countenance, we have a number of us most plentifully in
Print showed them and the whole Church, that this was the opinion of all the
Churches of Christ, and of all the learned fathers therein for 600. years after
Christ at least. Indeed then, if we would have them to be and prove thus
unto us; we must search them, as Christ has commanded John 5. and we have
need meditate therein day and night, as we have heard Joshua, for all the great
business that otherwise he had, commanded to do, and as we read it set down
for a Property of every man that would be blessed, Psalm. 1.2. And no other good
means of hearing them opened unto us, by preaching, or any way else, that we
can come by, must be neglected, but carefully and religiously used, and with
all other means, hartye and often prayers unto God in all humility must be
made, that it would please God, so by his spirit, the author thereof, to
inlighten our dark hearts, that we may understand them aright. For this is to
search for wisdom, that lies hid therein, as for silver, and to search for it
as for treasures, and to watch daily at her gates, and to give attenda^ce at
the posts of her doors, as we are commanded to do, prou. 2.4. and 8.33. and
thus doing, if withal we forget not with David still to cry unto God, open
my eyes that I may see the wonders of thy Law, Psalm. 119. verse. 18. so calling
after knowledge and crying after understanding, as we are taught pro. 2. verse,
3. then, and not else, we are there promised, that we shall understand the fear
of the Lord, and find the knowledge of God, to direct us aright in all our
ways before the Lord, verse. 5.52. Most fearful are the examples that we have
in these scriptures, of Gods wrath breaking out against such, as have not in
the service that they have tendered him, first carefully set this rule before
their eyes; yea though otherwise they seemed to have never so devout and good
meanings therein. To this end, to let pass the infinite, examples of gross
idolaters, upon whom, in most fierce manner, his wrath has broken out, to the
utter destruction of them, and their countries, as herein often is recorded:
who yet often would seem, so fervent in serving of God, after their fashion,
that they would spare no cost, no not to sacrifice their own sons in the
fire, let us but consider of three or four, that fell out amongst Gods own
people. Do we not read Levit 10. that Nadab and Abihu offered incense with
their censors, upon strange fire, which the Lord had not commanded them, and
that therefore a fire went out before the Lord and devoured them, so that they
died before him? verse. 1.2. And what other cause was there that the Lord smote
of the men of Beth-shemesh, 5070* men, but that of a fond affection, and blind
devotion, as it should seem, for joy that it was come home, from the
Philistines, and to see whether all were safe therein, they looked into the
Arc, contrary to the rule of the word Numb. 4. given in that behalf? Notable
likewise in show, was the occasion and in^ent, that Saul had, both in his
offering burnt offering, in the absence of Samuel 1. Sa^. 13. ver. 11. and in his
and p^oples sparing the life of Agag, and some of his cattle ca. 15. ver: 15.
but yet, because in both these, he walked without direction and warrant from
the word of the Lord, in both those places immediately upon his answer, we
read, that he was told, he had done foolishly, and that the Lord was so angry
with him therefore, that he should leese his kingdom. But that which we read
touching David's bringing home of ye Arc 2. Sa. 6. and 1. Chr. 13. and also 15.
he being the man he was, in my opinion, gives us (how godly and wise soever we
take our selves to be) most excellent warning to take heed how holy and good
soever our intents be, yet in our walking before God, not to tread a step,
without light and warrant from his word. For there it appears, that the first
time yt he went about it, he co^sulted not with this word which would have told
him, that it should have been brought home only on Levites shoulders Number. 4.
and therefore to his great discomfort, it fell out, that he seeking to bring it
the^ home, upon a new cart, that Vzzah putting but his hand to hold it, because
the oxen did shake it, though of never so good an intent also, yet lacking
warrant therefore from hence, as David did for the whole manner of his actio^;
he was stroke^ by the lord with sodein death. 1. Chapter 13. v. 10. But the second
time when he had learned to bring it home aright, he prospered in his
enterprise, and brought it home with great joy and triumph, as it appears, 1.
Chro. 15. In what case then, be all those that glory in nothing more, tha^ when
they walk either directly contrary, or quite beside ye direction of this word?
Surely we must needs both say and think, that the further they either run or
walk, the more they are out of the way. And yet this is not only the walking
of Turks and Barbarians, but the common walking, wherein they most glory that
are of the superstitious synagogue of Rome (as if I might stand upon that
point, I could most easily show,) and therefore their glory in the end, will
be their shame.

But to go on, in that the Prophet here describes the^ whom he would comfort,
not by bare walking, but by walking before him, by that him, understanding even
God himself, forasmuch as it is evident, that by that kind of phrase, before
him, it is still the fashion of the scriptures, when they speak of that which
either is, or should be in Gods children, to understand that they walk, or
should, without all hypocrisy: we are to learn, that it is not enough to walk
so before men, that they can spy no fault in our walking, (for so far came the
hypocrite Mat. 22. in his walking, coming unto, and sitting at, the marriage
feast, for until the master of the feast came, he was not found of any of the
guests to have lackt his wedding garment, as it there appears:) but we must
have a care, if we would be of the number that he talks of, to be answerable
within, even in the secret of our own hearts, to the outward good show we
make. For we know th^^ his eyes are so bright, and piercing, that he looks
eue^ through our hearts, and reins, and that nothing can be hid from his fight.
Psalm. 44.21. and Job. 42.2.

And to walk thus before God, two legs and feere are necessary, for there is
no walking with one, and unless also both be sound, it is rather like to prove a
halting, then any walking: the right leg and foot, is sound religion, and a
lively and true faith grounded thereupon: the left, is a holy life and true
repentance, in the continual practice whereof, it consists. Both these must
go together, for where either of the^ is severed from the other, there is
nothing but hypocriste or superstition. And therefore let a man be never so
zealous and sincere a professor of the Gospel and sound religion, yet if we
see him careless touching his life, we hold him to be but a carnal gospeller,
and that this his knowledge and profession makes his life and person, the more
abominable before God. So on the other side, let one be never so curious and
careful of a good life, insomuch that in that respect Christ might compare him
to painted tombs, and clear washen cups without, as he did the Pharasies,
yet if their religion, be unfound, as the Pharasies was, he will not stick to
cry out against them, w^ be to you hypocrites, as he did against the scribes and
Pharases Math. 23. we say therefore to every one, show me thy faith by thy
works, and I will show thee my faith by my works, I am. 2. verse. 18. For we
hold and teach, that it is no lively faith, but a shadow of faith, where good
works accompany it not, with the same Apostle ver. 20. But then we hold
likewise, that love which is the fulfilling of the law, and compriseth within
the compass of it, al good works, can never be, unless first there be a lively
faith, for it proceeds from a faith unfeigned, 1. Tim. 1. verse. 5. But this
faith is that, whereby in Christ Jesus, we are surely, and fully, soly and
wholly, justified, for he is the author and finisher of our faith, Heb. 12.
ver. 2. and there is no other name under heaven whereby comes salvation but
his. Act. 4. verse. 12. and the other serve to other holy uses, as namely, to
make our light so shine before men that they seeing the^ may glorify our father
which is in heaven, as Christ has taught Man 5.16. and to make us, known to be
his disciples. Ioh. 13.35. and as Peter has taught us, to certify us of our
election and calling 2. Epist. cap. 1.10.

To conclude therefore this general description of the Prophet, of those whom
he would comfort, let us mark, that every one that thus walks before God, he
means to comfort: for he says, every one that walks before him, as our
interpreter (...) rendered it: but the^ withal mark, that yet he means, to
comfort none but such, as living, and dying, are found thus walking. For it is
not enough in this case to begin well and to go on, for a time, unless we
persevere unto the end. For he that puts his hand to the plow, and look^
back, is not ^eet for the kingdom of heaven, Luke 9.62. and the promises
(...) thus, he that endures to the end he shall be (...) Mat. 10. verse. 22. be
faithful unto the end, and I will give thee the crown of life. Reu. 2.10. And
therefore S. Paul Philip. 3. is a most notable example unto us, in this: who
though then, he had well ny run his race, and had out run very many, yet, that
he might attain happily unto the end thereof, he protests, that he forgot that
which he had left behind him, and endeavored himself, to that which was
before, and followed hard to the mark, that so he might attain the price of
the high calling of God in Christ Jesus, using a word that shows, y still the
nearer he came to the race end, the more he bowed and enforced himself
forward, and so he wishes as many as be perfect, to be minded. ver. 13. etc.
For as we read. Psalm. 92.13.14. such as be planted in the house of God, they
shall flourish in the courts of God, and such shall bring forth fruit in their
age, and even then, be fat and flourishing. The Prophet therefore, to teach us
thus much, uses this word, yt is translated walks, in such a tense or time,
in his own language, as whereby it is well known to the skillful in that tongue,
he notes a continuance of their so walking, even unto the time, when God took
the^ hence. Let us therefore study every one of us, to approve our selves thus
qualified whiles we are in strength and living, that we may be found thus
walking, sick, weak, and dying. For it is a common proverb, qualis vita, finis
ita, such life, such end, or death. And there is small likelihood (sure I am, it
is not to be presumed on) that he that has not begun thus to walk before he
come to his death bed, will there begin, and there be found such a one. For who
is so simple, but he may easily conceive, that it is most likely, that he that
forgets both God and himself, living, shall be despised of God dying. We
dare not, nor may not say, yt vera and seria poenitentia can be sera, that is,
that true repentance and earnest can be too late: but yet I can tell you, that
sera penitentia, late repentance, may be suspected often, whither it will prove
seria and vera, earnest and true. And therefore the safest course is, whiles we
have wit and understanding, and whiles we have strength and use of our senses,
which oftentimes fail us in extremity of sickness, to labor to be such, as
here he describes.

Thus now in general, we have heard how the Prophet sets forth them, for whom
he has comforts anon to tell us of, both living and dear: let us therefore
mark further, what in particular, he calls such. The words that he uses, to ye
end, are in the former verse, and they are well rendered by our interpreters,
righteous and merciful men. The ways therefore of the Lord in particular, that
they, that would walk before him aright, must walk in; are righteousness or
justice, and mercy and compassion. Justice with mercy, and mercy with justice
therefore, must go hand in hand togegether for justice without mercy, will soon
prove extremity, and mercy without justice, will us quickly prove but foolish
pity, that warre^ (...) a City a But when to show the one, and to do the
at her, that must be learned of judgment, which is in deed, the right
moderatour, and directour of both. where these 3. concur in one, their justice
shall be shown in time and place, and so likewise mercy. All these in
perfection are found in God, and therefore says Jeremy Cap. 9. 23.24. let not
the wise manne rejoice in his wisdom, nor the strong man in his strength, nor
the rich man in his riches, but let him that glories glory in this, that he
understands and knows me, says the Lord, for I am the Lord, that show
mercy, judgment, and justice, in the earth, for in these things, I delight.
And surely we are like the children of such a father, to do what we can, to
be like our heavenly father herein: for he delights not only, to approve
himself such an one, in all his doings; but that we also should be such.
And therefore by Hosea Cap. 6. verse. 5. in the time of the old testament,
when sacrifices were in the greatest and best estimation, he taught his people,
that he desired mercy and not sacrifice, speaking so by comparison: which
sentence, Christ wishes them to consider that seemed to be offended at the
mercy, he showed publicanes, Matthew. 9.13. And to do justice and judgment.
(so joining the other two together) says Solomon Proverb. 21.3. is more
acceptable to the Lord then sacrifice. And yet Michah. Cap. 6. verse. 8, most
not (...) to commend these virtues unto us, says, he has showed thee, O man,
what the Lord requires of thee, surely to do justly and to love mercy, and
to humble thy self to walk with thy God. Al which places laid together, do
teach us three very good lessons, concerning this matter. The first is, that
he that has any care to walk, as he ought before God, he must have an
especial care, amongst all other things, if not above all other things, to
deal justly, and to show mercy. He must therefore abhor all injustice, as
extortion and oppression, and all cruelty and merciles dealing: and think, how
devout, zealous, and and religious soever he seem to be, that yet al is but
vain, without these. And to this purpose it is worthily said of S. James, in
my opinion, pure religion and undefiled before God, is this, to visit the
fatherles and widows in their adversity (therein calling for mercy) and to
keep himself unspotted of the world, therein likewise calling for righteousness
and justice. Cap. 1. verse. 27.

The second lesson, is this, that they that would rightly show both, that they
love justice, and mercy: must learn to join judgment withal. For through the
want and lack thereof, it was, that both Saul and Ahab, showed mercy, when
they should rather have done justice, the one upon Agag the King of the
Amalekits, 1. Sam 15. and the other upon Bennadad, the King of Aram, 1. Kings
the 20. and therefore the one for his labor was sharply reproved in the name
of the Lord, by Samuel, and told that therefore his kingdom should be taken
from him, and the other was met, and told likewise, by an other Prophet of the
Lord, that because he had let that Be^nadad escape with his life, whom he had
appointed to death, and therefore delivered into his hands, that therefore his
life should go for his, and his people for his, as it appears at large in the
said places. For by this, who sees not, yt though this their dealing, carried a
show of mercy, that yet in the sigh: of God, for that the malicious enemies of
him and his people were saved alive, when they might have bin killed, and so
dispatched from ever endangering of any his people afterward, and that to ye
just terror of the rest, it was accounted no better then plain cruelty. These
examples therefore considered, if a noble and valiant Captain, having
co^missio^ under his Prince, to govern and to defend a co^try, see ye same
enuaded by malicious foreign enemies, guided and assisted therein by
treacherous, and traitorous ho^e borne wretches, and the Lord having delivered
the^ up into his hand, had he not need to take heed ye for lack of sound
judgment, he show not foolish pity upon such, upon whom justice only indeed,
is to be done? Who therefore can but commend this honorable Lord, both for his
judgment, justice, and mercy for his dealing as he did in this very case, with
the^ in the fort in Ireland? especially seeing (as I have learned both of
himself, and by ye report of others yt were there with him) neither any manner
of promise that ever they could get of him, nor their own desert, could any way
put the^ in any hope of any better the^ they found. And besides, seeing it is
most certain, that he neither had then, any shipping to send them away
withal, nor might leave the^ there behind him to shift for themselus, nor yet
lead them away with him captive, without apparent show, not only of further
danger to the whole country, but also of inevitable peril to his own company,
being the^ so few, and so weakened with long being abroad, and being also so
meanly victuailed as they were, only for them selves: and yt which is most of
al, having to pass home so many 100. miles as they had, and most thereof, most
da^gerously through the cuntries of their friends, and their own enemies, how
could he in any wisdom or policy (unless men would have had him contrary to
al nature and judgment, for showing foolish pity upon such unworthy wretches,
cruelly and childishly have bazarded both all the cuntry, and his own company
also, to a further peril then they as yet had been in) do any otherwise then
he did? And the Lord be praised for it, though he were in that country but a
short time, by experience we have found, the Lord so blessed his judgment,
both in his doing justice upon them that deserved no other, and in showing
mercy toward the^, to whom it was to be showed indeed, that ever since we have
had greater quiet and peace there, then was of long time there before, or
otherwise was likely ^e should there have had yet.

The third lesson, that we have in the places before quoted, touching justice
and mercy, to learn Michah has taught us, who though he require, that we
should do justly, and low mercy, yet he requires for all that, that they yt
have both these, should humble themselves, to walk before God. For though our
consciences witness with us, even before God, that unfeignedly we have studied
and had a care to walk before men and him, so in justice and mercy, with
judgment, that we may as worthily be called righteous, and merciful men, as
any that here, Isaiah speaks of; yet we must learn of the same Prophet, not
in a counterfeit humility, but because indeed, it is so, and we think so, in
simplicity to say and confess: yt when our righteiousnes is compared with that
it should be, that al our righteousness is as filthy clouts, Cap. 64. verse. 6.
that so still with Paul, our own righteousness, which we have framed in the
best ma^er we ca^, to the law, we may indeed account of no force or value to
justify us before god, that as he says, we may be found of him, not having our
own righteousness, which is of the law, but that which is through the faith of
Christ, even the righteousness which is of GOD through faith. for though, the
titles of just, righteous, and perfect men, be attributed and given to sundry
in ye scriptures, yet we are not to take and understand them, howsoever the
papists and so^e other pha^tastical heads fondly do, as spoken to show that
they were quite without sin, and absolutely and fully kept the law. For what is
more plain in the scriptures, then that al me^ be sinners: And therefore says
David, Psa. 143. ve. 2. enter him into judgment with thy servant of or in thy
fight, no man living shall be justified: and (...) in an other. Psalm, namely,
1 ^0. ver. 30. (...) says if thou, O lord, straightly markest iniquities, who
shall stand^^ Solomon his son, most plainly faith, there is no man that sins
not, 1. Kings. 8.46. and therefore pro. 20. ver. 9. Eccle. 7.22. he says
again, who can say, I have made my heart c^eane, I am void of sin^ Surely
there is no man in the earth, that does good and sins not. And the new
testament is as flat in this point. For Romans 3.10. we read, that there is none
righteous, no not one, and James most plainly faith, that in many things we
sin all, Cap. 3.2. and John likewise, as plainly, writes, speaking of such
as himself then was, If we say we have no sin we deceive our selves, and
there is no truth in us 1. Epist. 2. verse. 8.

And if we do but take a view of those that in the scriptures are most
honored with the titles of just and righteous men, we shall find the same
scriptures, tell us of some sins, of the very same men. For who are more
commended, in the old testament, for such, then Noah, Abraham; Loath, Job,
Moses and Aaron, David, Asa, Iehosaphat, Ezechiah and Josiah? And yet read we
not Genesis 9. of Noah's drunkenness? Genesis 12. and 20. of Abraham's twice causing
Sara to dissemble her being his wife, to the great peril of her chastity? and
Genes. 19. that Loath was first made drunk by his daughters, and then therein
that he committed in incest with them both? And Mo^^e^ and Aaron both of them,
at the waters of strife N^^^. 20. ver. 12. are told by the Lord, because they
believed him not there, to sactify him before the people, therefore they should
not bring the^ into the land that he promised the^. And as for David, it is not
only well known, that he grievously fell, in adultery and murder, 2. Sam. 11.
and in nu^bring of the people, 2. Sam. 24. but also even in the administering of
justice, in adiudging, through his too rash crediting the first and false
information of treacherous and b^^bing Sibah, to him, the lands of his
innocent master Mephiboseth: and yet when he saw the innocence of Mephiboseth,
we read not that ever he reuerst this his unjust sentence. 2. Sam. 16. Likewise
surely are their faults even registered, of all the rest, how much good soever
otherwise be reported of them. For of Asa we read, that he was wroth with the
seer, and put him in prison, and moreover that then he oppressed some of the
people. 2. Cron. 16.10. And of Iehosaphat, it appears, that he made affinity
with wicked Ahab, and joined with him to help him in battle, 2. Chron. 18.
for the which upon his return, he is sharply rebuked by Iehu the son of
Hanani, 2. Chron. 19. verse. 2. etc. And after the miraculous victory that God
had given Ezechiel against the army of Senacharib, it is recorded of him, that
therefore, he rendered not the Lord thanks accordingly, but was lift up in his
heart, and so wrath came upon him, and upon Judah and Jerusalem for the same:
2. Chro. 32.35. Finally touching Josiah, his story shows, that he came to his
death by fighting against Pharao Necho King of Egypt at Megiddo, contrary to
the persuation (even from the Lord, as the text says) that, that king gave
him. 2. Chron. 35.

And if any think that it is otherwise now, with them that are commended for
righteous men in the new testament, they are much deceived. For though it be
said of Zachary the father of John Baptist, that he was a just man before God,
and that he walked in all the commandments and ordinances of the Lord, without
reprofe Luke 1. ver. 6. Yet after in the same Chapter verse 20. for his not
believing the words of the Angel, touching his wives bearing of John Baptist, he
is strooken dome, and so continued until the child was borne. And if we go
on, and consider Peter and Paul, most famous amongst the Apostles, though it
cannot be denies, but that they studied to be righteous and very godly men, and
that then they had the spirit of regeneration to enable them both to will well
and to do well, yet even in respect of the time when they were such, they are
not found without fault or sin. For Math. 26. we read how shamefully. for
fear, Peter denied his master: and that at Antioch, a good while after
Christ's ascension, and therefore after the desc^^^^on of the holy ghost upon
him and his fellows, he behaved himself so, that Paul therefore openly rebuked
him there and charged him, that he was to be blamed, for his so dealing, for
that by his example, he constrained the Gentiles, to do like the Jews:
insomuch, that other Jews (as Paul reports it) dissembled likewise with him,
and even Barnabas, was brought into their dissimulation also Gal. 2. ve. 1.
etc. Now Paul in the 7 to the Romans ve. 10.20. etc. most plainly confesses,
of himself, when he had striuen and labored for the contrary to the utmost
be could, that he found a law in his members, rebelling against the law of his
mind, which before he called the sin that dwelt in him, whereby it came to
pass, that sometimes he did that he would not, and was led captive unto the
Law of sin, insomuch that most lamentably he cries out, and says, O wretched
man that I am, who shall deliver me, from this body of sin and death? and to the
Co. ep. 2. Cap. 12. ve. 7. etc. he complains of a prick in his flesh, which
he calls the messenger of Satan, that did buffet him, whereof he could not be
rid, though he besought the lord thrice that he might. Very well therefore in
my opinion was it said of Hierom in his epistle to Ctesiphon, against Pelagius,
who used to object many of these examples to prove, that me^ might be without
sin, because many of these are said, as you hard in the scriptures, to have
been just and righteous men: iusti appellantur non quod omni vitio careant,
sed quod maiori part vntutu^ commendentur, that is, they are called just men,
not that they were without all fault, but that they were commended with the
greater part of virtues. Notable truly, and well worth the reading is this
epistle of Hieroms, both to the confutation of the old and new Pelagians, that
notwithstanding the plain evidence of all that I have said, will yet hold, that
me^ ca^ in this life have in themselves a perfect and absolute righteousness,
for not only does he most plainly therein, condemn that as an opinion that in
it contains the poison of al heretics, and takes man out of man, and
holds him that is in the body, to be out of the body; but also to be contrary
to al experience, either past or to come, and directly to rob Christ of his
special prerogative, which is, to be without sin. And most sharply and
briefly he confutes all their chief arguments, and leaves them never a
starting hole, and in the end concludes that, haec hominibus sola perfectio, si
imperfectos se esse nouerint, this is man's only perfection to know himself to
be imperfect. But if it were a thing, that I might longer stand upon, it were
an easy matter to keep you an whole hour, with golden sentences and
arguments, o^^ of this father and the rest, most pregnant to this purpose. For
I can assure you, never a one of the ancient learned fathers, but they are full
and forcible against al Pelagians, and other heretics whatsoever, to humble
men always in the sight of their own w^is, and imperfection before God.

And doubtless (though they that hold the contrary, will not see it) in the great
wisdom and providence of God, it is, that whiles we are here, we should
still, do what we can, find our selves compassed with infirmities, and
encombred with sin. For hereby we see the power and strength of sin, the
better, to make us thankful unto our God continually the more, for our sweet
savior Jesus Christ, that cleanses us from all sin. Hereby, we are from day
to day, made the more weary of this world, where we see this troublesome
battle with sin will not end, and so the more desirous of an other, when we are
sure it shall. Hereby also in the mean time we have occasion, the better to
show our faith, our patience and constant feruentnesse, in flying to God, for
help and succor: and thereby the Lord breeds in us, many a good virtue, as
humility mercifulnes and compassion, toward others, and preserues us from the
contrary, foul vices, of pride, hard hartednes and contempt of others. Paul
himself confesses, that the prick in his flesh, that we heard him ear
while complain of, was given him, lest he should be exalted out of measure,
through the abundance of revelations. 2. Cor. 12. ve. 7. Wherefore, as of the
flesh of vipers, there is made, as they say, a notable counterpoyson, so of
the viperous remnantes and relics of sin, God in his wisdom, and by his
power, makes us a preservative against most dangerous sins. And as the
skillful Chirurgian, that would heal his patients wound, thoroughly to the
bottom, keeps it the longer open, so deals the Lord with us, in this case;
that we by this means, seeing the depth and daungerousnesse of our wound the
longer, may seek and find, in Christ Jesus, our only sovereign Chirurgian
and Physician in this case, a full, and perfect remedy. For it is he alone, who
his own self, bare our sins in his body on the tree, that we being
delivered from sin, should live in righteousness, and yet by whose stripes we
are healed 2. Pet. 2.24. And surely the Pharisee puffed up with a conceit of his
own righteousness, shall go home, in his judgment as he came, and the very
Publican shall be rather justified then he, Luke. 18. verse. 10. etc. And
therefore he calls only for the heavy laden and weary of that heavy load,
Mat 11.28, and offers himself to those that thirst after him, Ioh. 7.37.38.
For to whom should the Lord have an ei^ but to him that is of a broken and
co^trite spirit Isaiah. 66. ver. 2. And who will be at this point, but he that
has learned to humble himself before his God, as Michah has taught us, when
he has walked before him, in justice and mercy, the best he can.

Thus therefore I hope sufficiently, we have heard opened, whom the Prophet here
minded fo comfort wherefore these things thus premised, and understood, I dare
and do confidently assure my self, that this noble person, whose body lies
here before us, anon to be buried, was such a one, both generally and
particulerly, as here the Prophet has described: and I hope there are few or
none here present, that knew him in deed, but as I have gou on, from point to
point, in examining and explaining the Prophets description, have thought it to
fit him. Howsoever, for my own part, having known him, these 14 or 15 years,
and having had very near and familiar acquaintance with him, touching the
state of his soul and mind, I am fully of that mind, simply, and without al
flattery, either before God or man, that he was such a one as here the Prophet
speaks of. Loath I am to enter into any particularizing of that which I am
able to say, but upon my own knowledge, to the proof hereof; for I have
neither wit nor utterance fit and meet to express the same withal, howbeit
seeing it is a thing expected, (I know) at my hands, and without some just
note of unkindness I cannot stay here, knowing what I have known: and that to
the glory of God, and good example of some, it may be, that that which I shall
speak may prove, though it come never so short of that which he has
deserved: give me leave a little to apply in particular, from step to step the
Prophets description unto him, First therefore to begin withal, ever since I
knew him, he has bin one careful, aright to walk before God in righteousness
and mercy, for any thing that ever I could perceive. And therefore having
learned, that thus to do, he must have his direction and light from the word
of God, contained in the Canonical scriptuees, rightly understood, I must
needs protest, that I never knew man of his place, nor scarce of any other,
more careful and diligent, to use al ordinary means to attain thereunto. For
even hence it has come, and to this end it has bin, that along time he has
most diligently red the scriptures, attentively heard them red, and preached
upon, both publicly and privately, as often as he could; and also joined
therewith, not only the helps of serious meditation, conference of the learned
that be met withal, and the reading of all good and learned books of
controversies that he could come by; but also twice or thrice a day he has
used along time most earnest and devout invocation of the name of God, privately
betwixt God and himself (besides public prayers also in his house, twice a
day continually) for grace to understand the same, and to live accordingly.
Thus to read of the scriptures besides other books, 8 Chapters a day was his
ordinary task: and hence it came that he was a religious and devout keeper of
the (...) both, consecrating it wholly to public and private holy exercises:
that he wonderfully reverenced all learned honest and painful ministers, that
he could be acquainted withal: and that he reverenced learning and learned
men, as he did. In this time, that I have known him, even for love to
learning, I have known him, to have bin at three solemn Acts at Oxforde, and
there always to have bin a most diligent hearer of al exercises, from the
beginning to the ending. And by these means it pleased God to bless him, with
knowledge and understanding, that for his place (let no man be offended with my
speech) no (...) both for matters of the Church and common weal also, was
better able and more careful to speak, in time and place then he. And as by
these means he was enabled to make every good show of Christianity; both for
life and religion: so surely therein he was no man pleaser, or time seruer,
neither hypocrite before God, nor dissembler with man. For all that knew him,
knew, he was no gloser nor flatterer, nor a man that would be drawn contrary to
his conscience and Honor, to do any thing, though in the woorlde he might have
gained never so much thereby. Never knew I man more fast and faithful to his
friend, more just of his word and deed to friend and foe, and more plain in
all his dealing with one an other, without partiality the^ him. And though I am
persuaded, that God had given him great judgment, when to show justice and when
to show mercy, and I know, that he had such a special care, to deal always
uprightly in both, that wittingly and wilfully he could not, nor would not
offend his conscience, in either: yet seeing ma^s weakness and infirmity, as he
did, and finding thereby, by searching his own ways, what might or had any
way failed in himself, walking in the best manner he could: thereby he took
occasion, when he had walked before God in righteousness and mercifulnes, and in all other his good ways, to the utmost of his power, to humble himself before
his God to answer the rest of Isaiahs description of those whom here he would
comfort. For still I have found him the nearer he grew to his end; the more
watchful and careful over himself, and striving with God by all good means to
become fit for him, so that for these 3 or 4 last years of his life, he has
seemed to study and to desire nothing more, then that God would give him grace,
so to number his days, that he might apply his heart unto wisdom: which was
Moses suit unto God for himself and his people Psa. 9. ve. 12. And howsoever
he could be stout enough, according to his place, and but as it became him,
when had to deal with men: yet when he had to deal with God, either in
sickness or health, I never knew a man that in words and behavior, would
carry himself more submisly and reverently, or that gave better testimony, of
a broken and contrite heart before him. What the^ should I say more? Briefly
this, that being the man that others know he was besides my selft: her Majesty
has lost of him a loyal, loving, and most faithful and good subject, the
state has lost of him a stout valiant and renoumed Captain, reuerented of
all the enemies thereof, forreyne, or domestical, for fear; and of all the true
friends thereof, at home or abroad, for love. The Church, has lost of him,
here an Honorable member, for his own part: and many therein a loving Patron
his country has lost of him an upright Justice, a good hous-keeper, and a very
father in any thing wherein he might stand the^, lawfully instead. And to
conclude, I for my own part, have lost of him the honorablest and most loving
and faithful patron, that ever poor minister of my condition lost. Here yet
is our comfort in all these losses, that we all have thus lost by his departure
hence; that he has himself (as we shall hear anon) lost nothing, but that
both he has found God, and God has found him, and taken him from us, that
were not worthy of him, to join him with those, for whom he himself had thus
fitted him. For as he lived honorably and Christianly, so has he died. For
though he were sick, an 18. days, and therein had many sharp, long, and
bitter fits, of his old disease the stone (as it was taken;) yet being with him
from time to time, unto the end, as I was; I never heard any word of
impatiency, thereby wrong from him: but still, the more sore his fits were, and
his sickness grew, the more earnest and holy prayers and meditations came from
him; insomuch that he continued, praying, and calling upon God, to take him
hence unto himself in peace, to have mercy upon him for his Christ his sake,
and to receive his spirit, until the very last ghaspe: only the mercies of God
in Christ Jesus promised, all the time of his sickness, as very often he
protested, were his comfort, acknowledging still, that but for them, he were a
most miserable wretch, and yet they being such as they were, he would never
give over trusting in him, howsoeuec he dealt with him. From the beginning of
his sickness, it seems that he had received in himself the sentence of death
and therefore after never minded wordly thing, (...) then needs must: his
continual praye^ for (...) and children was, that the Lord would bless them;
then (as it seemed by the manner of his speech) thinking* yt they should do well
enough, (...) meanly sooner he left them. Indeed to his eldest son, kneeling
by his bed side, and craving his blessing, (though then it was very painful for
him to speak) he g^^e it most Christianly thus, saying, my son hear; hear
and fear the Lord feruing him in holiness and righteousness all the days of thy
life, and so thou shall want no manner of thing that is good: and for the rest
of his children he said, there were blessings enough in store, which he prayed
the Lord to bestow upon them. And to others weep^ng about him, I remember well
he said, with set countenance, and stated voice, (and I hope I shall I never
forget it) weep not for me, but weep for your own sins. And thus never
satisfying himself, with humbling of himself before God on the one side, in
the sight of his own unworthiness, and yet showing (...) ye other always that
he had a chereful hope, freely and fully, to be saved for Jesus Christ's sake a
love, through his worthiness; whiles both they about him ^ the rest of the
family below together, were in pouring forth their prayers to God for him, the
14 day of the last month of October, being the Lords day, he ended the day of
rest, or Sabbath, in falling into such a sleep and rest, that now for every he
shall keep a perpetual Sabb^th (...) ^e Lorde^ and thus (well beloved) ye have
hea^^ both of the life, and death, of this Right Honorable Lord Gray, though
nothing answerably to that which he deserved, yet so far, and so much, as I
trust, I going on, now lastly to lay before you the comfortes, that the Prophet
has here set down for them, that he has here described: of your selves, with
out any further application of mine, you will think that he had, and shall
have his part and portion therein.

Wherefore herein to be as brief as I can: as I have said, either they are
such as either may comfort such dying; or such, as they only taste of and enjoy
when they be dead. And two comfortes here I observe still to be given them, of
each kind. The first of the former sort, is taken from the end that God has
in taking such away, for their good; and is thus much in effect. Though the
wicked ones in the woorlde live in never such iollity and security, in all
sin and impiety, triumphing and hartening themselves the more in their
course, because such is the state of those that walk before God in
righteousness and mercifulness here sometimes, that they, through the
unkindness of the woorlde, can neither enjoy any sound peace in mind, nor
rest in their beds, living in it: nor yet so dye in the end, but that either
they are put to some violent death by their enemies and persecutors, or dye of
some such sharp and paineful sickness, that the wicked think they have
cause to judge them, as a sorce that God loves not, and therefore that are
perished: yet indeed for all this, the Lord loved them alive, and of that
love of his, has taken them away by death before the evil day come, which he
has prepared for the destruction of the wicked and impenitent. Let the words
and circumstances of my text be well scanned, and it will evidently thereby
appear, that it was the Prophets meaning to minister and give this comfort.
For though both immediately before my text and after, and by the word perishes,
he plainly shows, that when the righteous are picked out from amongst the wicked
they conceive no better of it, and in that there is no rest or peace promised
the godly herein, but after they be taken hence; it be more the^ insinuated
that both their lives and deaths are often in this world full of tribulation:
yet that they should not be discouraged, either with that they feel
themselves; or with the doings and sayings of the other, the Prophet assures
the righteous and merciful man that walks before god, that he is taken hence
of love, to exempt him from evil. And therefore if he can take it to be an
argument of love in a husbandman, or shepherd, foreseeing a storm and tempest
before, to gather into his barn his harvest, or unto some shelter his flock
of sheep, then he has cause so to think, of the Lords calling and fetching
him home, before the evil day come. With this God comforted Abraham Genes.
15. verse. 13. etc. For there, first having told him, that his seed should
serve, and be ill entreated in a strange land 400 years; after to comfort him
he tells him, that yet he should go unto his fathers in peace: and so he did,
as we read, Genesis 25.8. But Josiah, that lived not long before this evil spoken
of here bego^ne to break in upon the kingdom of Judah, is a most not able
example hereof. For by Huldah the Prophetisse he being first given certainly
to understand, that it should shortly be: yet from her, this word withal was
sent him to his comfort, that he first should be gathered unto his fathers,
and put into his grave in peace: and that so his eyes, should not see, the
evil that God would bring upon that place and people, 2. Chro. 34. Wherein
doubtless, they could not but take comfort, and be the willinger to die, when
where, and howsoever the Lord appointed. For who would not be glad to flee out
of a^ old house before it fall about his ears? Who would not take comfort upon
the sea, seeing a great storm coming, to get into some safe haue^ first? Who
being in a journey, and knowing the way to be laid for passengers, to spoil
and to destroy them, would not be glad to take up his Inn before?

And yet this is not so to be taken, as though it were here either said, or
meant, that always God takes away, al such as he describes, before the coming
of such an evil as here he speaks of. For Jeremy himself, who doubtless was
such a one, lived to see this evil come upon them, to the full: as it is
evident, Ier. 39. which was such a grief unto him, that thereupon he wrote his
book of Lamentations. And it is the common opinion, that John that beloved
Apostle of our Savior lived to see the final and last destruction of
Jerusalem and the temple, and the utter subversion of that kingdom of the Jews
by the Romans. Only therefore thus are we to take it, that when in such had
times as this was that Isaiah speaks of, it pleases the Lord, thought
thorough many tribulacions, living, and in the end also by great pa^^^ying, to
take many such a way, that then, howsoever the wicked conster this, that most
certainly it is (...), of the Lord, of singular and special favor toward
(...), and namely to take them away from euel to come.

This therefore serves, not only, mightely^^^ (...) the wicked and ungodly from
all ca^ulting^^ (...) thus dealing with his, and to teach them, th^^
notwithstanding, to refor^e their judgments, of the lives and deaths of such
as I have sufficiently showed before in handling the Prophets complains but
also it serves as forciblye, to comfort and chea^e the Godly in the midst
of all their tribulations living, and pains and torments dying. For hereby,
they may perceive, though their peace and rest ^e reserved, until they be
taken hence by (...): yet both before, and in their very death the Lord ha^ a
special favor and love to (...). Wherefore, let such take all the (...), that
they are enforced to suffer lying as dying (...) of (...) ^^^cifull father, for
their good; as means to conform them to their head CHRIST JESUS here, that
hereafter else where, they may be made conformable unto him: and therefore
even so many arguments, of a better life reserved for them in an other
woorlde. For howsoever they cannot choose but for the present, to flesh and
blood be grievous; yet certainelye, as the Lord uses them to his, they are
his very good means, to to mortify his children to this woorlde; that they
way be the readier and willinger to depart hence, when be calls for them: and
in his band, they are but as his fire, and furnare to make his, pure gold; and
as his fan to make them clean corn for his own use, and as his mill to
grind them, and oven to bake them, to be pure mainchet to serve his own
table. And in the very sight of the woorlde, to the glory of God, and the good
example of others, they prove but the ordinary means to cause their faith,
patience and constancy in cleaving fast to God, notwithstanding, and in
calling the more earnestly upon him, to appear. Let not any man therefore, be
dismaide, or discomforted, at tribulatio^s incident to the godly living, or at
the painfulnes, or manner of their death so they die constant in faith in the
Lord. Indeed, Ioh^s friends looking upon the tribulations that he had to (...)
^ooke occasion thereby, to judge him to have bin before but an hyprocrite, but
they were not only rightly withstoode by Job (...), but in the end God
himself, as it appears in the conclusion of that story, took Iobes part
against them. And Luke 13. ver. the first, we read, that some told Christ, how
Pilate had mingled the blood of certain Galileans, with the blood of their
sacrifices: but Christ perceiving that in so doing they thought, th^^ therefore
they might judge those Galileans, to the worse then of any of the rest, he tells
them in so thinking they were deceived: and so likewise, if they should think
that those 18, upon who^ the tower of Siloah fell, were greater sinners the^ any
that dwelt in Jerusalem, he shows them, they were in an error; thereby
teaching us that we may not by these outward accidents and occurrentes judge.
But notable to this our purpose is it, to considers, that though, as we have
heard 2. Chr. 34. the Lord promised to take Josiah hence in his favor (and
therefore we may be sure he did so) yt yet he came to his death be a wound
taken at Megiddo, in a battle against, the Lords liking taken in hand,
against Pharao Necho king of Egypt, as it is showed in the next Chapter. For
hereby any man may see, that one, as dearly beloved of God, as Josiah was,
yet notwithstanding, sometimes may have such a death: and that therefore men
are not to judge them, not loved or regarded of God straight, that have painful
and somewhat extraordinary means to bring them to their deaths. Hereunto also,
well serves yt, which we read He. 11. ve. 35. etc. For though it be evident,
that there the Apostle speaks of such, as both lived and died out of all
question the dear children of God, and so were taken hence in his favor, yet
he says, some of them were rackt, some tried by mockings and scourgings, some
by bonds and imprisonment, some were stoned, some hewn a sunder, and some were
slain with the sword etc. and yet he says, the world was not worthy of them.
For the simplest man that is, hereby may see, that men may be the dear
children of God, and be also most dearly beloved of him, and yet have many
tribulations in this life, and in the end also be taken away by some tormenting
death. If it were not thus, we should condemn all the Martyrs which are
inumerable, that for the Lords cause, have endured both living, and dying,
wonderful trouble and torment. Wherefore seeing we are compassed, as the
Apostle speaks Heb. 12.1. etc. with so great a cloud of witnesses, in this
case, let us run with patience the race that is set before us, looking unto
Jesus the author and finisher of our faith, who as he there shows, has run
this race before us. For seeing in him our head, we see that found true which
we read Act. 14.12. that by many tribulations we must enter into the kingdom
of heaven, let not us, that as members have communion and union, with him, think
to get thither any other way. And yet let us hold it, for all this, a most
sound principle, that is set down Psalm. 116. verse. 15. that is, that precious
in the sight of the Lord, is the death (always) of his saints, let that
therefore be effectually provided for, that we live and die the Lords, in being
such, both living and dying as here Isaiah speaks of, and then let us be
assured, whatsoever the ungodly think of us either for our tribulations
living, or for our pains in dying, that the Lord always has a love and favor
to us, first in making us ready thereby to go hence, and then in taking us
thereby away from the evil to come.

The other comfort, given here by the Prophet, that we may cast of, and
strengthen our selves withal dying, yet before we die, lies in the two Hebrewe
words, that are here translated perishes and taken away. For howsoever, the
wicked, using the former of these of the deaths of the righteous, thereby
mean^, that they, when they are once dead, are so lost and gone, that they
shall never be found again. Yet the use of the word in the Hebrewe tongue, As
not always to importe so much: For it is (...) ^1. Sam. 9. verse. 3. touching
Saul's fathers a^^e^, which are said were lost; and yet in that Chapter, it
appears they were not so lost but they were found, sale and sound again,
verse. 20. and the thing lost by one, and found by ^n other Leuit. o^ verse. 3.
is expressed by a de^^atiue thereof. And the other word, used here by the
Prophet in his own tongue, is so rich in signification, as it is noted (...)
the learned in that tongue, and as they make it evident by the use of it in
other places of the scripture, that is signifies (...) take up to (...) away,
but also to draw back again, to receive back again to one, to gather up,
or together, and to cure and heal: they being therefore here used by the holy
ghost, to express the death of the righteous by, because we are therefore sure
they are fit for the purpose, in my opinion touching the death of such, thereby
we may well learn, thus much; to the great comfort of all such, both living,
and dying, that howsoever the profane Atheiste and Epicure, count death, to
be, vltima linea rerum, the utmost bound of all things, and therefore cry one
to another, Ede, bibe, post mortem nulla voluptas, eat and drink, for after
death there is no pleasure and therefore are likely enough to account such men
dead, so to be quite perished, that they shall never be again; yet in deed
and truth it is nothing so. But such, though by death, the world and men
living, have lost them; yet another, has found them, that is, the Lord
himself; and therefore though by their death, he has quite taken them from
us, and conveyed them clean out of the company of the living here: yet he has
thereby, but gathered them up and together, from amongst the wicked, with whom
they were mingled, and amongst whom, to their grief, they were as scattred,
whiles they were here; that so, who^ he sent into the world, to do him service
for a time, and as it were to play a part on a scaffold that he had appointed
them, he might draw back again, and take home again to himself that there
he may perfectly both cure their souls of all sin and infirmities, and
thoroughly heal their bodies, of al sicknesses and diseases, whereof, neither,
could be free or clear, as long as they were here. And, that death to the
righteous is no other thing, but thus, the scriptures do plainly and
plentifully teach us: for Eccle. 12. verse. 7. when it comes, we are taught,
that the body (which he there calls dust,) returns to the earth from whence it
came, and the spirit to God that gave it. And therefore Christ Luke 23. v. 46.
and Stephen, according to his example, dying, Act. 7. ver. 59. commend their
spirits to God: and Paul counts death 2. Cor. 5. ver. 1. etc. to the godly, but
a flitting out of his earthy tabernacle, to a better in heaven prepared for is;
and therefore says, that he desired to be loosed, and to be with Christ
Philip. 1.23. And therefore these things, thus being, hereby a most notable
comfort to remove the terriblenes of death, is given unto such, as live and
die the Lords: so, that these things remembered, we may well say with Cyprian
de mortalitate, of such; non amittuntur sed praemittuntur^ they are not lost,
but sent before: and again, we may well said with him, these things being
thus, as most surely they are; that eius est mortem timere qui ad Christum non
vult ire, quod enim mo^^^e, ad ^^ortalitatem, morte transgred^nur, non est
^^itur, sed, transitur, and quis non ad meliora fest^^^^ that is, he only, has
cause to fear (...) not go to Christ, for in that we die, by death we pass to
immortality, it is therefore no dispatch or full end, but a passage; and who
would not make have to better? And surely, the good remembrance of these two
comforts, I am fully persuaded, did so mightily prevail with this noble
person, that they swallowed up, and made him so Christianly and comfortably to
bear, what pains soever he felt that led him thereunto, as I have showed
before. For from what fountain else, could his saying, weep not for me, weep
not for me, come, but from hence: that he was fully persuaded, that death
should be an advantage unto him whatsoever should follow thereupon to us. And
his often and earnest praying to God, to take him hence in peace, and requesting
others, as namely my self, that I would pray unto him, that he would: for he
was most willing to come unto him, and therefore would not once str^^e with him
to the contrary: whence came it but from a certain persuasion, that death
should be no more unto him, but as I have showed? and so a means to bring
him, past all danger either of sin or ^^eknes, to the city of the living God,
the celestial Jerusalem, and to the company of innumerable angels, and to the
congregation of the first borne, which are written in heaven, and to God the
judge of all, and to the spirits of just and perfect men, and to Jesus the
mediator of the new Testament, as Paul speaks of that company, that he is
gone unto, Heb. 12.22. etc.

Wherefore, to our further comfort concerning him, our selves, and all others,
that shall live and die such as here the Prophet speaks of, let us now go on,
and view the comforts that he gives and sets down, to appertain to such, being
once taken hence by death. His words are touching such, as our interpreter has
rendered them, peace shall come, they shall rest in their beds, but in my
opinion, better according to the original, others translate, he shall (meaning
the righteous) enter into peace, upon peace, or in peace, for such variety
there is, and they (meaning such) shall rest in their beds. The knitting of
which words immediately with the former, touching their taking hence, ought to
teach us, that the comforts hereby delivered, are such; as that immediately
upon death, such as the Prophet speaks of, enter into possession and fruition
of. And that the comfortes prepared for such, come immediately and presently
upon their death, the word (...) used by the Angel shows Apoc. 14. v. 13.
saying blessed are the dead, even from the very instant of their death,
always after (as that word signifies) that die in the Lord, for they rest
from their labors, and their works (he says not any bodies else) follow
them. Which we see confirmed to be so, by that which we read Luke 16.22. of
Lazarus his being carried, immediately upon his death into Abraham's bosom.

And in that these two things are promised them, upon their gathering hence
by death and not before; and that as it is evident, to give them therein better
comfort to enjoy these; peace, and rest, immediately upon their death, and
dissolution of body and soul, then ever they did before: unless we might think
that the spirit of GOD, that directed the Prophet to comfort such, could not
tell how to comfort them effectually and to the purpose; we must needs
think, that by peace and rest, are meant, far more excellent peace and rest,
then such ever enjoyed here. Yea they must needs importe, that before death
come, they never had either peace or joy, in comparison. And yet it is well
known, both by scripture and comfortable experience, that GOD gives such both
peace and rest, in some good sort and measure, whiles they are here. For it is
written Romans 5. verse. 1. that the justified by faith have peace with God,
though not such as the world gives, yet such as that their hearts need not
be troubled, or fear, John. 14.27. as Christ there has promised. And this
peace, I tell you Paul says, passes all understanding, and preserues the
heart and mind in Christ Jesus. Philip. 4. verse. 7. And who knows not, that
it is written, that God gives his beloved sleep or rest, Psalm. 127. verse. 2.
And who of Gods children, the better to enable them, to serve the Lord
comfortably in their callinges, have not found these scriptures verified upon
them. Otherwise surely, they could never be able, to bear the heat of the
day, and labor in the Lords vineyarde as they do. And thus much in my mind,
will the very Hebrewe words, that are translated peace, and to rest, bear:
for it is well known, of every simple man in that tongue, that the first of
them, is used of the Hebrews not only to signify peace, but all prosperity,
and that the Root that it comes of, does not only signify to be at peace and
to pacify, but to be perfected and cons^^mated. And as for the other word
likewise, it does not only signify to rest, but soundly to rest.

Wherefore, whatsoever others have thought. I am resolute, that by the former,
the Prophet settes down the comfort that concerns the souls of the righteous
immediately upon their death, and by the other, that, which respects their
bodies, until the general resurrection. By this then we may perceive that the
souls of such straight enter possession of ^ far greater peace and joy, then
ever they had here; for else we must needs think, that the Prophet could not
tell, how to comfort such (which he being herein by the spirit of God directed
to one, as doubtless he was) but once to think were blasphemy. I say of purpose
of far greater peace and joy, then ever they had here: for though I know, that
this imports that their peace, is such, as that the angel from heaven might
justly in respect thereof, thenceforth immediately for ever pronounce the
blessed, as we have heard, Revelations. 14. ver. 13. yea that it is such as is
^^^terable and inconceivable of mortal man; yet I know there is a consummation
behind, to be accomplished at the last day in the general resurrection, and
that the very Saints in heaven wish and exspect that as we may learn
Revelation. 6. verse. 10. for to teach us so much, they that are there most safe
under the shadow of their altar Christ, upon whom whiles they lived, they
offered all their spiritual sacrifices: are brought in crying, how long Lord,
holy and true, do not thou avenge our blood, on them that dwell on the
earth? For how can it be otherwise, but, that that soul, that here has
faithfully served the Lord in the body, must have a desire there, once in Gods
good time, to have this body joined with it in the reward as well as it was
before, in taking the right course unto it. And when this comes to pass,
which must one day (because the truth of Gods promises in his son must be
fulfilled, and otherwise he cannot show himself to be a perfect Savior both
of the bodies and souls of his, and to have had just cause to take unto him
both the body and soul of man, and to suffer in both as he did:) then doubties
there cannot be but sin access of joy and peace to the souls of the
righteous, in the mean time departed. And yet therewhilst, hereby we are
assured it is such as I have said,

Now touching the other comfort, which respects their bodies, it is said here,
they shall rest in their beds. By their beds, the Prophet understands, the
places where the Lord in his providence bestows their bodies, whatsoever those
places be, immediately upon death, until the general resurrection. For we may
not be so superstitious, though it be meet that convenient and decent order
be taken and kept for the burial of the bodies of the dead (the better to
nourish the hope of the resurrection) in some fit place, as to think that
none is in possession and fruition of this rest, before their bodies be buried
in Churchyard or Church. For we find it an usual thing in the Scriptures,
immediately when men die, to say they fell a sleep, though yet they be not
buried, and so, as soon as GOD has taken the soul out of the body; so
soon, wheresoever that be, and whatsoever afterward becomes of it, or be
done with it, be it thrown into the sea, devoured of wild beasts, burnt to
ashes, buried or not buried; it is so couched in the bed that God has made for
it, that there it is fallen into such a sound sleep and rest, that unless God
mean extraordinarily to show his power, as he did when Moses and Elias
appeared with Christ in the mount, when he was transfigured Mat. 17. or as when
that was, that Matthewe writes of Chap. 27. that graves opened, and many of the
bodies of the Saints arose that slept, and went into the holy City and
appeared unto many, (which if he please to do to his they shall be sure to
find no disturbance thereby) it shall more quietly then ever it did here, upon
any feather bed, for never so short a time take rest, until the last day, when
the general resurrection shall be 1 Thessalonians. 4.15.16. For here, do what we
can, to make our beds soft, and to get rest; yet our sleeps are subject to
many interruptions, and troublesome phansies and dreams: but in these beds, we
shall be troubled with none of these. This the ancient Grecians had an eye
unto, in calling the ordinary places for the burial of the dead (...), that
is, sleeping and resting places. This speech therefore of the Prophet thus
understood, is full of comfort and consolation. For it strengthens and
nourishes our hope of the resurrection. For we all know, that is the end of
taking us to our bed chambers and beds, that there, afafter we have slept, we
may rise again: and we see by experience, that though we lie down wearied and
tired, yet after convenient sleep, though it be but for a night we commonly
rise, mightily refreshed, as full of interruptions and troublesome dreams, as
our sleeps are, usually. How much more then, after this long, sound, and quiet
sleep, should we hope, and be persuaded, that our bodies shall not only rise
again, but also be woonderfullie altered. This the Apostle Paul 1. Cor. 15.
most notably teaches us where he tells us, that at the last day, the trumpe
should blow, and our bodies, shall rise (the which when they were laid down,
were corruptible; mortal and inglorious) immortal incorruptible and glorious;
yea and which is more, that then our bodies, that slept in him, shall be made
like unto the glorious body of our Lord and Savior by his mighty power,
whereby he is able to subdue al things unto himself. Phil. 3.2. And therefore
when we fall a sleep in these beds, we may co^fide^tly falling a sleep, yet
say with Job. cap. 19. v. 25. I am sure that my redeemer lives, and though
after this skin, worms destroy this body, yet shall I see God in my flesh,
even with these same eyes and no other.

To grow therefore toward a conclusion, this being the meaning of the Prophet
(as I have plainly showed it was) by these his comfortes to teach us thus much,
concerning the deaths of the righteous, thereupon, all these things
necessarily follow: that, man consists of a body and a soul; that the body
is mortal, and yet shall rise again; that the soul is immortal; that there
is no such Purgatory for the souls of any of the righteous that are taken
hence walking before GOD, as the Romanistes talk of: for that they immediately
enter upon, or into a most joyful peace; that therefore they all go straight
to heaven, and that they pass not their time betwixt this and the judgment in
a senseles sleep, or not feeling of any woe, (as some have phansied) but in a
present and continual fruition of exceeding joy and peace: and lastly that
neither the bodies and souls of such, walk and wander up and down here in
this world, nor are subject to the malice of Satan or witches to be fetched
again, to present themselves to be consulted withal by the living, as fondly
some superstitious people have imagined; for neither of these can stand either
with the peace, that the soul enters into, as the Prophet has taught,
immediately after death, or with the rest that he says, their bodies enjoy in
their beds. And therefore with the best learned both ancient and of late time,
we are to be resolved, that all apparitions and visions to the contrary, except
such as before I excepted, are either very illusions of Satan himself, so
offering himself to be seen, to breed erromous opinions touching ye dead; or
else that they are but imagined only, as we do many things in our dreams,
which yet then, are nothing so as we phantasied. All which points, but that I
have wearied you already, were worth the further standing upon, and I would
indeed, but that I fear I have been too tedious already, open and confirm
them further, to the full confutation both of all Atheists and Papists. But
seeing they are such, as I hope you are already rightly persuaded of; and I
have my self already in a sermon which I have preached at the funeral of the
late Right Honorable Lord of Bedford, which is in Print, sufficiently further
urged them, let it suffice now, thus only to have showed you how this text
confirms the same, thus briefly as I have.

And to make an end, in full hope that this honorable man, whom honorably to
bury we are here at this time, both living, dying, and dead; has had, has,
and ever shall have, to his everlasting comfort, his part and portion, in all
these comfortes; therewith (because I see you much discomforted, and many
present I perceive are full of sorrow, for the loss of so worthy a man, as I
have showed you there is just cause) I beseech you comfort your selves, and
comfort one an other. And to ad one other comfort unto these, to comfort us all
withal; the Lords name be blessed for it, he has left here behind him, as
you see, an honorable son and heir, of whom we all have just cause to
conceive very good and great hope, that er long, the very lively image of his
father in him, to the comfort of all his fathers friends, will be reviued:
which the Lord grant even for Jesus Christ's sake.

Thus you have heard (right honorable and well-beloved) both the Prophets
complaint and comfort, and by the former we have been taught, that when in bad
and ungodly times, most worthy men drop away apace, that it is a thing to be
grieved at and complained of, if men yet continue and go on in security in sin
and impiety: For it is a judgment of God, of it self to be taken to heart, of
all sorts of men, that they leave behind them; and it threattens a further
evil to come upon them, and therefore neither to take it to heart, nor to
understand such a further judgment to be threatened thereby; are certain
tokens of gross and intolerable security, and a fearful prognostication,
that some heavy judgment hastens on a pace: the consideration whereof, I
hope, even by the multitude of heavy countena^ces, that I now behold, has and
will have his due effect in many of us to our good awakening and reformation,
in this respect. And by the Prophets consolation, we have learned, that his
co^forts only appertain to such, as so walk before God, in righteousness and
mercy, as we have heard; and that to all such they do: and therefore to this
honorable person: and lastly, that such dying, may comfort themselves, that God
always takes them away to a good end in his favor, and namely in such times
as the Prophet spoke of, from the evil to come upon others: and that death it
self is no such loosing of them, but that God straight finds them, and takes
them hence back again to himself, gathering the^ up and together from
amongst the ungodly, which were not worthy of them, to join them to the
blessed company of the rest of his Saints in heaven; so curing and healing
them of all diseases both of body and soul. And thus they once gone hence,
presently and immediately, both in body and soul, they enter into better
estate then ever they were in here; the soul into better peace and joy; and
the body, soundly to rest, wheresoever it be bestowed, until the general
resurrection, in better manner then ever it did alive. Which day when it comes,
which we cannot tell how shortly it will be, both body and soul shall be
joined together, and so appearing before. Christ the judge of quick and dead,
hear the comfortable sentence, set down Mat. 25.34. for such: come ye blessed
of my father, receive the kingdom prepared for you before the foundations of
the world were laid: Whereunto the Lord happily bring us all, even for
sweet Jesus sake, to whom with the father and the Holy Ghost, three persons
and one everlasting God, be al honor, praise, and dominion now and for ever.
Amen.

FINIS.
Faults escaped.
Page 8. l. 18. for two read too. 14. 27. for tyles read tytles. 52. 2. for
low. r. love. 54. 1. put out in. 58. 12. for when, r. where. 63. 10. for 9. r.
90. 77. 20. next unto angel put in shows. 71. 8. put out of.


