COLIN CLOVTS Come home again.

By Ed. Spencer.

LONDON Printed for William Ponsonbie. 1595.

TO THE RIGHT worthy and noble Knight Sir Walter Raleigh, Captain of her
Majesty's Guard, Lord Wardein of the Stanneries, and Lieutenant of the County
of Cornwall.
SIR, that you may see that I am not always idle as ye think, though not
greatly well occupied, nor altogether undutiful, though not precisely
officious, I make you present of this simple pastoral, unworthy of your
higher conceit for the meanness of the style, but agreeing with the truth in
circumstance and matter. The which I humbly beseech you to accept in part of
payment of the infinite debt in which I acknowledge my self bounden unto you,
for your singular favors and sundry good turns showed to me at my late being
in England, and with your good countenance protect against the malice of evil
mouths, which are always wide open to carpe at and misconstrue my simple
meaning.

I pray continually for your happiness.

From my house of Kilcolman, the 27. of December. 1591. Yours ever humbly. Ed.
Sp.

COLIN CLOVTS come home again.
THe shepherds boy (best known by that name)
That after Tityrus first sung his lay,
Lays of sweet love, without rebuke or blame,
Sat (as his custom was) upon a day,
Charming his oaten pipe unto his peers,
The shepherd swains that did about him play:
Who all the while with greedy listfull ears,
Did stand astonished at his curious skill,
Like hartlesse dear, dismayed with thunders sound.
At last when as he piped had his fill,
He rested him: and sitting then around,
One of those grooms (a jolly groom was he,
As ever piped on an oaten reed,
And loved this shepherd dearest in degree,
Hight Hobbinol) began thus to him areed.
Colin my liefe, my life, how great a loss
Had all the shepherds nation by thy lack?
And I poor swain of many greatest cross:
That since thy Muse first since thy turning back
Was heard to sound as she was wont on hye,
Have made us all so blessed and so blythe.
Whilst thou wast hence, all dead in dole did lie:
The woods were heard to wail full many a sithe,
And all their birds with silence to complain:
The fields with faded flowers did seem to mourn,
And all their flocks from feeding to refrain:
The running waters wept for thy return,
And all their fish with languour did lament:
But now both woods and fields, and floods reviue,
Since thou art come, their cause of meriment,
That us late dead, have made again alive:
But were it not too painful to repeat
The passed fortunes, which to thee befell
In thy late voyage, we thee would entreat,
Now at thy leisure them to us to tell.
To whom the shepherd gently answered thus,
Hobbin thou temptest me to that I covet:
For of good passed newly to discus,
By dubble usury does twice renew it.
And since I saw that Angels blessed eye,
Her worlds bright sun, her heavens fairest light,
My mind full of my thoughts satietie,
Does feed on sweet contentment of that sight:
Since that same day in naught I take delight.
Ne feeling have in any earthly pleasure,
But in remembrance of that glorious bright,
My life's sole bliss, my hearts eternal threasure.
Wake then my pipe, my sleepie Muse awake,
Till I have told her praises lasting long:
Hobbin desires, thou may it not forsake,
Hark then ye jolly shepherds to my song.
With that they all began throng about him near,
With hungry ears to hear his harmony:
The whiles their flocks deuoyd of dangers fear,
Did round about them feed at liberty.
One day (quoth he) I sat, (as was my trade)
Under the foot of Mole that mountain hoar,
Keeping my sheep amongst the cooly shade,
Of the green alders by the Mullaes shore:
There a strange shepherd chaunst to find me out,
Whether allured with my pipes delight,
Whose pleasing sound yshrilled far about,
Or thither led by chance, I know not right:
Whom when I asked from what place he came,
And how he hight, himself he did ycleepe,
The shepherd of the Ocean by name,
And said he came far from the main-sea deep.
He sitting me beside in that same shade,
Provoked me to play some pleasant fit,
And when he heard the music which I made,
He found himself full greatly pleased at it:
Yet aemuling my pipe, he took in hond
My pipe before that aemuled of many,
And played thereon; (for well that skill he cond)
Himself as skillful in that art as any.
He pip'd, I sung; and when he sung, I piped,
By change of turns, each making other merry,
Neither envying other, nor envied,
So piped we, until we both were weary.
There interrupting him, a bonie swain,
That Cuddy hight, him thus atweene bespake:
And should it not thy ready course restrain,
I would request thee Colin, for my sake,
To tell what thou did sing, when he did play.
For well I ween it worth recounting was,
Whether it were some hymn, or moral lay,
Or carol made to praise thy loved less.
Nor of my love, nor of my loss (quoth he)
I then did sing, as then occasion fell:
For love had me forlorn, forlorn of me,
That made me in that desert chose to dwell.
But of my river Bregogs love I soong,
Which to the shiny Mulla he did bear,
And yet does bear, and ever will, so long
As water does within his bancks appear.
Of fellowship (said then that bony Boy)
Record to us that lovely lay again:
The stay whereof, shall naught these ears annoy,
Who all that Colin makes, do covet feign.
Hear then (quoth he) the tenor of my tale,
In sort as I it to that shepherd told:
No leasing new, nor Grandams fable stale,
But ancient truth confirmed with credence old.
Old father Mole, ( Mole hight that mountain gray
That walls the Northside of Armulla dale)
He had a daughter fresh as flower of May,
Which gave that name unto that pleasant vale;
Mulla the daughter of old Mole, so hight
The Nymph, which of that water course has charge,
That springing out of Mole, does run down right
To Butteuant, where spreading forth at large,
It gives name unto that ancient City,
Which Kilnemullah cleped is of old:
Whose ragged ruins breed great ruth and pity,
To trauailers, which it from far behold.
Full feign she loved, and was beloved full feign,
Of her own brother river, Bregog hight,
So hight because of this deceitful train,
Which he with Mulla wrought to win delight.
But her old sire more careful of her good,
And meaning her much better to prefer,
Did think to match her with the neighbor flood,
Which Allo hight, Broad water called far:
And wrought so well with his continual pain,
That he that river for his daughter won:
The dowre agreed, the day assigned plain,
The place appointed where it should be done.
Nath les^e the Nymph her former liking held;
For love will not be drawn, but must be led,
And Bregog did so well her fancy weld,
That her good will he got her first to wedde.
But for her father sitting still on hie,
Did warily still watch which way she went,
And eke from far observed with jealous eye,
Which way his course the wanton Bregog bent,
Him to deceive for all his watchful ward,
The wily lover did devise this slight:
First into many parts his stream he shared,
That whilst the one was watched, the other might
Pass vnespide to meet her by the way;
And then besides, those little streams so broken
He under ground so closely did convey,
That of their passage does appear no token,
Till they into the Mullaes water slide.
So secretly did he his love enjoy:
Yet not so secret, but it was descride,
And told her father by a shepherds boy.
Who wondrous wroth for that so foul despite,
In great avenge did roll down from his hill
Huge mighty stones, the which encomber might
His passage, and his watercourse spill.
So of a River, which he was of old,
He none was made, but scattred all to naught,
And lost among those rocks into him rold,
Did lose his name: so dear his love he bought.
Which having said, him Thestylis bespake,
Now by my life this was a merry lay:
Worthy of Colin self, that did it make.
But read now eke of friendship I thee pray,
What dittie did that other shepherd sing?
For I do covet most the same to hear,
As men use most to covet foreign thing.
That shall I eke (quoth he) to you declare.
His song was all a lamentable lay,
Of great unkindness, and of usage hard,
Of Cynthia the Lady of the sea,
Which from her presence faultlesse him debard.
And ever and anon with singulfs rife,
He cried out, to make his vndersong
Ah my loves queen, and goddess of my life,
Who shall me pity, when thou do me wrong?
Then began a gentle bonylasse to speak,
That Marin hight, Right well he sure did plain:
That could great Cynthiaes sore displeasure break,
And move to take him to her grace again.
But tell on further Colin, as befell
Twixt him and thee, that thee did hence dissuade.
When thus our pipes we both had wearied well,
(Quoth he) and each an end of singing made,
He began to cast great lyking to my lore,
And great dislyking to my lucklesse lot:
That banished had my self, like wight forlore,
Into that waste, where I was quite forgot.
The which to leave, thenceforth he counseld me,
Unmeet for man, in whom was ought regardfull
And wend with him, his Cynthia to see:
Whose grace was great, and bounty most rewardfull.
Besides her peerlesse skill in making well
And all the ornaments of wondrous wit,
Such as all womankynd did far excel:
Such as the world admyr'd and praised it:
So what with hope of good, and hate of ill,
He me persuaded forth with him to fare,
Naught took I with me, but mine oaten quill:
Small needments else need shepherd to prepare.
So to the sea we came; the sea? that is
A world of waters heaped upon hie,
Rolling like mountains in wide wilderness,
Horrible, hideous, roaring with hoarse cry.
And is the sea (quoth Coridon) so fearful?
Fearful much more (quoth he) the^ heart can fear:
Thousand wyld beasts with deep mouths gaping direful
Therein still wait poor passengers to tear.
Who life does loath, and longs death to behold,
Before he die, already dead with fear,
And yet would live with heart half stony cold,
Let him to sea, and he shall see it there.
And yet as ghastly dreadful, as it seems,
Bold men presuming life for gain to sell,
Dare tempt that gulf, and in those wandering stremes
Seek ways unknown, ways leading down to hell.
For as we stood there waiting on the strond,
Behold an huge great vessel to us came,
Dancing upon the waters back to land,
As if it scornd the danger of the same;
Yet was it but a wooden frame and frail,
Glewed together with some subtle matter,
Yet had it arms and wings, and head and tail,
And life to move it self upon the water.
Strange thing, how bold and swift the monster was,
That neither cared for wynd, nor hail, nor rain,
Nor swelling waves, but thorough them did pass
So proudly, that she made them roar again.
The same aboard us gently did receive,
And without harm us far away did bear,
So far that land our mother us did leave,
And naught but sea and heaven to us appear.
Then hartlesse quite and full of inward fear,
That shepherd I besought to me to tell,
Under what sky, or in what world we were,
In which I saw no living people dwell.
Who me recomforting all that he might,
Told me that that same was the Regiment
Of a great shepherdess, that Cynthia hight,
His liege his Lady, and his life's Regent.
If then (quoth I) a shepherdess she be,
Where be the flocks and herds, which she does keep?
And where may I the hills and pastures see,
On which she uses for to feed her sheep?
These be the hills (quoth he) the surges hie,
On which fair Cynthia her herds does feed:
Her herds be thousand fishes with their fry,
Which in the bosom of the billows breed.
Of them the shepherd which has charge in chief,
Is Triton blowing loud his wreathed horn:
At sound whereof, they all for their relief
Wend too and fro at evening and at morn.
And Proteus eke with him does drive his heard
Of stinking Seals and Porcpisces together,
With hoary head and deawy dropping beard,
Compelling them which way he list, and whether.
And I among the rest of many least,
Have in the Ocean charge to me assignd:
Where I will live or die at her beheast,
And serve and honor her with faithful mind.
Besides an hundred Nymphs all heavenly borne,
And of immortal race, do still attend
To wash fair Cynthiaes sheep, when they be shorn,
And fold them up, when they have made an end.
Those be the shepherds which my Cynthia serve,
At sea, beside a thousand more at land:
For land and sea my Cynthia does deserve
To have in her commandment at hand.
Thereat I wondered much, till wondering more
And more, at length we land far off descryde:
Which sight much gladed me; for much before
I feared, least land we never should have eyde:
Thereto our ship her course directly bent,
As if the way she perfectly had known.
We Lunday pass; by that same name is meant
An Island, which the first to west was shown.
From thence another world of land we kend,
Floting amid the sea in ieopardie,
And round about with mighty white rocks hemd,
Against the seas encroching cruelty.
Those same the shepherd told me, were the fields
In which dame Cynthia her landheards fed,
Fair goodly fields, then which Armulla yields
None fairer, nor more fruitful to be red.
The first to which we nigh approached, was
An high headland thrust far into the sea,
Like to an horn, whereof the name it has,
Yet seemed to be a goodly pleasant lea:
There did a lofty mount at first us greet,
Which did a stately heap of stones vpreare,
That seemd amid the surges for to fleet,
Much greater then that frame, which us did bear:
There did our ship her fruitful womb unlade,
And put us all a shore on Cynthias land.
What land is that thou meanst (then Cuddy said)
And is there other, then whereon we stand?
Ah Cuddy (then quoth Colin) thous a fon,
That have not seen least part of natures work:
Much more there is unkind, then thou do kon,
And much more that does from men's knowledge lurk.
For that same land much larger is then this,
And other men and beasts and birds does feed:
There fruitful corn, fair trees, fresh herbage is
And all things else that living creatures need.
Besides most goodly rivers there appear,
No whit inferior to thy Funchins praise,
Or unto Allo or to Mulla clear:
Naught have thou foolish boy seen in thy days,
But if that land be there (quoth he) as here,
And is their heaven likewise there all one?
And if like heaven, be heavenly graces there,
Like as in this same world where we do wone?
Both heaven and heavenly graces do much more
(Quoth he) abound in that same land, then this.
For there all happy peace and plenteous store
Conspire in one to make contented bliss:
No wayling there nor wretchedness is heard,
No bloody issues nor no leprosies,
No griesly famine, nor no raging sweard,
No nightly bodrags, nor no hue and cries;
The shepherds there abroad may safely lie,
On hills and downs, withouten dread or danger:
No ravenous wolves the good man's hope destroy,
Nor outlawes fell affray the forest raunger.
There learned arts do flourish in great honor,
And Poets wits are had in peerlesse price:
Religion has lay power to rest upon her,
Advancing virtue and suppressing vice.
For end, all good, all grace there freely grows,
Had people grace it gratefully to use:
For God his gifts there plenteously bestows,
But graceless men them greatly do abuse.
But say on further, then said Corylas,
The rest of thine adventures, that betyded.
Forth on our voyage we by land did pass,
(Quoth he) as that same shepherd still us guyded,
Until that we to Cynthiaes presence came:
Whose glory greater then my simple thought,
I found much greater then the former fame;
Such greatness I cannot compare to ought:
But if I her like ought on earth might read,
I would her lyken to a crown of lillies,
Upon a virgin brydes adorned head,
With Roses light and Goolds and Daffadillies;
Or like the circlet of a Turtle true,
In which all colors of the rainbow be;
Or like fair Phebes garlond shining new,
In which all pure perfection one may see.
But vain it is to think by paragone
Of earthly things, to judge of things divine:
Her power, her mercy, and her wisdom, none
Can deem, bu^ who the Godhead can define.
Why then do I base shepherd bold and blind,
Presume the things so sacred to profane?
More fit it is to adore with humble mind,
The image of the heavens in shape humane.
With that Alexis broke his tale asunder,
Saying, By wondering at thy Cynthiaes praise:
Colin, thy self thou make us more to wonder,
And her vpraising, do thy self vpraise.
But let us hear what grace she showed thee,
And how that shepherd strange, thy cause advanced?
The shepherd of the Ocean (quoth he)
Unto that Goddess grace me first enhanced:
And to mine oaten pipe inclined her ear,
That she thenceforth therein began take delight,
And it desired at timely hours to hear,
All were my notes but rude and roughly dight,
For not by measure of her own great mind,
And wondrous worth she mott my simple song,
But ioyd that country shepherd ought could find
Worth harkening to, emongst that learned throng.
Why? (said Alexis then) what needs she
That is so great a shepherdess her self
And has so many shepherds in her fee,
To hear thee sing, a simple silly Elfe?
Or be the shepherds which do serve her laesie?
That they list not their merry pipes apply,
Or be their pipes untunable and craesie,
That they cannot her honor worthily?
Ah nay (said Colin) neither so, nor so,
For better shepherds be not under sky,
Nor better hable, when they list to blow,
Their pipes aloud, her name to glorify.
There is good Harpalus now woxen aged,
In faithful service of fair Cynthia,
And there is a Corydon though meanly waged,
Yet hablest wit of most I know this day.
And there is sad Aleyon bent to mourn,
Though fit to frame an everlasting dittie,
Whose gentle spright for Daphnes death does tourn
Sweet lays of love to endless plaints of pity.
Ah pensive boy pursue that brave conceit,
In thy sweet Eglantine of Meriflure,
Lift up thy notes unto their wonted height,
That may thy Muse and mates to mirth allure.
There eke is Palin worthy of great praise,
Albe he envy at my rustic quill:
And there is pleasing Alcon, could he raise
His tunes from lays to matter of more skill.
And there is old Palemon free from spite,
Whose careful pipe may make the hearer rue:
Yet he himself may rewed be more right,
That sung so long until quite hoarse he grew.
And there is Alabaster thoroughly taught,
In all this skill, though known yet to few,
Yet were he known to Cynthia as he ought,
His Eliseis would be read anew.
Who lives that can match that heroic song,
Which he has of that mighty Princess made?
O dreaded Dread, do not thy self that wrong,
To let thy fame lie so in hidden shade:
But call it forth, O call him forth to thee,
To end thy glory which he has begun:
That when he finished has as it should be,
No brauer Poem can be under Sun.
Nor Po nor Tyburs swans so much renowned,
Nor all the brood of Greece so highly praised,
Can match that Muse when it with bays is crowned,
And to the pitch of her perfection raised.
And there is a new shepherd late up sprung,
The which does all before him far surpass:
Appearing well in that well tuned song,
Which late he sung unto a scornful less.
Yet does his trembling Muse but lowly fly,
As daring not too rashly mount on hight,
And does her tender plumes as yet but try,
In loves soft lays and looser thoughts delight.
Then rouse thy feathers quickly Daniell,
And to what course thou please thy self advance:
But most me seems, thy accent will excel,
In Tragic plaints and passionate mischance.
And there that shepherd of the Ocean is,
That spends his wit in loves consuming smart:
Full sweetly tempred is that Muse of his
That can empierce a Princes mighty heart.
There also is (ah no, he is not now)
But since I said he is, he quite is gone,
Amyntas quite is gone and lies full low,
Having his Amaryllis left to moan.
Help, O ye shepherds help ye all in this,
Help Amaryllis this her loss to mourn:
Her loss is yours, your loss Amyntas is,
Amyntas flower of shepherds pride forlorn:
He whilst he lived was the noblest swain,
That ever piped in an oaten quill:
Both did he other, which could pipe, maintain,
And eke could pipe himself with passing skill.
And there though last not least is Action,
A gentler shepherd may no where be found:
Whose Muse full of high thoughts invention,
Does like himself Heroically sound.
All these, and many others mo remain,
Now after Astrofell is dead and gone.
But while as Astrofell did live and rain,
Amongst all these was none his Paragone,
All these do flourish in their sundry kind,
And do their Cynthia immortal make:
Yet found I lyking in her royal mind,
Not for my skill, but for that shepherds sake.
Then spoke a lovely less, hight Lucida,
Shepherd, enough of shepherds thou have told:
Which fauouy th^^, and honor Cynthia,
But of so many Nymphs which she does hold
In her retinew, thou have nothing said,
That seems, with none of the^ thou favor foundest,
Or art ungrateful to each gentle maid,
That none of all their due deserts resoundest.
Ah far be it (quoth Colin Clout) fro me,
That I of gentle Mayds should ill deserve:
For that my self I do profess to be
Vassal to one, whom all my days I serve.
The beam of beauty sparkled from above,
The flower of virtue and pure chastity:
The blossom of sweet joy and perfect love,
The pearl of peerlesse grace and modesty,
To her my thoughts I daily dedicate,
To her my heart I nightly martyrize:
To her my love I lowly do prostrate,
To her my life I wholly sacrifice,
My thought, my heart, my love, my life is she:
And I hers ever only, ever one:
One ever I all vowed hers to be,
One ever I, and others never none.
Then thus Melissa said; Thrice happy Maid,
Whom thou do so enforce to deifie:
That woods, and hills, and valleys, thou have made,
Her name to echo unto heaven hie.
But say, who else vouchsafed thee of grace?
They all (quoth he) me graced goodly well,
That all I praise, but in the highest place,
Vriana, sister unto Astrofell,
In whose brave mind as in a golden cofer,
All heavenly gifts and riches locked are:
More rich then pearls of Ynde, or gold of Opher,
And in her sex more wonderful and rare.
Ne less praise worthy I Theana read,
Whose goodly beams though they be over dight
With mourning stole of careful wydow head,
Yet through that darksome vale do glister bright.
She is the well of bounty and brave mind,
Excelling most in glory and great light:
She is the ornament of womankind,
And Courts chief garlond with all virtues dight.
Therefore great Cynthia her in chiefest grace,
Does hold, and next unto her self advance,
Well worthy she of so honorable place:
For her great worth and noble governance.
Ne less praise worthy is her sister dear,
Fair Marian, the Muses only darling:
Whose beauty shyneth as the morning clear,
With silver deaw upon the roses pearling.
Ne less praise worthy is Mansilia,
Best known by bearing up great Cynthiaes train:
That same is she to whom Daphnaida
Upon her neeces death I did complain.
She is the pattern of true womanhead,
And only mirrhor of feminitie:
Worthy next after Cynthia to tread,
As she is next her in nobility.
Ne less praise worthy Galathea seems,
Then best of all that honorable crew,
Fair Galathea with bright shining beams,
Inflaming feeble eyes that her do view.
She there then waited upon Cynthia,
Yet there is not her won, but here with us
About the borders of our rich Coshma,
Now made of Maa the Nymph delitious.
Ne less praisworthie fair Neaera is,
Neaera ours, not theirs, though there she be,
For of the famous Shure, the Nymph she is,
For high desert, aduaunst to that degree.
She is the blosome of grace and courtesy,
Adorned with all honorable parts:
She is the branch of true nobility,
Beloved of high and low with faithful hearts.
Ne less praisworthie Stella do I read,
Though naught my praises of her needed arre,
Whom verse of noblest shepherd lately dead
Has praised and raised above each other star.
Ne less praisworthie are the sisters three,
The honor of the noble family:
Of which I meanest boast my self to be,
And most that unto them I am so nie.
Phyllis, Charillis, and sweet Amaryllis,
Phyllis the fair, is eldest of the three:
The next to her, is bountiful Charillis.
But th'youngest is the highest in degree.
Phyllis the flower of rare perfection,
Fair spreading forth her leaves with fresh delight,
That with their beauties amorous reflection,
Bereave of sense each rash beholders sight.
But sweet Charillis is the Paragone
Of peerlesse price, and ornament of praise,
Admyr'd of all, yet envied of none,
Through the myld temperance of her goodly rays.
Thrice happy do I hold thee noble swain,
The which art of so rich a spoil possessed,
And it embracing dear without disdain,
Have sole possession in so chaste a breast:
Of all the shepherds daughters which there be,
And yet there be the fairest under sky,
Or that elsewhere I ever yet did see.
A fairer Nymph yet never saw mine eye:
She is the pride and primrose of the rest,
Made by the maker self to be admired:
And like a goodly beacon high addressed,
That is with sparks of heauenle beauty fired.
But Amaryllis, whether fortunate,
Or else unfortunate may I aread,
That freed is from Cupids yoke by fate,
Since which he does new bands adventure dread.
Shepherd what ever thou have heard to be
In this or that praysd diversely apart,
In her thou may them all assembled see.
And sealed up in the threasure of her heart,
Ne thee less worthy gentle Flauia,
For thy chaste life and virtue I esteem,
Ne thee less worthy courteous Candida,
For thy true love and loyalty I deem.
Besides yet many mo that Cynthia serve,
Right noble Nymphs, and high to be commended,
But if I all should praise as they deserve,
This sun would fail me ere I half had ended.
Therefore in closure of a thankful mind,
I deem it best to hold eternally,
Their bounteous deeds and noble favors shrynd,
Then by discourse them to indignifie.
So having said, Aglaura him bespake:
Colin, well worthy were those goodly favors
Bestowd on thee, that so of them do make.
And them requitest with thy thankful labors.
But of great Cynthiaes goodness and high grace,
Finish the story which thou have begun.
More eath (quoth he) it is in such a case,
How to begin, then know how to have done.
For every gift and every goodly meed,
Which she on me bestowd; demands a day,
And every day, in which she did a deed,
Demands a year it duly to display.
Her words were like a stream of honny fleeting,
The which does softly trickle from the hiue:
Hable to melt the hearers heart vnweeting,
And eke to make the dead again alive.
Her deeds were like great glusters of ripe grapes,
Which load the bunches of the fruitful vine:
Offering to fall into each mouth that gapes,
And fill the same with store of timely wine.
Her looks were like beams of the morning Sun,
Forth looking through the windows of the East:
When first the fleecie cattle have begun
Upon the perled grass to make their feast.
Her thoughts are like the fume of Franckincence,
Which from a golden Censer forth does rise:
And throwing forth sweet odours mou^ts fro thence
In rolling globes up to the vauted skies.
There she beholds with high aspiring thought,
The cradle of her own creation:
Emongst the seats of Angels heavenly wrought,
Much like an Angel in all form and fashion.
Colin (said Cuddy then) thou have forgot
Thy self, me seems, too much, to mount so hie:
Such lofty flight, base shepherd seems not,
From flocks and fields, to Angels and to sky.
True (answered he) but her great excellence,
Lifts me above the measure of my might:
That being filled with furious insolence,
I feel my self like one yrapt in spright.
For when I think of her, as often I ought,
Then want I words to speak it fitly forth:
And when I speak of her what I have thought,
I cannot think according to her worth.
Yet will I think of her, yet will I speak,
So long as life my limbs does hold together,
And when as death these vital bands shall break,
Her name recorded I will leave for ever.
Her name in every tree I will endosse,
That as the trees do grow, her name may grow:
And in the ground each where will it engrosse,
And fill with stones, that all men may it know.
The speaking woods and murmuring waters fall,
Her name I Will teach in known terms to frame:
And eke my lambs when for their dams they call,
I Will teach to call for Cynthia by name.
And long while after I am dead and rotten:
Amongst the shepherds daughters dancing rownd,
My lays made of her shall not be forgotten.
But sung by them with flowery gyrlonds crowned.
And ye, who so ye be, that shall surviue:
When as ye hear her memory renewed,
Be witness of her bounty here alive,
Which she to Colin her poor shepherd showed.
Much was the whole assembly of those herds,
Moov'd at his speech, so feelingly he spoke:
And stood awhile astonished at his words,
Till Thestylis at last their silence brake,
Saying, Why Colin, since thou foundst such grace
With Cynthia and all her noble crew:
Why did thou ever leave that happy place,
In which such wealth might unto thee accrue?
And back returnedst to this barrein soil,
Where cold and care and penury do dwell:
Here to keep sheep, with hunger and with toil,
Most wretched he, that is and cannot tell.
Happy indeed (said Colin) I him hold,
That may that blessed presence still enjoy,
Of fortune and of envy vncomptrold,
Which still are wont most happy states t'annoy:
But I by that which little while I proved:
Some part of those enormities did see,
The which in Court continually hooued,
And followd those which happy seemd to be.
Therefore I silly man, whose former days
Had in rude fields been altogether spent,
Dare not adventure such unknown ways,
Nor trust the guile of fortunes blandishment,
But rather chose back to my sheep to turn,
Whose utmost hardness I before had tryde,
Then having learnd repentance late, to mourn
Emongst those wretches which I there descryde.
Shepherd (said Thestylis) it seems of spite
Thou speak thus against their felicity,
Which thou enuiest, rather then of right
That ought in them blameworthie thou do spy.
Cause have I none (quoth he) of cancred will
To quite them ill, that me demeand so well:
But selfe-regard of private good or ill,
Moves me of each, so as I found, to tell
And eke to warn young shepherds wandering wit,
Which through report of that lives painted bliss,
Abandon quiet home, to seek for it,
And leave their lambs to loss misled amiss.
For sooth to say, it is no sort of life,
For shepherd fit to lead in that same place,
Where each one seeks with malice and with strife,
To thrust down other into foul disgrace,
Himself to raise: and he does soonest rise
That best can handle his deceitful wit,
In subtle shifts, and finest sleights devise,
Either by slaundring his well deemed name,
Through leasings lewd, and fained forgerie:
Or else by breeding him some blot of blame,
By creeping close into his secrecy;
To which him needs, a guilefull hollow heart,
Masked with fair dissembling courtesy,
A filed tongue furnished with terms of art,
No art of school, but Courtiers schoolery.
For arts of school have there small countenance,
Counted but toys to busy idle brains,
And there professors find small maintenance,
But to be instruments of others gains.
Ne is there place for any gentle wit,
Unless to please, it self it can apply:
But shouldred is, or out of door quite shit,
As base, or blunt, unmeet for melody.
For each man's worth is measured by his weed,
As hearts by horns or asses by their ears:
Yet asses been not all whose ears exceed,
Nor yet all hearts, that horns the highest bears.
For highest looks have not the highest mind,
Nor haughty words most full of highest thoughts:
But are like bladders blown up with wynd,
That being pricked do vanish into noughts,
Even such is all their vaunted vanity,
Naught else but smoke, that fumeth soon away,
Such is their glory that in simple eye
Seem greatest, when their garments are most gay.
So they themselves for praise of fools do sell,
And all their wealth for painting on a wall;
With price whereof, they buy a golden bell,
And purchase highest rowmes in bower and hall:
Whiles single Truth and simple honesty
Do wander up and down despys'd of all;
Their plain attire such glorious gallantry
Disdaines so much, that none them in does call.
Ah Colin (then said Hobbinol) the blame
Which thou imputest, is too general,
As if not any gentle wit of name,
Nor honest mind might there be found at all.
For well I wot, since I my self was there,
To wait on Lobbin ( Lobbin well thou knew)
Full many worrhie ones then waiting were,
As ever else in Princes Court thou vewest.
Of which, among you many yet remain,
Whose names I cannot readily now guess:
Those that poor Suitors papers do retain,
And those that skill of medicine profess.
And those that do to Cynthia expound,
The ledden of strange languages in charge:
For Cynthia does in sciences abound,
And gives to their professors stipends large.
Therefore unjustly thou do wit them all,
For that which thou mislikedst in a few.
Blame is (quoth he) more blameless general.
Then that which private errors does pursew:
For well I wot, that there amongst them be
Full many persons of right worthy parts,
Both for report of spotless honesty,
And for profession of all learned arts,
Whose praise hereby no whit impaired is,
Though blame do light on those that faulty be,
For all the rest do most-what far amiss,
And yet their own misfaring will not see:
For either they be puffed up with pride,
Or fraught with envy that their galls do swell,
Or they their days to idleness divide,
Or drownded lie in pleasures wastefull well,
In which like Moldwarps nousling still they lurk,
Unmindful of chief parts of manliness,
And do themselves for want of other work,
Vain votaries of laesie love profess,
Whose service high so basely they ensew,
That Cupid self of them ashamed is,
And mustring all his men in Venus view,
Denies them quite for seruitors of his.
And is love then (said Corylas) once known
In Court, and his sweet lore professed there,
I weened sure he was our God alone:
And only woond in fields and forests here,
Not so (quoth he) love most abounds there.
For all the walls and windows there are writ,
All full of love, and love, and love my dear,
And all their talk and study is of it.
Ne any there does brave or valiant seem,
Unless that some gay Mistress badge he bears:
Ne any one himself does ought esteem,
Unless he swim in love up to the ears.
But they of love and of his sacred lere,
(As it should be) all otherwise devise,
Then we poor shepherds are accustomd here,
And him do sue and serve all otherwise.
For with lewd speeches and licentious deeds,
His mighty mysteries they do profane,
And use his idle name to other needs,
But as a complement for courting vain.
So him they do not serve as they profess,
But make him serve to them for sordid uses,
Ah my dread Lord, that do liege hearts possess,
Avenge thy self on them for their abuses.
But we poor shepherds whether rightly so,
Or through our rudeness into error led:
Do make religion how we rashly go,
To serve that God, that is so greatly dred;
For him the greatest of the Gods we deem,
Borne without Sire or couples of one kind,
For Venus self does soly couples seem,
Both male and female through commixture joined.
So pure and spotless Cupid forth she brought,
And in the gardens of Adonis nursed:
Where growing he, his own perfection wrought,
And shortly was of all the Gods the first.
Then got he bow and shafts of gold and lead,
In which so fell and puissant he grew,
That Jove himself his power began to dread,
And taking up to heaven, him godded new.
From thence he shootes his arrows every where
Into the world, at randon as he will,
On us frail men, his wretched vassals here,
Like as himself us pleases, save or spill.
So we him worship, so we him adore
With humble hearts to heaven vplifted hie,
That to true loves he may us evermore
Prefer, and of their grace us dignifie:
Ne is there shepherd, ne yet shepherds swain,
What ever feeds in forest or in field,
That dare with evil deed or leasing vain
Blaspheme his power, or terms unworthy yield.
Shepherd it seems that some celestial rage
Of love (quoth Cuddy) is breathed into thy breast,
That powers forth these oracles so sage,
Of that high power, wherewith thou art possessed.
But never wist I till this present day
Albe of love I always humbly deemed,
That he was such an one, as thou do say,
And so religiously to be esteemed.
Well may it seem by this thy deep insight,
That of that God the Priest thou should be:
So well thou wot'st the mystery of his might,
As if his godhead thou did present see.
Of loves perfection perfectly to speak,
Or of his nature rightly to define,
Indeed (said Colin) passes reasons reach,
And needs his priest to express his power divine.
For long before the world he was y'bore
And bred above in Venus bosom dear:
For by his power the world was made of yore,
And all that therein wondrous does appear.
For how should else things so far from atone
And so great enemies as of them be,
Be ever drawn together into one,
And taught in such accordance to agree.
Through him the cold began to covet heat,
And water fire; the light to mount on hie,
And th'heauie down to peize; the hungry t'eat
And voydnesse to seek full satietie.
So being former foes, they wexed friends,
And began by little learn to love each other:
So being knit, they brought forth other kynds
Out of the fruitful womb of their great mother.
Then first began heaven out of darkness dread
For to appear, and brought forth cheerful day:
Next began the earth to show her naked head,
Out of deep waters which her drowned always.
And shortly after every living wight,
Crept forth like worms out of her slimie nature,
Soon as on them the Suns like giving light,
Had powered kindly heat and formal feature,
Thenceforth they began each one his like to love,
And like himself desire for to beget,
The Lion chose his mate, the Turtle Dove
Her dear, the Dolphin his own Dolphinet,
But man that had the spark of reasons might,
More then the rest to rule his passion:
Chose for his love the fairest in his sight,
Like as himself was fairest by creation.
For beauty is the bayt which with delight
Does man allure, for to enlarge his kind,
Beauty the burning lamp of heavens light,
Darting her beams into each feeble mind:
Against whose power, nor God nor man can find,
Defense; ne ward the danger of the wound,
But being hurt, seek to be medicynd
Of her that first did stir that mortal stownd.
Then do they cry and call to love apace,
With prayers loud importuning the sky,
Whence he them hears, and when he list show grace,
Does grant them grace that otherwise would die.
So love is Lord of all the world by right,
And rules their creatures by his powrfull saw:
All being made the vassalls of his might,
Through secret sense which thereto does the^ draw.
Thus ought all lovers of their lord to deem:
And with chaste heart to honor him always:
But who so else does otherwise esteem,
Are outlawes, and his lore do disobay.
For their desire is base, and does not merit,
The name of love, but of disloyal lust:
Ne among true lovers they shall place inherit,
But as Exuls out of his court be thrust.
So having said, Melissa spoke at will,
Colin, thou now full deeply have divynd:
Of love and beauty and with wondrous skill,
Have Cupid self depainted in his kind.
To thee are all true lovers greatly bound,
That do their cause so mightily defend:
But most, all women are thy debtors found,
That do their bounty still so much commend.
That ill (said Hobbinol) they him requite,
For having loved ever one most dear:
He is repayd with scorn and foul despite,
That yrkes each gentle heart which it does hear.
Indeed (said Lucid) I have often heard
Fair Rosalind of diverse fowly blamed:
For being to that swain too cruel hard,
That her bright glory else has much defamed.
But who can tell what cause had that fair Maid
To use him so that used her so well:
Or who with blame can justly her upbraid,
For loving not? for who can love compel.
And sooth to say, it is foolhardie thing,
Rashly to wyten creatures so divine,
For demigods they be and first did spring
From heaven, though graft in frailnesse feminine.
And well I wot, that often I heard it spoken,
How one that fairest Helene did revile:
Through judgment of the Gods to been ywroken
Lost both his eyes and so remaynd long while,
Till he recanted had his wicked rimes:
And made amends to her with treble praise,
Beware therefore, ye grooms, I read betimes,
How rashly blame of Rosalind ye raise.
Ah shepherds (then said Colin) ye ne weet
How great a guilt upon your heads ye draw:
To make so bold a doom with words unmeet,
Of thing celestial which ye never saw.
For she is not like as the other crew
Of shepherds daughters which emongst you be,
But of divine regard and heavenly hew,
Excelling all that ever ye did see.
Not then to her that scorned thing so base,
But to my self the blame that looked so hie:
So hie her thoughts as she her self have place,
And loath each lowly thing with lofty eye.
Yet so much grace let her vouchsafe to grant
To simple swain, since her I may not love:
Yet that I may her honor paravant,
And praise her worth, though far my wit above.
Such grace shall be some guerdon for the grief,
And long affliction which I have endured:
Such grace sometimes shall give me some relief,
And ease of pain which cannot be recured.
And ye my fellow shepherds which do see
And hear the languours of my too long dying,
Unto the world for ever witness be,
That hers I die, naught to the world denying,
This simple trophe of her great conquest.
So having ended, he from ground did rise,
And after him vprose eke all the rest:
All loath to part, but that the glooming skies,
Warnd them to draw their bleating flocks to rest.
FINIS.
ASTROPHEL.

A Pastoral Elegy upon the death of the most Noble and valorous Knight, Sir
Philip Sidney.

Dedicated To the most beautiful and virtuous Lady, the Countess of Essex.

Astrophel.
Shepherds that wont on pipes of oaten reed,
Often times to plain your loves concealed smart:
And with your piteous lays have learnd to breed
Compassion in a country lasses heart.
Hearken ye gentle shepherds to my song,
And place my doleful plaint your plaints among.
To you alone I sing this mournful verse,
The mournfulst verse that ever man heard tell:
To you whose softened hearts it may empierse,
With dolours dart for death of Astrophel.
To you I sing and to none other wight,
For well I wot my rymes been rudely dight.
Yet as they been, if any nycer wit
Shall hap to hear, or covet them to read:
Think he, that such are for such ones most fit,
Made not to please the living but the dead.
And if in him found pity ever place,
Let him be moov'd to pity such a case.
A Gentle Shepherd borne in Arcady,
Of gentlest race that ever shepherd bore:
About the grassie bancks of Haemony,
Did keep his sheep, his little stock and store.
Full carefully he kept them day and night,
In fairest fields, and Astrophel he hight.
Young Astrophel the pride of shepherds praise,
Young Astrophel the rusticke lasses love:
Far passing all the pastors of his days,
In all that seemly shepherd might behoue.
In one thing only failing of the best,
That he was not so happy as the rest.
For from the time that first the Nymph his mother
Him forth did bring, and taught her lambs to feed:
A sclender swain excelling far each other,
In comely shape, like her that did him breed.
He grew up fast in goodness and in grace,
And doubly fair wox both in mind and face.
Which daily more and more he did augment,
With gentle usage and demeanure myld:
That all men's hearts with secret rauishment
He stole away, and weetingly beguyld.
Ne spite it self that all good things does spill,
Found ought in him, that she could say was ill.
His sports were fair, his ioyance innocent,
Sweet without sour, and honny without gall:
And he himself seemd made for meriment,
Merrily masking both in bower and hall.
There was no pleasure nor delightful play,
When Astrophel so ever was away.
For he could pipe and dance, and caroll sweet,
Emongst the shepherds in their shearing feast:
As Summers lark that with her song does greet,
The dawning day forth coming from the East.
And lays of love he also could compose,
Thrice happy she, whom he to praise did chose.
Full many Maidens often did him woo,
Them to vouchsafe emongst his rimes to name,
Or make for them as he was wont to do,
For her that did his heart with love inflame.
For which they promised to dight for him,
Gay chapelets of flowers and gyrlonds trim.
And many a Nymph both of the wood and brook,
Soon as his oaten pipe began to shrill:
Both crystal wells and shadie groves forsook,
To hear the charms of his enchanting skill.
And brought him presents, flowers if it were prime,
Or mellow fruit if it were harvest time.
But he for none of them did care a whit,
Yet wood Gods for them often sighed sore:
Ne for their gifts unworthy of his wit,
Yet not unworthy of the countries store.
For one alone he cared, for one he sight,
His life's desire, and his dear loves delight.
Stella the Fair, the fairest star in sky,
As fair as Venus or the fairest fair:
A fairer star saw never living eye,
Shot her sharp pointed beams through purest air.
Her he did love, her he alone did honor,
His thoughts, his rimes, his songs were all upon her.
To her he vowed the service of his days,
On her he spent the riches of his wit:
For her he made hymns of immortal praise,
Of only her he sung, he thought, he writ.
Her, and but her of love he worthy deemed,
For all the rest but little he esteemed.
Ne her with idle words alone he wowed,
And verses vain (yet verses are not vain)
But with brave deeds to her sole service vowed,
And bold atchieuements her did entertain.
For both in deeds and words he nourtred was,
Both wise and hardy (too hardy alas)
In wrestling nimble, and in renning swift,
In shooting steddie, and in swimming strong:
Well made to strike, to throw, to leap, to lift,
And all the sports that shepherds are among.
In every one he vanquished every one,
He vanquished all, and vanquished was of none.
Besides, in hunting such felicity,
Or rather infelicitie he found:
That every field and forest far away,
He sought, where saluage beasts do most abound.
No beast so saluage but he could it kill,
No chase so hard, but he therein had skill.
Such skill matched with such courage as he had,
Did prick him forth with proud desire of praise:
To seek abroad, of danger naught y'drad,
His mistress name, and his own fame to raise.
What need peril to be sought abroad,
Since round about us, it does make abode?
It fortuned as he, that perilous game
In foreign soil pursued far away:
Into a forest wide, and waste he came
Where store he heard to be of saluage pray.
So wide a forest and so waste as this,
Nor famous Ardeyn, nor foul Arlo is.
There his welwouen toils and subtle trains,
He laid the brutish nation to enwrap:
So well he wrought with practice and with pains,
That he of them great troops did soon entrap.
Full happy man (misweening much) was he,
So rich a spoil within his power to see.
Eftsoons all heedlesse of his dearest hale,
Full greedily into the heard he thrust:
To slaughter them, and work their final bale,
Least that his toil should of their troops be brust.
Wide wounds emongst them many one he made,
Now with his sharp borespear, now with his blade.
His care was all how he them all might kill,
That none might escape (so partial unto none)
Ill mind so much to mind another ill,
As to become unmindful of his own.
But pardon that unto the cruel skies,
That from himself to them withdrew his eyes.
So as he raged emongst that beastly rout,
A cruel beast of most accursed brood:
Upon him turned (despeyre makes cowards stout)
And with fell tooth accustomed to blood,
Launched his thigh with so mischievous might,
That it both bone and muscles ryued quight.
So deadly was the dint and deep the wound,
And so huge streams of blood thereout did flow:
That he endured not the direful stound,
But on the cold dear earth himself did throw.
The whiles the captive heard his nets did rend,
And having none to let, to wood did wend.
Ah where were ye this while his shepherd pears,
To whom alive was naught so dear as he:
And ye fair Mayds the matches of his years,
Which in his grace did boast you most to be?
Ah where were ye, when he of you had need,
To stop his wound that wondrously did bleed?
Ah wretched boy the shape of drery head,
And sad ensample of man's suddein end:
Full little fails but thou shall be dead,
Unpitied, vnplaynd, of foe or friend.
Whilst none is nigh, thine eylids up to close,
And kiss thy lips like faded leaves of rose.
A sort of shepherds sewing of the chase,
As they the forest raunged on a day:
By fate or fortune came unto the place,
Where as the lucklesse boy yet bleeding lay.
Yet bleeding lay, and yet would still have bled,
Had not good hap those shepherds thither led.
They stopped his wound (too late to stop it was)
And in their arms then softly did him rear:
Tho (as he wild) unto his loved less,
His dearest love him dolefully did bear.
The dolefulst bear that ever man did see,
Was Astrophel, but dearest unto me.
She when she saw her love in such a plight,
With crudled blood and filthy gore deformed:
That wont to be with flowers and gyrlonds dight,
And her dear ^auours dearly well adorned
Her face, the fairest face, that eye mote see,
She likewise did deforme like him to be.
Her yellow locks that shone so bright and long,
As Sunny beams in fairest summers day:
She fiersly tore, and with outrageous wrong
From her red cheeks the roses rent away.
And her fair breast the threasury of joy,
She spoyld thereof, and filled with annoy.
His palled face impictured with death,
She bathed often with tears and dried often:
And with sweet kisses sucked the wasting breath,
Out of his lips like lillies pale and soft.
And often she called to him, who answered naught,
But only by his looks did tell his thought.
The rest of her impatient regret,
And piteous moan the which she for him made:
No tongue can tell, nor any forth can set,
But he whose heart like sorrow did invade.
At last when pain his vital powers had spent,
His wasted life her weary lodge forwent.
Which when she saw, she stayed not a whit,
But after him did make untimely haste:
Forth with her ghost out of her corpse did flit,
And followed her make like Turtle chaste.
To prove that death their hearts cannot divide,
Which living were in love so firmly tide.
The Gods which all things see, this same beheld,
And pitying this pair of lovers true:
Transformed them there lying on the field,
Into one flower that is both red and blew.
It first grows red, and then to blew does fade,
Like Astrophel, which thereinto was made.
And in the midst thereof a star appears,
As fairly formd as any star in skies:
Resembling Stella in her freshest years,
Forth darting beams of beauty from her eyes,
And all the day it stands full of deow,
Which is the tears, that from her eyes did flow.
That herb of some, Starlight is called by name,
Of others Penthia, though not so well:
But thou where ever thou do find the same,
From this day forth do call it Astrophel.
And when so ever thou it up do take,
Do pluck it softly for that shepherds sake.
Hereof when tidings far abroad did pass,
The shepherds all which loved him full dear:
And sure full dear of all he loved was,
Did thither flock to see what they did hear.
And when that pitteous spectacle they vewed,
The same with bitter tears they all bedewed.
And every one did make exceeding moan,
With inward anguish and great grief oppressed:
And every one did weep and wail, and moan,
And means deviz'd to show his sorrow best.
That from that hour since first on grassie green,
Shepherds kept sheep, was not like mourning seen.
But first his sister that Clorinda hight,
The gentlest shepherdess that lives this day:
And most resembling both in shape and spright
Her brother dear, began this doleful lay.
Which least I mar the sweetness of the vearse,
In sort as she it sung, I will rehearse.
AY me, to whom shall I my case complain,
That may compassion my impatient grief?
Or where shall I unfold my inward pain,
That my enriuen heart may find relief?
Shall I unto the heavenly powers it show?
Or unto earthly men that dwell below?
To heavens? ah they alas the authors were,
And workers of my vnremedied woe:
For they foresee what to us happens here,
And they foresaw, yet suffered this be so.
From them comes good, from them comes also il,
That which they made, who can them warn to spill.
To men? ah they alas like wretched be,
And subject to the heavens ordinance:
Bound to abide what ever they decree,
Their best redress, is their best sufferance.
How then can they like wetched comfort me,
The which no less, need comforted to be?
Then to my self will I my sorrow mourn,
Since none alive like sorrowful remains:
And to my self my plaints shall back return,
To pay their usury with doubled pains.
The woods, the hills, the rivers shall resound
The mournful accent of my sorrows ground.
VVoods, hills and rivers, now are desolate,
Since he is gone the which them all did grace:
And all the fields do wail their widow state,
Since death their fairest flower did late deface.
The fairest flower in field that ever grew,
Was Astrophel; that was, we all may rue.
What cruel hand of cursed foe unknown,
Has cropped the stalk which bore so fair a flower?
Untimely cropped, before it well were grown,
And clean defaced in untimely hour.
Great loss to all that ever him see,
Great loss to all, but greatest loss to me.
Break now your gyrlonds, O ye shepherds lasses,
Since the fair flower, which them adornd, is gone:
The flower, which them adornd, is gone to ashes,
Never again let less put gyrlond on.
Instead of gyrlond, wear sad Cypres now,
And bitter Elder, broken from the bow.
Ne ever sing the loue-layes which he made,
Who ever made such lays of love as he?
Ne ever read the riddles, which he said
Unto yourselues, to make you merry glee.
Your merry glee is now laid all abed,
Your merry maker now alas is dead.
Death the deuourer of all worlds delight,
Has robbed you and rest fro me my joy:
Both you and me, and all the world he quight
Has robbed of ioyance, and lest sad annoy.
Joy of the world, and shepherds pride was he,
Shepherds hope never like again to see.
Oh death that have us of such riches rest,
Tell us at least, what have thou with it done?
What is become of him whose flower here left
Is but the shadow of his likeness gone.
Scarce like the shadow of that which he was,
Naught like, but that he like a shade did pas.
But that immortal spirit, which was decked
With all the dowries of celestial grace:
By sovereign choice from th'heuenly quires select,
And lineally derived from Angels race,
O what is now of it become aread.
Ay me, can so divine a thing be dead?
Ah no: it is not dead, ne can it die,
But lives for aie, in blisfull Paradise:
Where like a newborn babe it soft does lie,
In bed of lillies wrapped in tender wise.
And compast all about with roses sweet,
And dainty violets from head to feet.
There thousand birds all of celestial brood,
To him do sweetly caroll day and night:
And with strange notes, of him well understood,
Lull him a sleep in Angelick delight;
Whilst in sweet dream to him presented be
Immortal beauties, which no eye may see.
But he them sees and takes exceeding pleasure
Of their divine aspects, appearing plain,
And kindling love in him above all measure,
Sweet love still joyous, never feeling pain.
For what so goodly form he there does see,
He may enjoy from jealous rancor free.
There lives he in everlasting blis,
Sweet spirit never fearing more to die:
Ne dreading harm from any foes of his,
Ne fearing saluage beasts more cruelty.
Whilst we here wretches wail his private lack,
And with vain vows do often call him back.
But live thou there still happy, happy spirit,
And give us leave thee here thus to lament:
Not thee that do thy heavens joy inherit,
But our own selves that here in dole are drent.
Thus do we weep and wail, and wear our eyes,
Mourning in others, our own miseries.
Which when she ended had, another swain
Of gentle wit and dainty sweet device:
Whom Astrophel full dear did entertain,
Whilst here he lived, and held in passing price,
Hight Thestylis, began his mournful turn,
And made the Muses in his song to mourn.
And after him full many other more,
As every one in order loved him best,
Began dight themselves to express their inward woe,
With doleful lays unto the time addressed.
The which I here in order will rehearse,
As fittest flowers to deck his mournful hearse.
The mourning Muse of Thestylis.
COme forth ye Nymphs come forth, forsake you watery bowres,
Forsake your mossy caves, and help me to lament:
Help me to tune my doleful notes to gurgling sound
Of Liffies tumbling streams: Come let salt tears of ours,
Mix with his waters fresh. O come let one consent
Join us to mourn with wailfull plaints the deadly wound
Which fatal clap has made; decreed by higher powers.
The dreery day in which they have from us yrent
The noblest plant that might from East to West be found.
Mourn, mourn, great Philips fall, mourn we his woeful end,
Whom spiteful death has pluct untimely from the tree,
Whiles yet his years in flower, did promise worthy fruit.
Ah dreadful Mars why did thou not thy knight defend?
What wrathful mood, what fault of ours has moved thee
Of such a shining light to leave us destitute?
Tho with benign aspect sometime did us behold,
Thou have in Britons valor taken delight of old,
And with thy presence often vouchsaft to attribute
Fame and renown to us for glorious martial deeds.
But now their ireful bemes have chilled our hearts with cold,
Thou have estranged thy self, and deignest not our land:
Far off to others now, thy favor honor breeds,
And high disdain does cause thee shun our clime (I fear)
For had thou not been wroth, or that time near at hand,
Thou would have heard the cry that woeful England made,
Eke Zelands piteous plaints, and Hollands toren hear
Would happily have appeased thy divine angry mind:
Thou should have seen the trees refuse to yield their shade
And wailing to let fall the honor of their head,
And birds in mournful tunes lamenting in their kind:
Up from his tomb the mighty Corineus rose,
Who cursing often the fates that this mishap had bred,
His hoary locks he tare, calling the heavens unkind.
The Thames was heard to roar, the Reyne and eke the Mose,
The Schald, the Danow self this great mischance did rue,
With torment and with grief; their fountains pure and clear
Were troubled, and with swelling floods declared their woes.
The Muses comfortles, the Nymphs with paled hue,
The Siluan Gods likewise came running far and near,
And all with tears bedeawd, and eyes cast up on hie,
O help, O help ye Gods, they ghastly began to cry.
O change the cruel fate of this so rare a wight,
And grant that natures course may measure out his age.
The beasts their food forsook, and trembling fearfully,
Each sought his cave or den, this cry did them so fright.
Out from amid the waves, by storm then stirred to rage
This cry did cause to rise the old father Ocean hoare,
Who grave with eld, and full of majesty in sight,
Spoke in this wise. Refrain (quoth he) your tears and plaints,
Cease these your idle words, make vain requests no more.
No humble speech nor moan, may move the fixed stint
Of destiny or death: Such is his will that paints
The earth with colors fresh; the darkest skies with store
Of starry lights: And though your tears a heart of flint
Might tender make, yet naught herein they will prevail.
Whiles thus he said, the noble knight, who began to feel
His vital force to faint, and death with cruel dint
Of direful dart his mortal body to assail,
With eyes lift up to heaven, and courage frank as steel,
With cheerful face; where valor lively was expressed,
But humble mind he said. O Lord if ought this frail
And earthly carcass have thy service sought t'aduaunce,
If my desire have been still to relieve the oppressed:
If Justice to maintain that valor I have spent
Which thou me gave; or if henceforth I might advance
Thy name, thy truth, then spare me (Lord) if thou think best,
Forbear these unripe years. But if thy will be bent,
If that prefixed time be come which thou have set,
Through pure and fervent faith, I hope now to be plast,
In th'euerlasting blis, which with thy precious blood
Thou purchase did for us. With that a sigh he fet,
And straight a cloudie mist his senses ouercast,
His lips waxt pale and wan, like damask roses bud
Cast from the stalk, or like in field to purple flower,
Which languisheth being shred by culter as it past.
A trembling chilly cold ran through their veins, which were
With eyes brimfull of tears to see his fatal hour,
Whose blustering sighs at first their sorrow did declare,
Next, murmuring ensude; at last they not forbear
Plain outcries, all against the heau's that enuiously
Deprived us of a spright so perfect and so rare.
The Sun his lightsom beams did shroud, and hide his face
For grief, whereby the earth feared night eternally:
The mountains each where shook, the rivers turned their streams,
And the air began winterlike to rage and fret apace:
And grisly ghosts by night were seen, and fiery gleames,
Amid the clouds with claps of thunder, that did seem
To rent the skies, and made both man and beast afeard:
The birds of ill presage this lucklesse chance foretold,
By dernfull noise, and dogs with howling made man deem
Some mischief was at hand: for such they do esteem
As tokens of mishap, and so have done of old.
Ah that thou had but heard his lovely Stella plain
Her grievous loss, or seen her heavy mourning cheer,
While she with woe oppressed, her sorrows did unfold.
Her hair hung lose neglect, about her shoulders twain,
And from those two bright stars, to him sometime so dear
Her heart sent drops of pearl, which fell in foyson down
Twixt lilly and the rose. She wroong her hands with pain,
And piteously began say, My true and faithful pheere,
Alas and woe is me, why should my fortune frown
On me thus frowardly to rob me of my joy?
What cruel envious hand has taken thee away,
And with thee my content, my comfort and my stay?
Thou only wast the ease of trouble and annoy,
When they did me assail, in thee my hopes did rest.
Alas what now is left but grief, that night and day
Afflicts this woeful life, and with continual rage
Torments ten thousand ways my mtserable breast?
O greedy envious heaven what needed thee to have
Enricht with such a Jewel this unhappy age,
To take it back again so soon? Alas when shall
Mine eyes see ought that may content them, since thy grave
My only treasure hides the joys of my poor heart?
As herewith thee on earth I lived, even so equal
Me thinks it were with thee in heaven I did abide:
And as our troubles all we here on earth did part,
So reason would that there of thy most happy state
I had my share. Alas if thou my trusty guide
Were wont to be, how can thou leave me thus alone
In darkness and astray; weak, weary, desolate,
Plung d in a world of woe, refusing for to take
Me with thee, to the place of rest where thou art gone.
This said, she held her peace, for sorrow tide her tongue;
And instead of more words, seemd that her eyes a lake
Of tears had been, they flowed so plenteously therefro:
And with her sobs and sighs, the air round about her roong.
If Venus when she waild her dear Adonis slain,
Ought moov'd in thy fires heart compassion of her woe,
His noble sisters plaints, her sighs and tears among,
Would sure have made thee mild, and inly rue her pain:
Aurora half so fair, her self did never show,
When from old Tithons bed, she weeping did arise.
The blinded archer-boy, like lark in shower of rain
Sat bathing of his wings, and glad the time did spend
Under those cristall drops, which fell from her fair eyes,
And at their brightest beams him proynd in lovely wise.
Yet sorry for her grief, which he could not amend,
The gentle boy ga^ wipe her eyes, and clear those lights,
Those lights through which, his glory and his conquests shine.
The Graces tuckt her hair, which hung like threads of gold,
Along her yuorie breast the treasure of delights.
All things with her to weep, it seemed, did incline,
The trees, the hills, the dales, the caves, the stones so cold.
The air did help them mourn, with dark clouds, rain and mist,
Forbearing many a day to clear it self again,
Which made them eftsoons fear the days of Pirrha should,
Of creatures spoil the earth, their fatal threads untwist.
For Phoebus gladsome rays were wished for in vain,
And with her quiuering light Latonas daughter fair,
And Charles-waine eke refused to be the shipmans guide.
On Neptune war was made by Aeolus and his train,
Who letting loose the winds, tossed and tormented the air,
So that on every coast men shipwreck did abide,
Or else were swallowed up in open sea with waves,
And such as came to shore, were beaten with despair.
The Medwaies silver streams, that wont so still to slide,
Were troubled now and wroth: whose hidden hollow caves
Along his banks with fog then shrouded from man's eye,
Ay Phillip did resownd, aie Phillip they did cry.
His Nimphs were seen no more (though custom still it craves)
With hair spread to the wynd themselves to bath or sport,
Or with the hook or net, barefooted wantonly
The pleasant dainty fish to entangle or deceive.
The shepherds left their wonted places of resort,
Their bagpipes now were still; their loving merry lays
Were quite forgot; and now their flocks, me^ might perceive
To wander and to straie, all carelessly neglect.
And in the stead of mirth and pleasure, nights and days
Naught else was to be heard, but woes, complaints and moan.
But thou (O blessed soul) do happily not respect,
These tears we shead, though full of loving pure affect,
Having affixt thine eyes on that most glorious throne,
Where full of majesty the high creator reigns.
In whose bright shining face thy joys are all complete,
Whose love kindles thy spright; where happy always one,
Thou live in blis that earthly passion never stains;
Where from the purest spring the sacred Nectar sweet
Is thy continual drink: where thou do gather now
Of well employed life, th'inestimable gains.
There Venus on thee smiles, Apollo gives thee place,
And Mars in reverent wise does to thy virtue bow,
And decks his fiery sphere, to do thee honor most.
In highest part whereof, thy valor for to grace,
A chair of gold he setts to thee, and there does tell
Thy noble acts arew, whereby even they that boast
Themselves of ancient fame, as Pirrhus, Hanniball,
Scipio and Caesar, with the rest that did excel
In martial prowess, high thy glory do admire.
All hail therefore O worthy Phillip immortal,
The flower of Sydneyes race, the honor of thy name,
Whose worthy praise to sing, my Muses not aspire,
But sorrowful and sad these tears to thee let fall,
Yet wish their verses might so far and wide thy fame
Extend, that enuies rage, nor time might end the same.
A pastoral Aeglogue upon the death of Sir Phillip Sidney Knight, etc.
Lycon. Colin. Colin, well ^its thy sad cheer this sad stownd,
This woeful stownd, wherein all things complain
This great mishap, this grievous loss of owres.
Hear'st thou the Orown? how with hollow sownd
He slides away, and murmuring does plain,
And seems to say unto the sading flowers,
Along his banks, unto the bared trees;
Phillisides is dead. Up jolly swain,
Thou that with skill can tune a doleful lay,
Help him to mourn. My heart with grief does freese,
Hoarse is my voice with crying, else a part
Sure would I bear, though rude: But as I may,
With sobs and sighs I second will thy song,
And so express the sorrows of my heart.

Colin. Ah Lycon, Lycon, what need skill, to teach
A grieved mind power forth his plaints? how long
Has the pore Turtle gone to school (weenest thou)
To learn to mourn her lost make? No, no, each
Creature by nature can tell how to wail.
See not these flocks, how sad they wander now?
Seems their leaders bell their bleating tunes
In doleful sound. Like him, not one does fail
With hanging head to show a heavy cheer,
What bird (I pray thee) have thou seen, that prunes
Himself of late? did any cheerful note
Come to thine ears, or gladsome sight appear
Unto thine eyes, since that same fatal hour?
Has not the air put on his mourning coat,
And testfied his grief with flowing tears?
Since then, it seems each thing to his power
Does us inuit to make a sad consort;
Come let us join our mournful song with theirs.
Grief will endite, and sorrow will enforce
Thy voice, and Echo will our words report.

Lyc. Though my rude rymes, ill with thy verses frame,
That others far excel; yet will I force
My self to answer thee the best I can,
And honor my base words with his high name.
But if my plaints annoy thee where thou sit
In secret shade or cave; vouchsafe (O Pan)
To pardon me, and here this hard constraint
With patience while I sing, and pity it.
And eke ye rural Muses, that do dwell
In these wild woods; If ever piteous plaint
We did endite, or taught a woeful mind
With words of pure affect, his grief to tell,
Instruct me now. Now Colin then go on,
And I will follow thee, though far behind.

Colin. Phillisides is dead. O harmfull death,
O deadly harm. Unhappy Albion
When shall thou see among thy shepherds all,
Any so sage, so perfect? Whom uneath
Envy could touch for virtuous life and skill;
Courteous, valiant, and liberal.
Behold the sacred Pales, where with hair
Untrust she sitts, in shade of yonder hill.
And her fair face bent sadly down, does send
A flood of tears to bathe the earth; and there
Does call the heavens despightfull, envious,
Cruel his fate, that made so short an end
Of that same life, well worthy to have been
Prolongd with many years, happy and famous.
The Nymphs and Oreades her round about
Do sit lamenting on the grassie grene;
And with shrill cries, beating their whitest breasts,
Accuse the direful dart that death sent out
To give the fatal stroke. The stars they blame,
That deaf or careless seem at their request.
The pleasant shade of stately groves they shun;
They leave their cristall springs, where they wont frame
Sweet bowres of Myrtel twigs and Laurel fair,
To sport themselves free from the scorching Sun.
And now the hollow caves where horror dark
Does dwell, whence banished is the gladsome air
They seek; and there in mourning spend their time
With wailfull tunes, whiles wolves do howl and bark,
And seem to bear a bourdon to their plaint.

Lyc. Phillisides is dead. O doleful ryme.
Why should my tongue express thee? who is left
Now to uphold thy hopes, when they do faint,
Lycon unfortunate? What spiteful fate,
What lucklesse destiny has thee bereft
Of thy chief comfort; of thy only stay?
Where is become thy wonted happy state,
(Alas) wherein through many a hill and dale,
Through pleasant woods, and many an unknown way,
Along the banks of many silver streams,
Thou with him yodest; and with him did scale
The craggie rocks of th'Alpes and Appenine?
Still with the Muses sporting, while those beams
Of virtue kindled in his noble breast,
Which after did so gloriously forth shine?
But (woe is me) they now yquenched are
All suddeinly, and death has them oppressed.
Lo father Neptune, with sad countenance,
How he sitts mourning on the strond now bare,
Yonder, where The Ocean with his rolling waves
The white feet washes (wailing this mischance)
Of Dover cliffes. His sacred skirt about
The sea-gods all are set; from their moist caves
All for his comfort gathered there they be.
The Thamis rich, the Humber rough and stout,
The fruitful Seuerne, with the rest are come
To help their Lord to mourn, and eke to see
The doleful sight, and sad pomp funeral
Of the dead corpse passing through his kingdom.
And all their heads with Cypres gyrlonds crowned
With woeful shrikes salute him great and small.
Eke wailfull Echo, forgetting her dear
Narcissus, their last accents, does resownd.

Col. Phillisides is dead. O lucklesse age;
O widow world; O brooks and fountains clear;
O hills, O dales, O woods that often have rong
With his sweet caroling, which could assuage
The fiercest wrath of Tygre or of Bear.
Ye Siluans, Fawnes, and Satyrs, that among
These thickets often have daunst after his pipe,
Ye Nymphs and Nayades with golden hear,
That often have left your purest cristall springs
To harken to his lays, that coulden wipe
Away all grief and sorrow from your hearts.
Alas who now is left that like him sings?
When shall you hear again like harmony?
So sweet a sownd, who to you now imparts?
Lo where engraued by his hand yet lives
The name of Stella, in yonder bay tree.
Happy name, happy tree; fair may you grow,
And spread your sacred branch, which honor gives,
To famous Emperors, and Poets crown.
Unhappy flock that wander scattred now,
What marvel if through grief ye woxen lean,
Forsake your food, and hang your heads adowne?
For such a shepherd never shall you guide,
whose parting, has of weal bereft you clean.

Lyc. Phillisides is dead. O happy sprite,
That now in heaven with blessed souls do bide:
Look down a while from where thou sitst above,
And see how busy shepherds be to endite
Sad songs of grief, their sorrows to declare,
And grateful memory of their kind love.
Behold my self with Colin, gentle swain
(Whose learned Muse thou cherisht most whyleare)
Where we thy name recording, seek to ease
The inward torment and tormenting pain,
That thy departure to us both has bred;
Ne can each others sorrow yet appease.
Behold the fountains now left desolate,
And with red grass with cypres boughs be-spred,
Behold these flowers which on thy grave we strew;
Which faded, show the giuers faded state,
(Though eke they show their fervent zeal and pure)
Whose only comfort on thy welfare grew.
Whose prayers importune shall the heau's for ay,
That to thy ashes, rest they may assure:
That learned shepherds honor may thy name
With yearly praises, and the Nymphs always
Thy tomb may deck with fresh and sweetest flowers;
And that for ever may endure thy fame.

Colin. The Sun (lo) hastened has his face to steep
In western waves: and the air with stormy showers
Warnes us to drive homewards our silly sheep,
Lycon, lett's rise, and take of them good keep.


Virtute summa: caetera fortuna. L. B.
An Elegy, or friends passion, for his Astrophill. Written upon the death of
the right Honorable sir Phillip Sidney Knight, Lord governor of Flushing.
AS then, no wind at all there blew,
No swelling cloud, accloid the air,
The sky, like grass of watchet hew,
Reflected Phoebus golden hair,
The garnisht tree, no pendant stird,
No voice was heard of any bird.
There might you see the burly Bear,
The Lion king, the Elephant,
The maiden Unicorn was there,
So was Acteons horned plant,
And what of wild or tame are found,
Were coucht in order on the ground.
Alcides speckled poplar tree,
The palm that Monarchs do obtain,
With Love juice staind the mulberie,
The fruit that dewes the Poets brain,
And Phillis philbert there away,
Comparde with myrtle and the bay.
The tree that coffins does adorn,
With stately height threatening the sky,
And for the bed of Love forlorn,
The black and doleful Ebonie,
All in a circle compast were,
Like to an Ampitheater.
Upon the branches of those trees,
The airie winged people sat,
Distinguished in od degrees,
One sort is this, another that,
Here Philomell, that knows full well,
What force and wit in love does dwell.
The skiebred Egle royal bird,
Percht there upon an oak above,
The Turtle by him never stird,
Example of immortal love.
The swan that sings about to die,
Leaving Meander stood thereby.
And that which was of wonder most,
The Phoenix left sweet Arabie:
And on a Caedar in this coast,
Built up her tomb of spicerie,
As I conjecture by the same,
Preparde to take her dying flame.
In midst and center of this plot,
I saw one groueling on the grass:
A man or stone, I knew not that,
No stone, of man the figure was,
And yet I could not count him one,
More than the image made of stone.
At length I might perceive him rear
His body on his elbow end:
Earthly and pale with ghastly cheer,
Upon his knees he upward tend,
Seeming like one in uncouth stound,
To be ascending out the ground.
A grievous sigh forthwith he throws,
As might have torn the vital strings,
Then down his cheeks the tears so flows,
As does the stream of many springs.
So thunder rends the cloud in twain,
And makes a passage for the rain.
Incontinent with trembling sound,
He woefully began to complain,
Such were the accents as might wound,
And tear a diamond rock in twain,
After his throbs did somewhat stay,
Thus heavily he began to say.
O sun (said he) seeing the sun,
On wretched me why do thou shine,
My star is fallen, my comfort done,
Out is the apple of my eine,
Shine upon those possess delight,
And let me live in endless might.
O grief that lie upon my soul,
As heavy as a mount of lead,
The remnant of my life control,
Consort me quickly with the dead,
Half of this heart, this sprite and will,
Di'de in the breast of Astrophill.
And you compassionate of my woe,
Gentle birds, beasts and shadie trees,
I am assurde ye long to kno,
What be the sorrows me agreeu's,
Listen ye then to that insu'th,
And hear a tale of tears and ruthe.
You knew, who knew not Astrophill,
(That I should live to say I knew,
And have not in possession still)
Things known permit me to renew,
Of him you know his merit such,
I cannot say, you hear too much.
Within these woods of Arcadie,
He chief delight and pleasure took,
And on the mountain Parthenie,
Upon the crystal liquid brook,
The Muses met him every day,
That taught him sing, to write and say.
When he descended down to the mount,
His personage seemed most divine,
A thousand graces one might count,
Upon his lovely cheerful eine,
To hear him speak and sweetly smile,
You were in Paradise the while.
A sweet attractiue kind of grace,
A full assurance given by looks,
Continual comfort in a face,
The lineaments of Gospel books,
I trow that countenance cannot lie,
Whose thoughts are legible in the eye.
Was ever eye, did see that face,
Was never ear, did hear that tongue,
Was never mind, did mind his grace,
That ever thought the travel long,
But eyes, and ears, and every thought,
Were with his sweet perfections caught.
O God, that such a worthy man,
In whom so rare deserts did reign,
Desired thus, must leave us than,
And we to wish for him in vain,
O could the stars that bred that wit,
In force no long^^ fixed sit.
Then being filled with learned dew,
The Muses willed him to love,
That instrument can aptly show,
How finely our conceits will move,
As Bacchus opes dissembled hearts,
So love sets out our better parts.
Stella, a Nymph within this wood,
Most rare and rich of heavenly blis,
The highest in his fancy stood,
And she could well demerite this,
It Is likely they acquainted soon,
He was a Sun, and she a Moon.
Our Astrophill did Stella love,
O Stella vaunt of Astrophrill,
Albeit thy graces gods may move,
Where will thou find an Astrophill,
The rose and lilly have their prime,
And so has beauty but a time.
Although thy beauty do exceed,
In common sight of every eye,
Yet in his Poesies when we reed,
It is apparent more thereby,
He that has love and judgment to,
Sees more than any other do.
Then Astrophill has honored thee,
For when thy body is extinct,
Thy graces shall eternal be,
And live by virtue of his ink,
For by his verses he does give,
To short liude beauty aye to live.
Above all others this is he,
Which erst approved in his song,
That love and honor might agree,
And that pure love will do no wrong,
Sweet saints it is no sin nor blame,
To love a man of virtuous name.
Did never love so sweetly breath
In any mortal breast before,
Did never Muse inspire beneath,
A Poets brain with finer store:
He wrote of love with high conceit,
And beauty reard above her height.
Then Pallas afterward attyrde,
Our Astrophill with her device,
Whom in his armor heaven admyrde.
As of the nation of the skies,
He sparkled in his arms afarrs,
As he were dight with fiery stars.
The blaze whereof when Mars beheld,
(An envious eye does see afar)
Such majesty (quoth he) is seeld,
Such majesty my mart may mar,
Perhaps this may a suter be,
To set Mars by his deity.
In this surmize he made with speed,
An iron cane wherein he put,
The thunder that in clouds do breed,
The flame and bolt together shut.
With privy force burst out again,
And so our Astrophill was slain.
His word (was flaine) straightway did move,
And natures inward life strings twitch,
The sky immediately above,
Was dimd with hideous clouds of pitch,
The wrestling winds from out the ground,
Filled all the air with rattling sound.
The bending trees expressed a groan,
And sighed the sorrow of his fall,
The forest beasts made ruthful moan,
The birds did tune their mourning call,
And Philomell for Astrophill,
Unto her notes annexed a phill.
The Turtle dove with tunes of ruthe,
Showed feeling passion of his death,
Me thought she said I tell thee truth,
Was never he that drew in breath,
Unto his love more trusty found,
Than he for whom our griefs abound.
The swan that was in presence here,
Began his funeral dirge to sing,
Good things (quoth he) may scarce appear,
But pass away with speedy wing.
This mortal life as death is tried,
And death gives life, and so he di'de.
The general sorrow that was made,
Among the creatures of kind,
Fired the Phoenix where she laid,
Her ashes flying with the wind,
So as I might with reason see,
That such a Phoenix nere should be.
Happily the cinders driven about,
May breed an offspring near that kind,
But hardly a peer to that I doubt,
It cannot sink into my mind,
Than under branches ere can be,
Of worth and value as the tree.
The Egle marked with pearcing sight,
The mournful habit of the place,
And parted thence with mounting flight,
To signify to Jove the the case,
What sorrow nature does sustain,
For Astrophill by envy slain.
And while I followed with mine eye,
The flight the Egle upward took,
All things did vanish by and by,
And disappeared from my look,
The trees, beasts, birds, and grove was gone,
So was the friend that made this moan.
This spectacle had firmly wrought,
A deep compassion in my spright,
My molting heart issude me thought,
In streams forth at mine eyes aright,
And here my pen is forced to shrink,
My tears discollors so mine ink.
An Epitaph upon the right Honorable sir Phillip Sidney knight: Lord governor
of Flushing.
TO praise thy life, or wail thy worthy death,
And want thy wit, thy wit high, pure, divine,
Is far beyond the power of mortal line,
Nor any one has worth that draws breath.
Yet rich in zeal, though poor in learnings lore,
And friendly care obscurde in secret breast,
And love that envy in thy life suppressed,
Thy dear life done, and death has doubled more.
And I, that in thy time and living state,
Did only praise thy virtues in my thought,
As one that seeld the rising sun has sought,
With words and tears now wail thy timelesse fate.
Drawn was thy race, aright from princely line,
Nor less than such, (by gifts that nature gave,
The common mother that all creatures have,)
Does virtue show, and princely lineage shine.
A king gave thee thy name, a kingly mind,
That God thee gave, who found it now too dear
For this base world, and has resumde it near,
To sit in skies, and sort with powers divine.
Kent thy birth days, and Oxford held thy youth,
The heavens made have, and staid nor years, nor time,
The fruits of age grew ripe in thy first prime,
Thy will, thy words; thy words the seals of truth.
Great gifts and wisdom rare imployd thee thence,
To treat from kings, with those more great tha^ kings,
Such hope men had to lay the highest things,
On thy wise youth, to be transported hence.
Whence to sharp wars sweet honor did thee call,
Thy countries love, religion, and thy friends:
Of worthy men, the marks, the lives and ends,
And her defense, for whom we labor all.
There did thou vanquish shame and tedious age,
Grief, sorrow, sickness, and base fortunes might:
Thy rising day, saw never woeful night,
But past with praise, from of this worldly stage.
Back to the camp, by thee that day was brought,
First thine own death, and after thy long fame;
Tears to the soldiers, the proud Castilians shame;
Virtue expressed, and honor truly taught.
What has he lost, that such great grace has won,
Young years, for endless years, and hope unsure,
Of fortunes gifts, for wealth that still shall dure,
Oh happy race with so great praises run.
England does hold thy lims that bred the same,
Flaunders thy valor where it last was tried,
The Camp thy sorrow where thy body died,
Thy friends, thy want; the world, thy virtues fame.
Nations thy wit, our minds lay up thy love,
Letters thy learning, thy loss, years long to come,
In worthy hearts sorrow has made thy tomb,
Thy soul and spright enrich the heavens above.
Thy liberal heart imbalmd in grateful tears,
Young sighs, sweet sighs, sage sighs, bewail thy fall,
Envy her sting, and spite has left her gall,
Malice her self, a mourning garment wears.
That day their Hanniball died, our Scipio fell,
Scipio, Cicero, and Petrarch of our time,
Whose virtues wounded by my worthless rhyme,
Let Angels speak, and heaven thy praises tell.
Another of the same.
SIlence augmenteth grief, writing increases rage,
Stald are my thoughts, which loved, and lost, the wonder of our age,
Yet quickened now with fire, though dead with frost ere now,
Enrag'de I write, I know not what: dead, quick, I know not how.
Hard hearted minds relent, and rigors tears abound,
And envy strangely rues his end, in whom no fault she found,
Knowledge her light has lost, valor has slain her knight,
Sidney is dead, dead is my friend, dead is the worlds delight.
Place pensive wailes his fall, whose presence was her pride,
Time cries out, my ebb is come: his life was my spring tide,
Fame mournes in that she lost, the ground of her reports,
Each living wight laments his lack, and all in sundry sorts.
He was (woe worth that word) to each well thinking mind,
A spotless friend, a matchles man, whose virtue ever shinde,
Declaring in his thoughts, his life, and that he writ,
Highest conceits, longest foresights, and deepest works of wit.
He only like himself, was second unto none,
Whose death (though life) we rue, and wrong, and al in vain do moan,
Their loss, not him wail they, that fill the world with cries,
Death slew not him, but he made death his ladder to the skies.
Now sink of sorrow I, who live, the more the wrong,
Who wishing death, whom death denies, whose thread is al to long,
Who tied to wretched life, who looks for no relief,
Must spend my ever dying days, in never ending grief.
Hearts ease and only I, like parables run on,
Whose equal length, keep equal breadth, and never meet in one,
Yet for not wronging him, my thoughts, my sorrows cell,
Shall not run out, though leake they will, for liking him so well.
Farewell to you my hopes, my wonted waking dreams,
Farewell sometimes enjoyed, joy, eclipsed are thy beams,
Farewell self pleasing thoughts, which quietness brings forth,
And farewell friendships sacred league, uniting minds of worth.
And farewell merry heart, the gift of guiltless minds,
And all sports, which for lives restore, variety assigns,
Let all that sweet is void; in me no mirth may dwell,
Phillip, the cause of all this woe, my lives content farewell.
Now rhyme, the son of rage, which art no kin to skill,
And endless grief, which deads my life, yet knows not how to kill,
Go seeks that haples tomb, which if ye hap to find,
Salute the stones, that keep the lims, that held so good a mind.
FINIS.
LONDON Printed by T. C. for William Ponsonbie. 1595.


