A short Treatise, very comfortable for all those Christians that be troubled
and disquieted in their consciences with the sight of their own infirmities:

Wherein is shevved how such may in their own selves find whereby to assure
them of their free election, effectual vocation, and justification.

Math. 7. verse 17. Every good tree brings forth good fruit, and a corrupt
tree brings forth evil fruit.

Math. 4. verse 18. A good tree can not bring forth evil fruit, neither can
a corrupt tree bring forth good fruit.

Printed at London by Ralph Newbery. Anno Domini. 1580.

To the Christian Reader, salvation in Christ JESUS.
WHen these few leaves were writ at the first (Christian Reader) it was not my
meaning thus by print to have made them common, for they were writ upon the
request of a particular man, for the comfort and consolation of his troubled
soul, but since one written copy has begot so many, and made me have so many
suitors for more, the number of afflicted consciences being in these days so
many as I know they be, and they that have had the reading hereof already,
reporting and confessing unto me that thereby they have bin much comforted,
though I know that it was not nor is not penned so exactly, nor yet the matter
dealt in so substa^tially as things in these days to be published had need to
be, yet I have suffered my self by the importunity of the godly that have
requested even this at my hands to be ouerread, and so to publish it I hope for
the benefit of all those that shall read it: for this I am sure of. I have so
laid down comforts for the healing of the broken hearted Christian, that
withal I have I hope taken all occasion from the profane and godless, of
taking cause to be sure by any thing here set down, which I take to be very
necessary to be regarded in such preatises and discourses: wherefore be the
Reader hereof a right and true Christian, or a carnal and counterfeyte
Gospeller, he may in this short and brief tracte find that which may be
profitable for him: if he be of the later sort, then here shall he learn that
where true justification in deed is, there is also sanctification, and that
therefore he deceyues himself in presuming of the former, having never had any
aquayntance with the later: and if he be of the first sort, be he weak, or
strong in faith, here shall he find both matter to lead him on in his
strength, and to raise him up in his weakness, and therefore take it unto
thee Christian Reader, and learn to make thy profit of it according to thy
heart, and a salve of it according to thy sore. That thou may thus do, I
beseech the Lord to direct thee in reading of it with his spirit, and having
done I pray thee recompense my good will in commending me unto God in thy
hearty Prayers again. Farewell.

Thine in Christ Jesus Thomas Spark Archdeacon.

How a man shall be assured in his own conscience of his election, effectual
vocation, and justification.
THis is certain, he that is desirous to know whether he be one whom God
has elected, and according to the same his election effectually called and
justified, he is to consider whether he be yet sanctified or no, and thereby to
judge of his election, vocation, and justification: for where this
sanctification is found, there the party that has it in possession, is
assured that he is the chosen child of God effectually called unto that
estate, and in Christ Jesus justified, and so in the end sure to be
glorified, as it may well and euidentelye appear both by the judgment of
Peter, and also of Paul, whereof, the first exhortyng to the particular
branches of sanctification, as namely to knowledge, temperance, patience,
godliness, brotherly kindness, and love, adds this as a reason to add
force unto his exhortation, Breethren give diligence to make your calling and
election sure, for if you do these things, ye shall never fall. 2. Pet. 1. verse
5. and the other Romans 8. as he assures those that be in Christ of their
election, vocation, and justification, yea and in the end, of their assured
glorification, saying, there is no condemnation to those that be in Christ
Jesus, so he in the words immediately following, teaches how to know those yt
be in Christ, and so consequently those that be elected, called, justified, and
in the end to be glorified, saying Which walk not after the flesh, but after
the spirit, which same lesson Christ our savior has taught us, Math. 7.
verse. 18. saying: A good tree cannot bring forth had fruit, nor yet a had
tree can bring forth good fruit, and also Ioh. 15. verse. 4. and 5. where he
says, as the branch can not bear fruit of it self except it abide in the
vine, no more can ye, except ye abide in me, I am the vine, ye are the
branches, he that abides in me, and I in him, the same brings forth much
fruit. Hereby I say then it is evident, as seeking the cause why we are
elected, called, justified, and finally shall be glorified, we find the only
cause to be Christ Jesus, and therefore are enforced to acknowledge him the only
door into the sheepefold Ioh. 10. the way, the truth, and the life John. 14.
and his name to be the only name whereby comes salvation Act. 4. so we are
compelled being asked who be elected, called, justified, and to be glorified,
to answer, they only that join virtue to their faith, that walk not after
flesh, but after the spirit, and so being good trees of the Lords planting
in Christ Jesus Esa. 61. and John. 13. bring forth the fruits of
righteousness, that is, those only that be sanctified, for those ye word
accompteth sanctified, in whom the sanctifying spirit shows it self to
dwell by the right fruits of the spirit, wrought in them, which all consist in
sacrificing, crucifying, ^^^^^cising, mortifying, killing, and burying of the
old man, and in putting on, ^^^^^ing, renewing, and strengthening of the new man,
which represents the image of God in holiness and righteousness, Ephesi. 4.
If therefore to our eternal comfort we would be certifyed of this point,
whether we be of the number of those that shall be saved, let us not seek to
be resolved thereof by ^urious entering into consideration of Gods secret
purpose, but let us in the revelation of Jesus Christ unto us, and in the
assured tokens and mar^es of those whom God in him has purposed to save,
learn to know and understand what Gods purpose is toward us. For as it is
written by Paul in the first Chapter unto the Ephesians, and the third
verse, In him it is, in whom the heavenly father has blessed us in all
manner of spiritual blessings in heavenly things, according as he had chosen
us in him before the soundations of the world were ^ayde, that we should be
holy and without blame before him thorough Love. In deed God in descending
down to us, and in bringing us to full possession of his blessings, proceeds
by these steps, being of nature good and loving toward mankind, though
in mutable manne there was found cause why he should altogether be shuffe
from taking any benefit by this love of God toward him, ye, God being of
nature immutable, ^erseuered in his love toward man, and ^o^ freely of his own
good will purposes the salvation of us men in his son Christ Jesus, and
electeth and predectinateth us to be saved through and for him, before the
foundations of the world, and therefore in time by promise reuealeth this his
purpose, and when the fullness of Time was come, sent him, in whom, by whom,
thoroughe whom, and for whose sake his purpose should stand ratified and
those, whose salvation in Christ thus promised and perform from everlasting
he purposed those by his word and spirit, in his good time he makes
effectuallye to understand how able and willing he is only in his son Christ
Jesus to justify: and there stays not, but by the same means he works
faith in their hearts, whereby they catch hold of Christ, and so in him of
full justification. Thus when he has made them trees of righteousness of his
own planting in Christ, then he so purges and trimmeth them, that they may
bring forth much fruit to his glory in this life, that in ye world to come
he may make the^ partakers of his own glory: so that God of his own good will
purposes to sane, or electeth whom he list, and those he calls when he
lists, and them justifies and sanctifies here, that he may in his good
time glorify elsewhere. Romans 8.

But now, if we would know Gods purpose of us, we have to begin at the
lowest or last effect of his good purpose toward us, and thereby by degrees
to ascend to find out what his absolute decree is to do with us: that is,
let us consider whether we be sanctified or no, if not, it is in vain either
to brag of Justification, Vocation or Election, or to presume of
Glorification: until this be found in us, we can have no assurance of any of
these: but when this is once sound in us, then forasmuch as none be
sanctified, whom he has not justified, and none justified, whom he has not
both effectually called in time, and elected before al times, and none ever was
partaker of all these but in the end also there was glorified, we may thereby
assure our selves, that we are already justified and therefore called, called
and therefore elected, and consequently such as shall be glorified.

Howbeit, as all is not gold that glisters: so all is not Sanctification or
true holiness that seems so to be. For, we read in the 29. Chapter of Esaias
of such as drew nigh to God with their lips, and yet were far from him in
their hearts: and Esaias 28. God in describing a people, in whom he found
nothing but sin and transgression to be cried out of, yet says thus of them,
yet they seek me daily, and would know my ways, even as a nation that did
righteously, and had not forsaken the statutes of their God: in these then
there seemed to be holiness, and yet was none: So in the Scribes and Pharisees in
Christ's time in the eyes and judgments of men, there seemed to be notable
sanctification or holiness of life, insomuch, that in that respect Christ
compares them to such as made clean the utter side of the Cup, and of the
Platter, and to painted tombs which appear beautiful outward. And yet there
he denounces many he any woes against them, and pronounces them Hypocrites,
Serpents, and generation of Vipers, Math. 23. And therefore Christ has told
us, Math. 5. verse 20. Except our righteousness exceed the righteousness of
the Scribes and Pharisees, we shall not enter into the kingdom of Heaven: and
has also warned us, that we be not like the^, neither in giving of alms,
praying, nor fasting, Math. 6. The Angel of the Church of Sardis had a name
yt he lived and yet was dead, Revel. 3. describing the wickedness of ye last
times, he says, that the^ they shall have a show of godliness, out have denied
ye power thereof. These places the^ evidently do teach us to take heed that we
do not flatter our selves, and think, yt therefore al is well with us, because
outwardly we appear to men sanctified and righteous, for we see here, yt it is
not yt seeming but yt being righteous yt is proved of God as a mark and true
token of those yt shall enter into Heaven. O the^ how void are they of any true
hope of salvation, in who^ there is neither found holiness in deed, neither yet
so much as an outward show thereof, being men which live so wickedly, that al
men yt have any acquaintance and familiarity with them, see and behold their
profane and wicked lives. But now let these alone, let us take this profit
by this lesson, yt it stands us upon to be righteous in deed, if we be
desirous hereby to reap any assurance of our election and justification. And
hereby let us take occasion to consider (least we be deceived in accompting our
selves truly righteous, when we are not) what things be necessary to true
righteousness.

For the understanding whereof, if we resort unto the Scriptures of God,
thereby shall we learn, that true righteousness and perfect, is a ceasing
from all the sins condemned in the law in heart, word, deed, and
countenance, and an embracing all the virtues commended in the same, in
heart, word, deed, and countenance. And further, thereby shall we plainly
learn, that he that would walk in holiness and righteousness before the
Lord, he has to regard two principal things, the matter namelye, that he
exercise him self in, and the manner how to do it: For, if either both of
these, or one of these be neglected, the labor is lost. The matter of a good
work is that only which is warranted lawful to be done, either expressly or
by sound collection out of the Canonical Scriptures, for it is written ye
shall put nothing unto the word that I command you, neither shall you take
aught therefro^ Deu. 4.2. and good reason is there why we should obey this
precept, for the holy Scripture is given by inspiration of God, and is
profitable to teach, to reprove, to correct, and to instruct in righteousness,
that the man of God may be absolute, being made perfect unto al good works, 2.
Tim. 3. verse. 16.17. and therefore worthily Christ rejects all such works or
points of his worship which have no ground out of she word, saying, Mat. 15.
in vain they worship me, teaching for doctrines men's precepts, thereby
telling the Pharistes though they were never so paynefull and devout in
observing their own traditions, yet he would make no account of their so
doing, but as of vain and lost labor. Upon this ground Paul Coloss. 2.
condemns al works that have no better warrant than the commandments and
doctrines of men, though there be in them never so much show of wisdom,
and humbleness of mind as vain and foolish, verse, 20. etc. By this rule all
the will worshipping and wil-workes in Popery, lacking allowance from the word,
are proved such as never could be matter of godliness. But when thou have and
such regard to the matter thou take in hand, be it tending to the (...)
from sin, or practice of virtue, that thou art assured out of the word, yt
thou ought to be occupied therein, yet then have thou not done: for unless
you do the same thing in right manner, it leeseth the power of a good work. It
cannot be denied, but that alms and prayer to God, ^e things commanded, and
therefore good matter of godliness: but yet as it is evident, Math. 6. though
ye Scribes and Pharistes did both these, yet were they not accounted good
works then, because they were not done in right manner. The Lord in the first of
Esaias ^elleth ye people, that he regarded not their sacrifices and burnt
off^ings ^yes he signifies unto the^, yt he lothed them, and counted their
labor therein bestowed vain, and their incense abomination, and yet it is
well known, that then sh^s^ (...) were matters allowed and com^^^^ded of God,
yet because when they were done, they were not done as they ought to have
been, therefore the Lord thus despyseth the doing thereof. Wherefore it is not
enough, as the doltishe practice under Antichriste caused ^^^les to believe, to
give alms, to fast, to pray, to use the Sacraments, and never to care how
and in what sort to do these things: for we see, that though these things
be done never so much and never so ost, yet, if they be not done in right
manner, they are rejected of ye Lord as vain and as abhominatio^s in his sight.
Now in their manner of doing these thiges are to be regarded. First, that they
pro^eede (I mean al our actions) from a heart puristed by faith. For as 1. Tim.
2. verse 5. we be taught, yt the end, sum, or perfection of ye whole law, is
Love: so are we told, yt it comes out of a pure heart, and of a good
conscience, saying, ye true christil love indeed is not found growing where
there is no pure heart, neither can there be a pure heart where is not a good
conscience, neither yet can this g^od conscience be where there is absent an
vnsayned Faith: but where this unsained faith is, that is, where a full and
settled persuasion or assurance of salvation is through Jesu Christ alone
wrought in the heart by the holy Ghost, thereis a good conscience, because,
being justified by Faith, we have peace with God thorough our Lord Jesus Christ
Romans 5. and so there is also a pure heart, for it is faiths property to purify
ye heart, Act. 15. verse. 9. And therefore is it written, that by says Abel
offered a better sacrifice than Caine Heb. 11. verse 4. For if there had bin
faith in Caine as in Abell, his sacrifice had bin as well accepted as Abels,
but even for lack of this, it was not. If therefore we lack faith in God, when
we go about a good matter, we leese our labor, for it is impossible to please
God without faith, Heb. 2. verse. 6. and therefore eue^ hereby al ye gay and
glorious works of Turks, Jews, Atheists, Heretics, and Papists, are proved to
be no good works at all in the sight of god, because they proc^^d from such as
are destitute of ye true Christian faith. Secondly, we must take heed, that our
works be done in humility and lowliness of mind, taking our selves to be
bound, as indeed we are, to do more than we do or can do, yea* being ready to
say and think indeed, as Christ has taught us, that when we have done al yt is
commanded us to do (which is impossible for us to do, Act. 15. Romans 8.) that
we be but unprofitable servants. Luke 17. Further, that this Humility must
be of measure in us, that it cause us always to suspect our own weakness and
infirmity, yt so there may be found in us a holy trembling and fear to
offend our good God, in omitting the least necessary circumstance of a good
work, as we be taught Phil. 2. verse. 12. in these words: Make an end of your
salvation in sear and tre^bling. That this humility and lowliness of mind is
necessarily to be joined with exercizing our selves in good matters, Christ has
plainly taught us Luke 18 in the parable of the Pharisie and Publican: there it
appears, ye the Pharisie had exercised himself in good matters, both in
abstayning from outward fins, and in doing of good and lawful things, and yet
because, when he had done, he lackte humility, and therewith was puffed up to
think that God was therefore indebted to him, he mard al, and lost al his labor.
And therefore al merit-mongers, yt persuade themselves that by their works they
have deserved Heaven, for all their bragging of works more tha^ enough to
iuf^i^^e themselves withal, are by Christ sent home unjustified, yea not so
much as once reckoned and accounted amongst ye workers of any just and holy
work. Thirdly, least any should think that in teaching us to be thus lowly
minded when we go about a good work, we be taught therein utterly to distrust
or despair, that god will at any time regard our good works, and accept the^,
we must learn of the word, to join hope with our humility, yt as the one
preserves us from trust in our works, so the other may keep us from utter
dispairing that God will reward them: But yt this hope may be found in us, we
must not seek to ground any kind of worth^nesse in our selves, for when we
look into our selves, and consider our works, as they come from us in great
imperfection, we find and see our selves to tremble and ^^ar, being ready al of
us to say with Esaias c 4. at our righteousness is but as ^^thye clouts, but we must
resort to Christ, yt as in him we our selves are justified, so for his sake
these pore fruits of ours might be accepted. To teach us thus to do, Peter
has said unto us, 1. Epistle Chap. 2. to whom ^e come as unto a living stone
dis^ lowed of men, but chosen of God and pretidus, and be made a spiritual
house, a holy priesthood to offer up spiritual sacrifices acceptable to God
by Jesus Christ. He knew sul well, that to encourage Christians to exercise
themselves in godliness, which he terms here the offering (...) of spiritual
sacri^^te^, it was nece^^^ry to teach th^us, that though when they had done,
they should find no cause in their own works worthiness why they should be
accepted of God, that yet acceptable they should be in Christ Jesus, yt thus
yet he might teach them to do good works in hope that their labor should
be acceptable in Christ, and for his sake, the infirmities and imperfections
of their works being conered through his good means. Fourthelye, be the
matter never so godly, that we do, that yet it is necessary to take it in
hand, and to proceed therein of love, and by love, Paul has notably taught
us 1. Cor. 13. saying: Though I speak with the tongues of men and Angels,
and have not Love, I am as a sounding brass or a tinkling Cimball, and though
I had the gift of Prophecy, and knew all secrets and all knowledge: yea, if I
had all Faith, so that I could remove Mountains, and had not Love, I were
nothing: and though I seed the p^^re with all my goods, and though I give
my body that I be br^ned, and have not Love, it profits me nothing: By love,
I mean that two sold love toward God and man, it must not be the love of
our selves, love of the world, or love of advantage that must set us on work,
but love in deed unfeigned by to wards God, because he has loved us so
freely and effectually in Christ. And this love we can no way show toward
him better than in giving of our selves freely and wholly, heartily and
continually to obey his laws and commandments: For, he that says he loves
him, and hepeth not his commandments, dissem^leth with him: The hyr^l^ng not
working of love works ^oy^eringly and soon is weary, but where love sets a
work, there the work is done diligently, care^u^ly, and faithfully, and that
not for a (...) but ce^tin^^^ yea^ ^therfore, that it ^^ye appear, that we
give our selves is g^^^iuesse, ^uen of love to ^un that is go^^^sse it self,
let us busset our selves ab^use it their fully withour grudging for God lo^^^h
a thee^^full giver, diligently, and no^ ^^gligently or ^^^^^lly, for ^ursed is
he that does the work of the Lord negligentlye, and let us persevere and
continue in ^ell (...), without fai^^ing or giving over, for blessed is he that
perseuereth to the end, and he that puts his hend is the plough and looks
back, is not meet for the kingdom of Heaven. Finally, and last of al, that
nothing be lacking, learn we out of the 6. of Math. to take heeds, yt we seek
not vain glory, yt is, the praise and glory at man's hand for our well doing,
but let our principal end be the glory of God, as Christ has taught us,
Math. 5. saying: Let your light so shine before men, that they may see your
good works, and glorify your heavenly father which is in heaven: and aming thus
at this mark by the way, we shall there by edify our neighbors by our good
example, and assure our selves to our great comfort of our election, which ^e
two excellent ends, uses, and comu^^dities ye rise to us by our good works.
Thus exercising our selves, and wras^iug according to the measure of our
faith, every day to be less sinful and more righteous, though that perfect
righteousness that the law requires, be not found in us by reason of our
weakness, yet we age counted in the sight of GOD sanctified holy, and
acceptable in Christ Jesus, and so sealed up to the day of redemption. Paul
without al doubt was in state of Justification, and a man regenerate or new
borne, and therefore such a one as had put off the old man, and put on the
new, when he wrote his Epistle to the Romans: and yet there in the ^eauenth
Chapter it appears, that he sound in himself when he had done what he
could, sin dwelling, insomuch that he confesses, that he did not the good
thing that he would, but the evil thing that he would not, that did he, and
that he felt a law in his members rebelling e^ayust the law of his mind,
leading him captive unto the law of ^^ue, and therefore he cries out of
himself o wretched man that I am, who shall deliner me from this body of
sin, and death. And (...) Corinthians. 12. he confesses, that he had a
prick in his flesh which he calls the Messenger of Satan that bu^^itted
him* ^or the which his faith he prayed thrice that it might depart from him,
but he says answer was made him that Gods grace was sufficient for him, and
that his power was made perfect through weakness, whereby God taught him that
so it is, and will be eue^ with the holiest of us all, that there will remain
in us always whiles we live some reli^es of old Adain is humble us to wrestle
and fight against: this is necessary to be observed, least that any upon
occasion of the former do^rine should gather against himself, that forasmuch
as he sees ^n and infirmities in himself, that therefore he is not sanctified
and so void of any assurance of his election and justification, for though Paul
^ou^d it thus with himself, yet because in the inner man he ^ound a wrestling
and a striu^^g against these sins in his flesh, he ass^teth himself that he
is one whom God had so certainly purposed to save for his Christ's sake, that
in his own person, and in the persons of all other in the same case ye he was,
he says, I (...) pers^^ded that neither death nor life, nor Angels, nor
principalities, nor powers, nor things present, nor things to come, nor height,
nor deapth, nor any other creature is abte to separate us from the love of God
which is in Christ Jesus our Lord Romans 8. so that let not Peccatum ^i^abitans
sin dwelling in the flesh, in the which we know with Paul that no good thing
dwells Romans 7. discourage us, so that we be able to say truly with the same
Paul, we delight in the Law of God concerning the inner man. In deed we must
account that Paul has said unto the regeuerate, Let not (...) raigue in your
mortal bodies, that ye should obey it in the lusts thereof. Romans 6.12. and
thereby gather that i^ we be sa^^^fied and regeuerate in deed, that then sin
is put from his reign or kingdom in us: but their the must understand, that
there is great disterene betw^^te Peccatum regu^^s an^ E^^^catum (...), that
is, betweet sh^^e reiguing in us, and dwelling in us (...) then is in his
reign and king^ (...) when he has the members of man ready to yield him their
voluntary or willing obedience, taking delight in doing of him service, in
which estate sin is in us till we be regenerate and have put on Christ, wheby
his spirita dispossesseth sin of his kingdom: howbeit then til death come, in
some measure it will be found in man, but yet far unlike that it was before,
for now it is resisted by the spirit, and so, either cannot get the members is
do it service at al, or else, if it do so far prenayle, as to too often it
does, yet by theforce of the spirit they are so checked and taken up for
their so doing, that neither is there such delighte taken in sin, as before,
neither can sin after get his will obeyed so easily again, insomuch, that
though it get his will now and then done, yet it gets ye but with grudging
and misliking of ye spirit, and so has never full obedience yielded it as
before, and every day it obtains less obedience and less. So ye I may well
compare the obedience that sin has, being in his kingdom, to the obedience y^
a lawful and well-beloved King gets of his subjects, and the obedience, that
sin only dwelling in man obtains, to ye obedience ye a tyrant and usurper
gets of his subjects that love him not. Both of these get their things that
they command done, but in great dinersitie, for the one is obeyed in all, and
that willingly, heartily, and faithfully: the other in as little as they can,
and in that repyningly with inward grief and misliking, ye they should obey
such a one at al: and even the like difference betwixt obedience, yielded to
him before regeneration and after is there. Take we heed therefore, that sin
reign not in us, and wrestle we and strive we by the spirit every day more
and more to withdraw our bodies and souls from yielding any obedience to sin
dwelling in us, and in thus doing, though with Paul we find some time this
tyrant letting us from doing the good we would, and drawing us on to do the
evil that we mislike, yet with the same Paul as we do take occasion to cry
out of our own wretchedness, and of the tyranny of sin in us, so let us
comfort our selves, assuring our selves that this wrestling against sin in
the inner man is a sure argument of our most assured purposed salvation in the
blood of Jesus Christ.

But to the end that this doctrine now thus generally laid down may be to the
more comfort of thee Christian Reader particularly, let us see now how it can
be applied to thy fore, to salve it: to thy sickness: to cure it: to thy
afflicted conscience, to solace and comfort it: thou mournest, and thy soul is
troubled, desquieted, and sore vered within thee, yea, thou think thy self
even compassed about with the pains of hell, and therefore in bitterness of
heart complaynest as one cast off, forgotten and forsaken of God, fearing
greatly that thy end and portion shall be with the wicked: and why is all
this? because say thou I find in my self such doubting whether I shall be
saved for Christ's sake or no, and many other sins and infirmities in my
self beside, for the which I deserve utterly to be rejected. But tell me also
and dissemble not with me, do thou not greatly mislike this thy doubting?
art thou not grieved with thy self for it? find thou not in thy self an
earnest desire to be rid of it, that thou might fully believe that thou
shall be saved for Christ's sake? and further concerning the other infirmities,
do thou not mislike them and condemn them in thy self, and wrestle and
strive to lessen them in thy self? and yet to go one step further with theee:
do thou not unfeignedly find in thy self love toward Gods truth, and the
professors thereof, even for that they do profess it and embrace it, and a
love after godliness, even for godliness sake? And that in answering of me in
these two last points, you be not deceived, consider whether you take any
comfort, pleasure, and delight in reading of Gods book, in studying of his
truth, in hearing it preached and commoned on, and whether it be a grief unto
you to hear it withstoode or misliked, or the professors and preachers thereof
abused, if these things be in you, it is certain you have love toward God
and his truth, and to ye breethren that profess it: and as for love after
godliness universally even for godliness sake, then it is in you, if you be
at this point, that you could find in your heart to absteyne from sin,
though it might advantage you, and not hurt you in procuring you here any shame
or punishment, and to embrace virtue, though it purchase you mockes, scoffs,
and tauntes, and any other displeasure, and gain you nothing with men, even
because your God has condemned the one and commended the other. And whether
your abstaynyng from sin and embracing of virtue be such as this, you may be
able to judge, if you consider whither you be as careful to absteyne from
those sins that man punishes not or accounts not of, as from other: and if
you way whether you be not as well willing to embrace those points of
godliness which are most despised amongst me^, as those that he highliest
esteemed, you can not deny but that to these questions you must needs answer
that it is thus with your self, notwithstanding your complaining of lack of
faith and doubting, that sometime you have good comfort in hearing Gods truth
in Christ Jesus, and great consolation in pouring forth your Prayers unto God
in the bitte^nes of your soul: this is it that discomforts you, that this
comfort of yours lasts but for a short time, your doubting being renewed, and
yet you can not I am sure say to the contrary, but that you hope of the
renewing of your comfort in Christ, and of salvation through him in the end. Be
it then that this is thy state (Christian Reader) let us see now what
comfortes the word of God ministers unto thee, to bind up thy broken heart,
and to heal thy wounded conscience.

This I dare say unto you by g^^d and plentiful experience to begin withal in
the words of Paul 1. Cor. 10. verse 23. there has no te^ptatio^ taken you
but such as aperteineth to man: and God is faithful, which will not suffer you
to be tempted above that you be able, but will give the issue with the
temptation, that you may be able to bear it: thus has he before now
oftentimes brought down to Hell, and carried back again: he has thrown
down that he might raise up: wounded, that he might heal: thus does he use
to break up the fallow lands of the hearts of his children, to prepare them
as meet ground for the immortal seed of his word: thus does he according to
his promise Ezech. ^6. take from his their stony hearts, and bestows soft and
fleshie hearts upon them: such a broken and contrite heart as this is, is so
acceptable a sacrifice to God, that he will not despise it, Psalm. 51. yea to
the great consolation of such, it is said by God Esaias. 66. verse. 2. to him
will I look that is poor, and of a contrite spirit, and trembles at my
words, and therefore so far off is it that you should be persuaded that God
has forgotten you or left you off, because of the trouble and vexation which
you feel in your soul, that even therein you have matter of comfort, assuring
you that you are one whom most tenderly he looks upon and regards. In
deed it can not be denied, but that where there is no faith in Christ Jesus,
there is yet the state of damnation, for as it is written, He that believes in
him, shall not be condemned: so it follows writ in the same verse. But he
that believes not, is condemned already, because he believes not in the only
begotten son of God Ioh. ^. verse. 18. But your argument to prove that you
have not faith, neither yet the fruits, because you find in your self the
quite contrary doubting sins and infirmities, is not good, for the
antecedent may be true, and granted, yt you do so doubt, and that there is such
sins and infirmities in you, and yet that therefore you are forsaken and cast
off of God, to be denied: for yt making whereof plain unto you, you must
understand that the life of a Christian is a continual warfare, and that this
war is to be found even in such as Paul was (a man that had faith in great
measure, and the fruits thereof) as you have heard out of the seventh of the
Romans betwixt the inner man and the outward, in so much that he sets it
down Gala. 5. verse 17. for a certain point of doctrine, saying, the flesh
lusts against the spirit, and the spirit against the flesh, and these are
contrary the one to the other, so that ye can not do the same things that ye
would: whereby we are taught that naturally we are all nothing but the old man,
nothing but flesh both body and soul, and such we remain by nature the
children of wrath Ephesians. 2. poor captives in prison Esa. 61. sold under sin
Romans 7. blind, not able to discern the things of God 1. Cor. 2. yea, having
the best thing that is in us, our wisdom, a natural and rebellious enemy to
the will of God Romans 8. and in this case the strong enemy Satan keeps us
quietly in his subjection, until Christ Jesus a stronger than he come, and
dispossess him, Luke 11. who entering into possession, first lightneth our
dark hearts with understanding, and by his spirit works faith in us, and be
gets us anew, and so we put on the new man, and have his spirit dwelling in
us, Romans 8. by which spirit we offer battle to the flesh, and seek to put
off the old man, and to kill and crucify him with his lusts. But thus the case
stands with us, that we shall never quite be rid of this old man, we shall
never fully have killed and crucified the flesh, until death come, for he
strikes the last blow of the battle, till then we are in the field, and
have continually to skirmish. Now the state and condition of the most faithful
man being thus, and every one having cause to say with Paul Romans 7. I know
that in my flesh there dwells no go^d thing, yea, we understanding that the
fruits of the flesh be as the same Paul has told us, adultery,
fornication, uncleanness, wanto^nesse, ydolatrie, witchcraft, hatered, debate,
emulations, wrath, contentions, seditions, hereste^, enui^, murders,
drunkenness, gluttony, and such like, what marvel is it if looking into the
flesh that we carry up and down with us, we see and find therein doubting
sins and infirmities? and what strange thing is it then if Satan our old
ancient enemy, the more to discomforte his aduersarye the spirit but newly
come into the field, do cause his Lieutenant and Captain general of his
battle the flesh, to muster al his power, and to make as great a show of the^
as he can possibly? though many of his army in former skirmishes with the
spirit have bin sore wounded, some in the head, some in the arm, and some one
where and some another, yet I warrant you, the better and more to daunt his
adversary and his host, he will cause them until they be quite slain, to
present themselves in the field: and how is it possible but that this Captain
pitching his tents so nie us, but that we having eyes to see withal, should
descrie and espy his host, and with the greatness and fierceness thereof in our
selves he discomforted at the sight thereof, especially as long as we are
occupied rather in considering the force bent against us, than the strength of
our own Captain Christ Jesus, and his power ready present to help and succor
us. I remember that it is written in the sixth of ye last of the Kings, when the
King of Aram sent horses and Chareis and a mighty host to take Eliza at
Dothan, and therewith had compassed the City where he was by night, his man in
ye morning seeing ye host and their strength, and considering only thereof, was
afraid and said, alas master what shall we do: but his master rather
considering ye host that was of his side, he answered, fear not, for they that
be with us, are mo tha^ they that be with them, and the servants eyes being
opened, he perceyned it was so, and then his fear was gone. Eue^ so we, as
long as we are occupied in beholding the army of the flesh and old man, we can
not but be discomforted, but if our eyes were opened, and we would be occupied
in beholding and considering the strength and force of the new man, and of the
spirit which is o^ our side, we should be cheered again, but be it that the
one, and that the flesh and his host, s^^me never so strong, and like to foil
the other: and the other, the spirit, never ^o young and weak, and like to be
foiled, yet the spirit once having entered the field, and begone the battle,
doubt we not, but that in the end he will overcome the other and his force, for
ye one has his strength and force but from Satan a creature, and the other
from God the creator, and therefore sure in the end to be the conqueror. David
in offering and entering ye combat with great Goliath, was judged both of Saul
and of his adversary far too weak, but yet in the end he slew Goliath. 1.
Sam. 17. for he was the Lords Champion, and the other but ye Champio^ of the
Lords enemies ye Philistines: and therefore be it that the new man in thee be
but comparable to little and young David, and the old man to strong and mighty
Goliath, yet David offering the Combat, let him put thee in hope of certain
victory by his fornier experience of mightyer conquests, as David did Saul,
saying: thy servant has already slain both a Lion and Bear: my meaning is,
in that thou have heard and seen, that the spirit has subdued the flesh and
his power, in Manasses, Mary Magdalene, and snehe like ones, doubt you not but
that he shall overcome thy flesh never yet so brawned and inured to sin, as it
was in the^. Yea, but I hear thy flesh ready to teach thee to cast aside al
these comfordes, saying, that thou have not nor ^eel^st ^ot yet this ^^ttel
offered or begone in thee, and that therefore these things sal beside the well.
Yet to begin withal, thus much is obtained, if this battle be begone, that
then though looking into the flesh and the fruits thereof, thereby never so much
cause be given thee to be discoraged and discomfort^^, that yet looking upon
the spirit that resists and stri^eth with ye flesh, there is sufficient
cause of assured comfort again, unless tho^ dare said o^ think, that the
Diuet can putt^ God to flight, and make him altes his purpose which once to
surmise is blasphemy^. And this is gotten also, that in the regenerate man
there being as well flesh as spirit, the fruits of the flesh being as they
be, ye it follows not, there is in me doubting, and sins, and infirmities,
that desire. Gods wrath, and therefore I have no faith and godliness accepted
and approved of God in Christ Jesus, for though the former be found in the
flesh, as they have bin and be in all flesh in some measure, the later is
found and may be found in the new and inner man, whose properties are
contrary to the properties of the other, amongst which faith with diverse
fruits thereof are reckned Gal. 5. verse. 22. and 23. those things obtained
already, let us then now consider. whither it be true ye there be in you this
battle begun, and that God has made you a field for these two might^^
Captains the spirit and the flesh to fight a combat together in. That the one
is there, namely the flesh, you grant: but that the other is yet come, the
spirit you mean, you deny. What do you think that any man will fight with
himself will Satan then think you strive against himself? if you think that
it may so be, Christie Luke. ^^. has taught you ye Satan is wiser tha^ so,
taking it for a thing ye could not but be granted, ye Satan would not resist
himself, or strive with himself, and therefore proves the accusation of bys
casting out of Devils by the power of Satan, to be rediculous and fla^derous,
saying. If Satan be divided against him self, how shall his kingdom stand?
wherefore for as much as you feel in your selves a misliking of infidelity or
doubting of your salvation, a grief for it, and an earnest desire to be rid of
it, and withal feel a grief for your sins, joined with a lothing of them,
and an earnest desire to cease from sinning, I would ask you from whence you
think all this co^mes, from the same fountain trow you from whence the
former, that is the matter of your sorrow co^mes? if you think so, I reply
with James words Cap. 3. verse 11. and 12. Does a fountain send forth at one
place sweet water and bitter? can the fig tree bring forth ob^tes? either a
vine figs? yea, with Christ, Math. 7. verse 16. Do men gather Grapes of
Thorns, or figs of thistles? Is it possible then that these things should come
from the flesh where there dwells no good thing, Romans 7. Can the black Moore
change his skin, or the Leoperd his spots? Ierem. 1^.22. then may this be.
Nay these be fruits quyte contrary to the fruits of the flesh as it is well
known, and therefore they come from the spirit: for these two and their
fruits be contrary the one to the other, Gal. 5. and therefore, as the fyndyng
of and doubting of sins in your self be sure arguments, that the flesh is
in the field, so be these as certain arguments, ye the spirit is come, and
has joined battle. Further, your confessed love to Gods truth and the
professors thereof, your love to godliness for it own sake and mislike of sin,
not in worldly respects, but even because it is sin, your crying unto God in
your grief and heaviness of soul, your comfortes then, and in the o^te use
of the word, your hope of Gods goodness in the end toward you, strengthened
by the experience of his goodness toward you hitherto, be even so many most
excellent seals and assurances unto you even from God, that you are his
chosen, justified, and sanctified child, and that therefore you have his
spirit dwelling in you, to war and to ouercom the flesh to your eternal
comfort. O but yet in all this I have yet no faith. Why say you so. Is it not
written, Romans 8. as many as have the spirit of God be the sons of God? and
can any be the soune of God without Faith? therefore, in that thou haste the
spirit dwelling in thee, it is certain thou haste faith in some measure. Yea,
but I feel it not, but rather the contrary, and that in great measure: yet
being deceived, thou feel a thing in the striving against infidelity and
misliking it, and that is Faith, for as virtue is resisted by his contrary
vice, so this foul vice of Infidelity is withstoode by his contrary virtue
which is faith: And it is written: how shall they pray to him, in whom they have
not believed, Romans 10.14. of then as earnestly you have called upon God in
Christ's name, so many arguments have you of faith in him: And how could
you have had at any time such comfort in praying, and consolation in the
doctrine of the Gospel, without faith? For, if you have no faith in Christ,
then neither has his grace any access to you to comfort you, nor you to it,
thereby to take comfort, for you know, he that is without Faith, is without
Christ, and he that is without Christ, has God not his comforter, but his
confounder: and therefore those comfortes and consolations that you have had,
must remain with you as sure evidences, that by Faith you have Christ
dwelling in you. And though you feel not these comfortes still, shall you
therefore conclude, that you have no faith? The woman with child, though she
feel not the child always stir, yet, because she has sometime felt it,
she comfort her self, that she is with child: you know she is with child
a good while before she can sensibly feel it move, and at the first she
feels it but weakly, yea, after she has felt it strongly, some tune she
feels it not again a great while, and when she does, in much weakness
sometimes in comparison of the former, and yet for all this, has in the end
a happy travel: so Faith is not felt to move strongly as soon as it is bred,
and when it begins once, it continues not always alike motions. It is with
Faith and withal other the graces of the spirit, as it is with the Sun, which
sometime sets, sometime ryseth, sometime shyueth, sometime is covered with
clouds, or shadowed from us by thick and soggey mystes arising out of the
earth: for even so sometime these seem to be set and gone down in us, but
when the morning comes, they arise again, sometime they are covered from our
eyes, by such mists and clouds that arise out of the flesh, that we cannot
espy them: but yet for all this, as he reasons ilfauouredly and untruly,
that says, the Sun cannot be seen now for clouds, therefore it is not in
the firmament: so he that says: I can not see and perceive Faith and the
spirit in me for the fruits of the flesh, therefore they be not in me. Be
not therefore discouraged though thou synde a Winter in thy self sometime,
for if thou haste had once these flourishing fruits of Summer in thee
heretofore, be thou assured thou shall have hereafter a Summer again, and that
the trees and herbs are not dead, though there appear and be seen little
greenenesse in them, for the sap remains in the root, which when Summer
co^mes, will garnishe all again. When thou come into an Orchard, field,
and Garden, thou can comfort thy self with these thoughts: even do the
like in this: For it is written, that who^ he loves he loves to the end, John
13. and in whom he has begone this good work of Regeneration, in them he
will perform it, Philip. 1. For the gyfts and calling of God be without
repentance, Romans 11. And therefore, though they seem to be so raked up and
covered with ashes, that they are not seen nor perceived, insomuch, that David
(speaking according to his own sense) be ready to say, that God has turned
his back upon him, and forgotten to be gracious, and shut up his loving
kindness in displeasure, yet in truth it is not so, which God will make
manifest in his good time, by removing of the a^^es that covered his graces and
gi^tes, and by blowing the ^^^les thereof with the Bellows of his spirit in
the ministry of his word and sacraments. Further, that hope that is in thee,
what is it else, but faiths daughter: For when by faith once we have learned
what ^^ynges be: prepared for us at Gods hand in Christ Jesus, thi^^ by hope
we look for them in the mid^^ of most grievous tem^^tious, wherein Hope
plays a g^^d daughters p^i^^, in ^ourishing and ^^^^ngthning (...) mother,
which otherwise then would be ready to languish: but to hope ^or ^^ings,
which by ^aie^ we know not before in Christ Jesus to appertayn^ unto us, in
vain, and therefore (...) ^^counted in di^^, and that aptlye and worthily, the
daughter of Faith, and therefore, in confessing that you have Hope, you
confess that you have Faith also: For grant once, that there is a daughter:
and it is also of necessity to be granted, that there was the mother first.
And whereas thou complaynest, that thou feel it not, but rather the
contrary, I grant thou neither feel Faith, nor yet ever shall in the
flesh, but in the inner man. By these means that I have showed, thou may
find Faith, and therewith content thy self, and say as the man said to
Christ: I believe Lord, Lord help my vnbeleete, I believe in the spirit and
inner man, and there I find no doubtyng, but a wrestling against the least
doubting, and a mi^^iking of it: but in my flesh I find unbelief, which I
beseech thee O Lord ^^^e and help. If you dream (as it is ^^^ely you do) of
such a measure of Faith in the spirit that should ^^yte extinguishe, even
the least doubting in the flesh, you drea^^ of that which yet never ^^^^ll
mann^ had or shall have, if it be in the sinner man vnmixte, with doubting
which it is: if it mislike of the least doubting, and sight against it, you
have Faith in his right nature, yea, and the greater your doubting and
unbelief in the flesh has bin, the stronger has your Faith showed it
self, in that notwithstanding it continues striving against it, conde^ning it
and misliking it: you must understand, ye the force of Faith in instifying
depends not upon the quantity thereof, but upon ye quality, for all yt be
justified by Faith, have not Faith in equal measure and quantity, some have
it in strong measure, some in weak measure, but all that by Faith catch hold of
their salvation, must have like faith in quality, yt is, they must seek
their salvation at Gods hands in Christ Jesus alone. It is likely you know
that all those among ye Isralites that looked up to ye brazen Serpent had not
like eyes al in bigness and clearnes, yet if they had eyes, were they never so
little and so bleared, yet looking directly^ ^ppe, they found help as well as
the other: Be the beggars hand little or great, it serves him alike to take
a penny wythall. So if thou have a right faith, that is such a faith as seeks
and looks for salvation through Christ God and man alone, be it that it is
but little and weak, yet it serves thy turn. In deed it is god, that
fynding faith in weak measure in us, we should strive by reading and musing of
the word, by diligent ^oaring it read and preached, that we may grow in
faith, and proceed from a weak measure of faith to a stronger. But yet in anys
case we must take heed, that, having escaped from the filthiness of Popery
in this point, in seeking for any part of our salvation in our own merits,
subtle Satan cause us not to seek for our salvation, for the worthiness of
our faith, which we are very nigh unto, when we are ready to say or think,
that our^ weak faith, though it be never so right a faith, cannot justify us,
unless it were in some worthier measure. For is not this a lykelihoode, that
we are about to tie salvation to the worthiness of faith Wherefore, to
preserve us from this ^^^eight of Satan, we must understand, that if we
account it absurd to seek ^^luation in worthiness of ^ure other works, it
is as absurd to took for it for the worth^^^^ of our says: For when we are
^^^ghte in the word, that says in the blood of Christ Jesus iusti^^eth, the
meaning thereof is not to teach us that faith has this four for the
toorthinesse (...) it self, but for ye worthiness of Jesus Christ the
obiecte and matter that says finds out beholds and apprehen^^^. So that
the proposition so much^^icked against of the eui^^ies of Gods s^^^^ grace,
Faith only ^^sti^eth* is that in e^^^^te. Amongst al virtues when they are
together, Faith alone has thy^ ^^^ce, though when she ^^^^^^tes it she be not
alone or vnaccom^auyed of other virtues, to apprehende Christ Jesus, and so in
him alone to justify us: But to return again to your complaint of not
feeling faith, and therefore you have not faith: I must tell you further, that
I fear in these heavenly things you have followed to much sense and feeling.
For, if yo^ would judge aright whether you have faith or no, and whether you
be Gods dear child or no, you must not judge by sense and feeling, but by
the words of Almighty God. So that if your sense and feeling lead you one way
to judge of your self, and the word of God (...) and you an other way, you
must pref^^^ the judgment and determination, of God in his word, who knows
better these thinge^ than ^^ee o^^e selves, who is better to be believed than
our owns sense and feeling, before the sentence of flesh and blo^^^. To refuse
thus to do, is to ob^^se ^^then to believe our selves than GOD, and to
presume, that we by our own sen^^ and feeling can judge better in what ^ta^s,
we stand, than GOD himself that made us, which is great blasphemy.
Wherefore, to let go talking of your own sense and feeling, if you be
destrous to know your estate, would you have a better and surer Judge than God
himself to tell you it? In deed says you, if he would come down from
Heaven, and tell me, I should then I hope believe him. Even so he has in his
word: and if an Angel from Heaven should come and tell you otherwise than
in his word he has told you, you have Paul's war^^^, Gal^^^ to hold him
accursed therefore, and I hope you will hold that se^ce, that feeling, that
reason, that person, and that Devil accursed, that dare be so bold ^^reafter,
as to tell you otherwise of your self and your estate than GOD himself has
pronounced in this his word. Hearken therefore with a mind ready to yield
your subscription unto Gods judgment in his word.

We are told, Esaias 61. that Christ was anointed, because the spirit of God
was upon him, to preach glad tidings unto the pore, to bind up ye broken
hearted, to preach liberty to the captives, and to them that are bound, the
opening of the prison to preach the acceptable year of the Lords, and the
day of vengeance of our^ God to comfort all that mourn, to appoint unto them
that mourn in Syon, and to give unto them beauty for ashes, the oil of joy
for mourning, the ^a^ment of gladness for the spirit of heaviness, that they
might be called Trees of Righteousness, the planting of the Lord, that he
myghts (...) glorified: whereby we learn, that those Christ has cured and
comforted that be trees of Righteousness of the Lords plantyng, whereby
(...) is glorified. Now John 15. we learn that those trees of Righteousness
that be of the Lords planting* they be planted and grafted into Christ
Jesus, and there also we are taught as the branch cannot hear fruit of it
self, except it abide in the Vine, no more can we except we abide in
Christ.

In these two places then this doctrine is flatlye taught us, that we can
not be good trees of Righteousness, whereupon good fruit is found gr^^^ing,
unless we be such as be enriched, freed, deli^^^ed, cured, and healed by
Christ, yea until we be such as both be ingrafted into Christ, and child in
him. Now ye they that be in this case be elected and justified, hane faith, be
the children and sons of God in the end to be glorified, you can not deny;
now then, look upon your wres^^ing against infidelity and other sins, your
love toward God and his truth, and to all godliness vnseypedly, and you shall
sin that not only the matter of godliness which (...) found in hipocrites,
but the matter done in right manner, according to the rules before set down, be
found in you, what betteth then, but that according to Saint Peter's counsel
you should account your election sure, and that you shall never fall. 1. Peter.
2. These things you know, that doing in^^rie to the spirit of God that has
wrought them in you, you can not deny but that they are good fruits of faith;
and of one justified thereby: and then seeing you are enforced to conf^sse that
these be in you, unless you would^ clean contrary to Christ's indgeme^t say
Math. 7. that an ill tree can bring forth good fruit, confess that you are
in the sight of God a good tree, as the Lord has made it manifest to you to
your comfort, by causing these fruits to grow on you. To come to particulers,
you know Christ has said, Lou^ one another as I have loved you, that is, as
John expoundes it, in deed an^ truth. 1. Epistle Chap. 3. and by this shall
all men know that you are (...) Disciples, which less^n was of that force
with John, that finding in himself love toward the breethren, without
hypocriste, he set down this po^^tion of himself, and of all such. W^ know
that we are translated from death unto life, because we love the breethren 1.
John. 2. verse 14. Mark he says, we know, not we think or suppose, thereby
teaching us to account this fruit found in us an infallible argument of our
blessed estate. And in the next Chapter he teaches us to know whether we
be led by the spirit of truth or error, by our willingness to hear the
faithful ministers of God, saying: He that knows God hears us, he that is
not of God hears us not, hereby know we the spirit of error and the
spirit of truth (...) and a little after he adds, and hereby know we that
we dwell (...) him, and he in us, because he has given us of his spirit. Thus
then you in the iudgement^ of the word is, that you are a g^^^ tree of the
Lords planting and ^^g^aning, abiding in Christ Jesus, that you are one of
Christ's Disciples, translated from death to life, and led by the spirit of
truth, and therefore such an one as dwelles in the favor of God; this is Gods
sentence and judgment of you, and therefore thankefully praise him, and bring
once all your thoughts and imaginations that set up themselves against this,
into obedience hereunto: quench not the spirit, neither yet grieve any longer
the spirit of grace, 1 Thessalonians. 19. Ephe. 4.30.
whereby you are thus comfortably sealed unto the day of redemption, be no
longer unthankful unto God in staying from confessing your self to be his
child, and to have faith. Be of good cheer, the Lord has given you beauty
for ashes, the oil of joy for m^^rning, the garment of gladness for the
spirit of heaviness, and therefore say with the Prophet in the same place
Esaias. 61. I will greatly rejoice in the Lord, and we soul shall be joyful in
my God, for he has clothed me with the garments of salvation, and covered me
with the robe of righteousness, yea, he has decked me like a Bridegroom, and
as a Bride tireth hirselfe with jewels: and let not yours weakness and
brusednesse any wore dismay you, for you have a God that will not quench the
smoking s^are, not yet break the bruised reed. Neither yet let the chaunges
and alterations that you find in your self disco^^^t you, for God is no
changeling neither in himself nor in his gifts Mal. 3. James. 1. ^om. 11. and
though Satan be bu^^e in making war, and in renewing his assaults, yet
^^^r^st not, if you were not Gods child, and o^e in Gods kingdom, he needed
not, neither yet would so strive with you, he warreth not against those that be
his, but is at peace with them, and Christ that has taken in hand the keeping
of you, is a good Shepeheard, and has triumphed over sin, and overcome him,
and therefore he is bold to say John. 10. My Sheep shall never perish, neither
shall any pluck them out of my hands Psalm. 28. if we by the force of ye
enemy be caused to stray sometime, yet he gives us not over, but seeks us
till he find us, and then he lays us on his shoulder, and brings us home
again Luke. 15. and therefore let us even boldly trust our selves with him,
nothing doubting, but yt if he lead us at any time into temptation, he will
stand by us, and so preserve us, that we shall happily get out again, to his
glory and our comfort, which God the Father grant us, even for this his
sons sake, now and ever, Amen. To which God the Father, God the Son, and
God the holy Ghost, three persons and one true and ever living God, be all
praise, honor and dominion for evermore.

Amen.

