A DESCRIPTION of the Civil VVarres of ENGLAND.
IN this Platform are contained (gentle Reader) the several battles fought by
Sea and Land, at several times and in several places of England and Ireland,
and the parts adjoining, within these five hundred years last past.
Description of pictures after the manner of sight, as the plot will give roomth
I have placed, and in the margent by numbers marked, observing the time, year,
and event of every battle, which being performed by me in satisfaction of the
honorable desire of certain Martial Gentlemen professors of Arms, and lovers
of learning, were desirous to see these mixtures of matters of their own
profession, and the passed proceedings of their own countries affairs, and
desired me with my poor labor to further so good a work: which being
finished in large with the liking of the motioners, and good allowance of her
Majesty, to whose sacred person it was commended, and there contented to have
rested. The counterfeit whereof notwithstanding much lessened and more badly
performed, has since come forth in print, either through the greedy desire of
gain (the bane of all good proceedings) or the gainsaying minds of such as
are envious to others pains, lest their own profit thereby be empayred, whose
barren inventions must be supported by other men's endeavors, and their shallow
conceits carried through the currants of others springs otherwise run they
from little to nothing.

The silence of Englands civil wars I could have wished, being the marks of
our own infamies, and stains to be washed away rather with repentance, then
again to be renewed by remembrance: had not these drawn my pains to their
own headless inventions, and shot my shafts from their own Bows: for lucre
making common that, which in private and for great Estates I intended: and by
their indirect means am enforced to bring mine own (yet much abridged) to the
Press. Wherein if it so fall out, as that this my endeavor do yield
contentment to them which hitherto have allowed my labors, I mean in time to
come (if God permit) to second the same with another plot of other Wars,
performed by Englishmen in other Countries, against others and foreign forces:
a matter of more honor to our Country and pleasure to our Contrymen, in
regard the same are accompanied with many famous victories, under the Standers
of whose Kings, mighty Kings many times have been forced to bow, and Martial
men constrained to yield to Englands glorious obtained victories. These being
for the most part Civil Battles between mere Englishmen of one Nation,
wherein the parties victorers, besides the loss of their own side, procured
on the other, the fall and ruin of them that were all of his own Country,
many of them of his own acquaintance and alliance, and most of them perhaps
his own friends in any other cause, then that in which he contended for. But
from this general argument, to proceed to some particulars, it shall not be
amiss to make some division of them, according to their several qualities, of
the several quarrels in them which are found to be diverse, and of three
several natures. Whereof the first were the invasions attempted by foreign
Princes, and enemies against the Kings and people of this Realm. The second
were mere rebellions of Subjects against their anointed Princes. And the
third dissensious factions betwixt Princes of the blood Royal: of these three,
all these effusions of blood have consisted.

And to begin with the first battle in this plot, which was the first
beginning of government of this state as it yet continues. Such was the
attempt of William Duke of Normandy against King Harold the son of Earl
Goodwin, who prevailed so against him in fight at Battle in Sussex (a place
so called by this event) as the said Duke was afterward King of this Land, and
brought the whole nation under his obedience, as it has been continued to his
posterity ever since. Such was the arrival of Jews son and heir to Philip
King of France against John King of England, who being carried by his own
ambition, accompanied with French forces, and assisted by the rebellious Barons
of this Realm, after variable fortune of fight in several skirmishes,
battles, and assaults, was forced in the end, without all honor, or hope to
prevail, to make a very shameful retreat into his own country. Such was also
the entry made by James the fourth King of Scots, against King Henry the eight
of famous memory, his brother in law, and sworn allie, at that time absent in
the wars of France, who contrary to his oath and alliance formerly made,
entered the North frontires of England, with a mighty Army, had the same
discomfited and overthrown, and was himself slain in the field by the English
forces, under the leading of the Earl of Surrey, at that time Lieutenant
general for King Henry. And especially such was the late enterprise remaining
fresh in memory, of Phillip late King of Spain, against our dread Sovereign
Lady now reigning, in the year of our Lord 1588. attempting by his inuin^ible
Navy as he thought, and so termed, under the conduct of the Duke of Medina
Celi, which with great pride and cruelty intended against us, arrived on our
coasts to Englands invasion and subversion, had yet nevertheless here in the
narrow Seas, the one part of his Fleet discomfited, taken, and drowned, and the
other part forced to their great shame in poor estate to make a fearful and
miserable flight about the coast of Ireland homeward so that of 158. great
ships furnished for war, came to their own coast of Spain but few, and
those so torn and beaten by the English Cannons, that it was thought they were
unserviceable for ever, and eleven of their ensigns or banners of Idolatry,
prepared for triumph and pride in conquest, were contrariwise to their shame
and dishonor showed at Pauls-Crosse, and in other places of this Realm, to
Gods glory, our joy, and their endless infamy.

The second sort of quarrels in these wars, were mere rebellions of subjects
against their anointed Princes and Governors and of these some have been
private* and some general. Of the first kind for private occasions, was that
of Thomas Earl of Lancaster, against King Edward the second his cosin-germane,
upon mislike of the Spencers, greatly favored by the King, and as much envied
of him, who having his forces defeated at Burrowbridge, was there taken
prisoner, and after beheaded at Pomfret. Of the same kind was that of Henry
Lord Percie, surnamed Hot spur, and Thomas Percie Earl of Worcester his
Uncle, against K. Henry the fourth, at Shrewesbury; where the said Lord Henry
was slain, and the other taken prisoner, and after beheaded in the same town.
So was that of Michaell Joseph the blacksmith in Cornwall and his company
against King Henry the seventh, for a Subsidy granted in Parliament to the
same King, who gathered a head of rebellion so strong, that at Black Heath
near London, they abode battle against their Sovereign, but were there
taken, and afterward drawn, headed and quartered at Tiburne. Also such was
that of Robert Ket the Tanner of Windham in Norfolk, against King Edward the
sixth, pretended against enclosures and liberty to the weal public, was at
Norwich taken in the field, and afterward hanged on the top of the castle of
the same town. And lastly, so was that of Sir Thomas Wiat and the Kentishmen
against Queen Mary for the bringing in of Phillip of Spain, they being cut off
at S. James, and himself yielded at the Court. Of the latter sort of Rebellions
being general, were those of the Barons against King John, and King Henry the
third his son, in their several reigns. Against the father, in bringing in of
foreign powers; and working a resignation of the Crown and Diadem, to the
great blemish of their King and Kingdom. And against the son so prosecuted
their attempts, that their wars to this day are called and known by the name
of the Barons-wars, which had so lamentable consequence, as that after the
overthrow and consummation of sundry most noble and ancient houses of England,
and both parties wearied with wars: the conclusions of peace which ensued are
reported in regard of the precedent murders to be written with blood.

The third sort of these quarrels in these Ciuil-wars and dissentions, were
factious dissentions between Princes themselves of the blood Royal,
ambitiously aspiring the Crown of this Kingdom, and titles of Kings thereof:
Of which kind there have been two most notable known amongst us. The first
fell betwixt Stephen of Bloyse, Earl of Bolloigne, wrongfully succeeding his
uncle king Henry the first, in the Crown of England, on the one party, and
Maude the Empress, Daughter and sole heir to the said King Henry, and Henry
Duke of Normandy (his son and heir, who afterward succeeded the same K.
Stephen) on the other part, which was followed with such variable success of
fortune in many conflicts on both parts, that King Stephen himself was taken
prisoner, and laid in irons, with extremity used, and the Empress to save her
life dangerously adventured through the Scouts of the enemy, in the snow
slenderly guarded, and before that was driven to such distress, that faining
to be dead, she was laid as a liuelesse coarse in a coffin, and so conuaied
away in a Horse-litter. But the second and last of these two, being the
greatest of all the rest, was that which happened between the House of York
descended of Lionell of Andwarpe, Duke of Clarence, second son to King Edward
the third: and the house of Lancaster, issued of John of Gaunt, the third son
living of the same King; The occasion of a Civil war that raged most cruelly
for a long time together, but at that time most extremely, when there reigned
two Kings, of either Family; one of Lancaster, Henry the sixth, another of
York, Edward the fourth: between whom with the favorers and followers, there
were twelve several battles fought in little more then twelve years space. In
so much as one of our own writers Edward Hall, the great Chronicler, says,
that in these Civil wars betwixt these two Families it cost more English
blood, then twice had done the winning of France: and of foreign writers
Phillip Comi^^^, Lord of Argentine in France, reports that it consumed no
less then fourscore Princes of the blood Royal: and Paulus Iouius a Bishop
of Nouo Como in Italy, resembles the state of these wars to the most
tragical story of the City Thebes.

So let these few examples showed in these three general heads, suffice in
this brief Description in stead of many that might be brought; for by these we
may judge of the rest.

Now the benefit that may be gathered by perusing the several sorts of them,
shall be to consider, in the first, the blessing of God poured upon us, in
preserving our Country and Nation against the several invasions of foreign
enemies, notwithstanding their several and many attempts. In the second the
fall and ruin of rebellious Subjects taking arms against their anointed
Kings, Princes and Governors. And in the third the power of God and his heavy
punishments inflicted upon us for our sins, in making the one party the
scourge or maule of the other, with revenging murder by murder, working the
depopulation of our fruitful Country, and ruinating of our Cities at home,
with loss and reuolting of the territories in subjection unto us by just title
of inheritance and conquest abroad. And in all of them representing unto us the
lamentable stories of the times fore-passed and gone, to compare with the same
the peaceable estate of the happy times possessed and present, wherein Martial
men have leisure to win honor abroad, the rest to live in quiet and wealth
at home, all factions forgotten, and all rebellions surceased and repressed:
and for these blessings to yield due thanks unto Almighty God, that has
provided for us such a Prince, and so directed her in her government over us,
that with ease and pleasure we may both behold the one, and enjoy the other,
especially in these dangerous days of these latter times, when all hostility
and outrage of civil wars, broiles, and dissentions, have seemed by the
power of the Almighty hand of God stretched forth in our defense, to have been
transported out of this Island over the Seas into other Countries, insomuch as
notwithstanding this calm security of our own at home, our neighbour-Nations
of all sides abroad, either through the licentious tyranny of ungodly Princes,
that have laid persecution upon their Subjects, or the mutinous dissentions of
disobedient people, that have raised Rebellions against their Princes, have
been so turmoyled with garboyle of wars, as they have been pitifully
enforced to pray and seek aid at her Majesty's hands, and to submit
themselves under the protection of her, whom with us they acknowledge to be the
very defendresse of the Christian Faith and Peace, and the most natural Nurse
of the true Church of GOD. By all loyal duty therefore, we are indebted to
yield obedience unto her Majesty, and to her Majesty's most religious
government, by whom we have received such peace as the World does admire, and
following ages to her eternal fame shall record: and with faithful hearts
pray, that peace may ever dwell within her walls, and prosperity abide within
her Palaces, and that the abundance of her peace may continue so long as the
Sun and Moon endures.

Cease civil broils, O Englands subjects cease,
With streams of blood stain this fair soil no more:
As God, so Kings must be obeyed with peace,
Yield thou thy due, to them their right restore:
Wash with repentance, these thine acts before:
Give loyal pledge, with might resist her wrongs,
That reigns thy Prince, to her thy Sword belongs.
THE INVASIONS OF ENGLAND AND IRELAND WITH ALL THEIR CIVIL WARS SINCE THE
CONQVEST,
TO THE RIGHT Worshipful Sir Oliver Sanct John Knight.





(1) AT Battle the 14. of October being Saturday, the year of Christ, 1066.
William Duke of Normandy obtained this Land by Conquest, and slew Harold King
thereof, with Gerth and Leofwine his brethren, with 67974. Englishmen.

(2) York burnt and 3000. of the Citizens and Normans slain by the Danes,
under the leading of Harold and Canutus, sons to Sweno King of Denmark, for
the recovery of the Crown to the Danish blood, 1069. W.C. reg. 3.

(3) Malcolme King of Scots invaded Tefidale, Holdernesse, and Cumberland,
charging his Soldiers to spare neither sex nor age of the English nation, An.
1071. but the year following was himself forced to do homage to W. C. reg. 5.

(4) Elie surprised and won by the Conqueror, the last part of this Land that
flood out against the Normans, under Hereward their most valiant Captain. An.
reg. Conq. 7. 1073.

(5) The first seating of the Englishmen in Wales, through the dissension of
their Princes, who being called for parttakers, took from the Welsh that which
they could not again recover. 1090. reg. 1. Ruf. 3.

(6) At Alnwicke Malcolme king of Scots inuading Northumberland, with his son
Edward was slain, and all his boast discomfited by Rob. Mowbray Earl of
North. reg. Ruf. 5. 1092.

(7) Northampton endammaged and the Country adjoining spoiled through the
civil dissension of the three brethren William, Robert, and Henry, sons to the
Conq. H. 1. An. 7. 1106.

(8) Powes-land invaded by King Henry I. and resisted so by the Welsh, being
struck with an arrow on the breast that it had almost cost him his life. Au.
reg. 21. 1121.

(9) At Cardigan a sore battle was fought in October 1136. wherein many
thousands were slain, and men by women led away captives. reg. Steph. 1.

(10) Bristow taken by Robert Earl of Gloucester in defense of his sister Maud
the Empress, against K. Stephen. reg. 3. 1138.

(11) David K. of Scots inuading Northumberland, made his spoil as far as
Aluerton in Yorkshire, where being encountered by Thurston Archbishop of York,
Will. Earl of Albemarle, Wa. Espeke, Will. Peuerel, and the two Lacies, August.
22. was with his son Henry put to flight, and ten thousand Scots slain,
1139. Steph. 4.

(12) Nottingham taken and burned by Rob. bastard Earl of Glocest. in defense
of his sister Maud the Empress, 1140. Steph. 5.

(13) At Lincoln by Ranulph Earl of Chester and Rob. Earl of Glocest. K.
Stephen was taken prisoner, had to Glocest. thence to Bristow, and there laid
in irons. Feb. 2. 1141. reg. 5.

(14) From Winchester Maud the Empress, her Armies both of Scots and English
dispersed and overcome, fled to Lutegarshal, to Vies, and thence to Gloucester,
laid in a horse-litter* fained to be her dead corpse, and her brother Rob. taken
prisoner. reg. Steph. 6. 1141.

(15) From Oxford Maud the Empress with five persons more, apparelled in white
sheets, to deceive the Kings Scoutwatch, fled through the Snow, and so escaped
that besieged town. An. 1142. Steph. 7.

(16) At Edmundsbury Rob. Earl of Leicest. with Petronill his Countess were
taken prisoners, and 20000. taken and slain, by Richard Lucie L. chief
Justice, and Humfrey de Bohun high Constable of England, October. 17. 1173. H.
2.19.

(17) At Alnwicke W. King of Scots was taken prisoner by Rob. Scotuile,
Randulph Mandeuile, Barnard Bailiol and Will. Vescy Captaiues, his army
containing 80000. fighting men, July 7. 1174. he was sent to London, and by K.
Henry carried into Normandy, imprisoned at Roan, and ransomed at 4000. pounds.

(18) At Lincoln all the English Barons with 400. knights that took part with
Jews, were overthrown and taken, May 19. 1217. and first of H. 3.

(19) At Montgomery Llewellin Prince of Wales through the practice of a
traitorous Monk, overcame and slew many of the Kings power* An. 1231. reg. H.
3.15.

(20) At Chesterfield a conflict was done, wherein Robert Ferrers Earl of
Darby was taken, and many slain, An. H. 3.41. 1256.

(21) Northampton surprised by King H. 3. against his rebellious Barons, April
4. 1263. reg. 48.

(22) At Jews, May 12. 1264. K. H. 3. by his unfaithful Barons, with his
Brother Rich. King of Alman, and his son Prince Edward were taken prisoners.
There were slain about 4500. by Simon Montfort and Gil. Clare Earls of
Leicest. and Glocest. reg. H. 3.48.

(23) At Euesham, the 5. of August 1265. a sore battle was fought, wherein K.
H. 3. prevailed against the Barons through their own dissentions, and most of
them slain, as Sim. Montfort Earl of Leic. and 17. Lords and knights besides;
Humfrey Bohun and with him ten men of great account taken prisoners, with
slaughter of all the Welshmen. An. reg. 48.

(24) Berwick won, and 25000. Scottish slain, An. E. 1.24. 1296.

(25) At Bluith Leolin the last Prince that bare rule of the Britains, coming
from Snowdown, by Rog. Strangb. was slain, and his head crowned with Iuie set
upon the Tower of London. E. 1.10. An. 1282.

(26) At Mitton 3000. Yorkshire men were slain encountering with the Scots
inuading their country, called the white battle, for that it consisted most
of Clergy men. An. 1318. reg. E. 2.12.

(27) Unto Preston in Andernesse Rob. Bruise K. of Scots invaded England, burned
the said town, and haried the country before him, reg. E. 2.14. An. 1322.

(28) Borrowbridge battle fought betwixt E. 2. and his Barons, March 16. 1322.
under the leading of Andr. Hercley Earl of Carlle, where Tho. Earl of Lanc.
was taken and with him 65. Lords and Knights, Hum. Bohun being thrust into the
fundament thro^gh a bridge was slain. An. reg. 14.

(29) At Blackamore the Sc^ts following the English army, took prisoners the
Earl of Richm. and the French Ambassador, the King himself hardly escaped.
An. reg. E. 2.15. 1323.

(30) At Glamorgan K. E. 2. by his unnatural and cruel wife was taken Nou. 16.
1326. and conveyed to Monmouth, to Ledb^ry, to Kenilworth, to Corffe, to
Bis^ow, thence to Barkley Castle, and there lame^tably murdered, (...). 21.

(31) At Stannop park th Scots entrenched themselves, and against the English
made rim^ of disgrace as follows. An. E. 3.2. 1328. Long beards he^^tlesse,
painted hoods witless,
Gay coats grac^^esse, make England thriftlesse.


(32) At Halidown hill a great battle fought against the Scots, wherein were
slain 8. Earls, 1^00. horsemen, and common soldiers 35000 and their chief
Cha^pion Turnbul overcome by Rob. Venal Knight of Norfolk* An. E. 3.7. 1333.

(33) Southampton sack^d by Genowaie Pirates under the leading of the King of
Sicils (...), yet the townsmen slew 300. of them, and their Captain brai^ed
by a Husbandmans club. An. 1338. E. 3.12.

Carleil, Penr^th, and many towns else burnt by the Scots, under Will. Douglas,
yet la^tly are overcome by the manhood and policy of Th. Lucy, Rob. O^le, and
the B. of that sea, an. r. E. 3.19. 1345.

(35) At Neuils cross David Bruise K. of Scots inuading England with 60000.
Soldiers, was taken prisoner by ^o. Copland Esquire, and conuayed to London
with many of his Nobility, besides many noble men slain in the field under
the leading of Will. Young Archbishop of York, vicegerent, the Lords Mowbray,
Percie and Neuil, Queen Phillip in her own person present, encouraging her
people to fight. reg. E. 3.20. 1346.

(36) The insurrection of the commons under the leading of Jack Straw, Wat
Tiler, and others, after many rebellious acts done in Kent and Essex, from
Black Heath, Mile-end* and Smith-field, were dispersed, where the said Wat
Tiler was worthily slain by Will. Walworth Mayor of London, on Saturday, June
15. reg. Rich. 2.4. An. 1381.

(37) At North-Walsham the rebellious commons, by the instigation of Io. Wraw,
who had gathered 50. thousand in Suffolk, and under the leading of John
Litisar of Norwich Dyer, calling himself king of the commons were by Henry
Spencer Bishop of that City overcome, and their rustical king drawn, hanged,
and beheaded, who had by violence carried with him the Lord Seals, the Lord
Morley, Stephen Hales, and Robert Sale Knights, to serve at his Table, and take
his assayes. Rich. 2.4. 1381.

(38) Near Hatfield the rebellious commons of Essex were overcome, and 500. of
them slain by Thomas Woodstock Duke of Glocest. An. 1382. R. 2.^.

(39) At Radcot bridge Tho. Duke of Gloucester, the Earls of Arundel, Warwick,
Darby, and Nottingham, encountering with Rob. Vere Duke of Ireland, maintained
by King Ric. 2. against them, with 5000. men, slew Sir Tho. Mo^ineux Constable
of Chester* and put the said Duke to such strait, that in swimming Thames he
had almost lost his life, 1387. reg. Ric. 2.11.

(40) At Otterborne under the leading of Will. Douglas 1100 English men were
slain, and ^0000. put to flig^t, Lord Henry and Ralph P^rcies sons to the
Earl of Northumberland, were taken prisoners, notwithstanding the said L.
Henry had manfully slain that valiant captain Will. Douglas at the first
encounter, 1388. R. 2.12.

(41) At Flint castle King Rich. 2. was by the falsenes of Henry Percie Earl
of Northumb. delivered into the hands of Henry Duke of Lancaster, and thence
conveyed as prisoner to London, committed to the Tower, and shortly deposed:
thence sent to Leeds castle in Kent: lastly, to Pomfreit, and there murdered,
Feb. 13. 1400.

(*) At Circester the conspirators against K. Henry 4. were discomfited: the
Dukes of Excester and Surrey, the Earls of Salisbury, Gloucester, and
Huntington, Sr Th. Blunt and Barnard Brocas knights, were there taken, and in
sundry places beheaded, 1400. Ian. 15. reg. 2.

(42) At Hallidown hill again another great and bloody battle was fought Sep.
14. against the Scots by K. Henry 4. wherein the said Scots were beaten down
and slain, and besides the loss of many thousand common Soldiers, fourscore
Earls, Lords and knights of account were also then slain. An. 1402. reg. 3.

(43) At Pelale in Wales 110. Englishmen were slain by Owen Glendouer, and
Edmund Mortimer Earl of March taken prisoner, reg. H. 4.3. 1402.

(44) At Shrewsbury a bloody battle was fought against K. Henry 4 by the
Percies Henry and Thomas, wherein Henry L. Percie surnamed Hotspur, was slain
in the place called Old field, and Lord Thomas Earl of Worcester taken and
beheaded: there were slain on both sides 6600. An. 1403.

(45) The French coming to aid Owen Glendouer besieged Carmarden and spoiled
it. An. 1405. reg. H. 4.6.

(46) At Bramham-moore Henry Percy Earl of Northum. with Tho. Lord Bardolfe,
and many more, in taking arms against K. Henry. 4. were slain by Thomas
Rockley Sheriff of Yorkshire, 1408. reg. 9.

(47) On Black Heath twice Jack Cade (naming himself John Mortimer, captain of
the kentish rebels) camped against K. H. 6. reg. 28. An. 1450.

(48) At Sennocke the Kings power was overcome by Jack Cade, and the two
Staffords, brethren, slain by those rebels: but from Southwarke they were
dispersed, and Cade slain lurking in a garden, by Alexander Eden Gentleman of
Kent. 1450.

(49) At Dertforth upon Brent-heath, Rich. Duke of York encamped himself with
an army of 10000. men, against K. Henry 6. reg. 30. An. 1452.

(50) Saint Albons first battle fought May 23. against King H. 6. by Richard
Duke of York, wherein on the Kings side were slain Edmund Duke of Somerset,
Henry Earl of Northumb. Humfrey Earl of Stafford, John L. Clifford, with many
Knights of valor, and 5000. men on their parties besides: the King himself
was wounded with an arrow, and but only 600. of the Dukes men slain. An.
1455. reg. 33.

(51) Blore-heath field foughten September. 23. by Richard Earl of Salisbury
against K. Henry 6. the Lord Audley being general for the King; where the said
Lord was slain, with many Knights of Cheshire in his part, and with them 2400.
persons lost their lives. An. 1459. reg. 38.

(52) At Northampton the Earls of March and Warwick fought against K. Henry 6.
in the quarrel of Richard Duke of York, wherein the King himself was taken
and conuayed to London, Humfrey Duke of Buckingham, John Talbot Earl of
Shrewesbury, the Lords Beamont and Egremont were there slain. 1459. June 10.
reg. 38.

(53) Wakefield battle fought December. 30. 1461. by Q. Margaret, in defense of
K. Hen. 6. her husbands title, wherein the said Duke was slain with young
Edmund Earl of Rutland his son, the two bastards Mortimers Knights, and
2200. more: there Th. Neuill Earl of Salisbury was taken prisoner, and after
beheaded at Pomfreit. An. reg. 39.

(54) At Mortimers cross Edw. Earl of March, in revenge of the death of Rich.
Duke of York his Father, obtained a great victory against the Earls of
Penbroke and Wiltshire in the quarrel of Q. Margaret, and there slew 3800.
Englishmen, Feb. 2. being the day of Mary's Purification: in this battle Owen
Teuther was taken and beheaded. An. 1461. reg. H. 6. 39.

(55) Saint Albons last battle fought by Q. Margaret, against the Dukes of
Norfolk and Suffolk, the Earls of Warwick and Arundel, that kept by force
K. Henry her husband, with whom by constraint he held and fought, and lost the
field: there were slain of Englishmen 1916. persons. Februar. 17. being
Shroue. tuesday. 1461.

(56) Towton-field a most deadly and mortal battle fought on Palm-sundry. March
29. wherein were slain of Englishmen 35091. or as other have, 36776. persons,
amongst whom these Nobles dyed. Earls: Northumberland, Shrewesbury and
Devonshire. Lords: Clifford, Beamont, Neuil, Willoughby, Wels, Roos, Seals,
Gray, Dacres, Fitzhugh, Mollens, Bechingam. Knights: the two Bastards of
Excester, Percie, Heyron, Clifton, Hamys, two Crakenthorps, two Throlopes,
Haril, Ormond, Mollin, Pigot, Norbohew, and Burton, with many more Knights, and
others not named. K. H. 6. with such as escaped fled into Scotland, leaving E.
4. victor, 1461.

(57) Hexam battle fought May 15. against King H. 6. under the conduct of John
Neuil, L. Montacute, wherein Henry D. of Somerset, with the L. Roos, Mollens,
and Hungerford were taken. K. Hen. flying into Lancashire remained there in
wants and secret a year and more, and whence by deceit he was taken and
conuayed to the Tower of London, 1464. reg. E. 4.4.

(58) Edgecot-field fought upon Danes moore, July 26. by the Northren Lords,
their captains being Sir John Coniers, and Robbin of Ridsdale, against K. E.
4. under the leading of Will. Herbert Earl of Pembrook, who together with his
brother Ric. was taken, as also Ric. Wooduile, L. Rivers, brother to the Q.
with John his son, and all four beheaded, 5000. of their host being slain,
with most of the Welchmen, 1469. reg. E. 4.9.

(*) At Wolney K. Edw. 4. gathering his host to recover his loss, was taken
prisoner by his brother George D. of Clarence, and Ric. the stout E. of
Warwick, and conuaied to Middleham Castle in Yorkshire, whence shortly he
escaped to Land. 1469.

(***) At Stamford the Lincolnshire men, under the conduct of Sir Rob. Wells
Knight, instigated by Ric. Earl of Warwick against K. E. 4. were overcome,
and 1100. of them slain, the rest in flight so cast away their furniture, that
to this day the battle is called Losecote field, 1470. E. 4.10.

(59) Barnes-field fought April 14. being Easter Day, by the Earls of Warwick,
Oxford, and Marquis Montacute, against K. E. 4 who led H. 6. prisoner to the
field with him* in this battle were slain Ric. Earl of Warwick, and Marq.
Montacute his brother. On K. Edwards part were slain the Lords Cromwell, Say
and Mountioy: the slaughter in all amounted to 10000. says Hal, 1471. E. 4.11.

(60) At Tewkesbury K. E 4. obtained the diadem in subduing H. 6. under the
leading of prince Edward, who was there slain, and Q. Margaret taken prisoner:
there died likewise Th Courtney E. of Devonshire, John Somerset Marquis Dorset,
and the Lord Wenlake: of Knights, Hamden, Whittington, Vaus, Haruy, Deluys,
Filding, Leukenor, Lirmouth, Vrman, Seamer, Roos, and Henry: Edm. D. of
Somerset was there taken, and beheaded with John Bough L. Prior of S. John's.
May 4. 1471. E. 4. 11.

(61) Bosworth-field fought upon Redmoore, Aug. 22. 1485. and 3. of Ric. 3.
where himself was slain, with Ioh. D. of Norfolk, Wa. L. Ferrers, Ric.
Ratclif, and Rob. Brakenbury Knights, and 4000. more of his company: on the E.
of Richmonds part only ten persons, the chief whereof was Will. Brandon Knight,
his Standard Bearer. Earl Henry was there crowned in the field, and the union
of Lancaster with York effected, whose civil dissentions had cost more English
blood; then twice had done the winning of France.

(62) Stokefield June 16. 1487, was fought to arrest Lambert a counterfeit
Warwick against King H. 7. where 4000. with the naked Irish were slain, and
with them dyed De La Pole Earl of Lincoln, Francis L. Louel, Tho. Geradine
Chancellor of Ireland, Martin Swart, and Sir Tho. Broughton, Knights, general
against the King. Lambert was there taken and made a turne-spit. H. 7.2.

(63) At Cockeledge near York, the commons rose and slew Hen. E. of Northumb.
for a tax collected by him, granted in Parliament: their Captain named John a
Cumber was hanged at York, 1489. H. 7.4.

(64) Excest. besieged by Perken Werbeck a counterfeit, naming himself Ric. D.
of York, before murdered in the Tower of Land. after he had indammaged the
North and Northumb. was from this City expulsed to Bewdley sanctuary, and
lastly executed at Tiburne, 1497. reg. H 7.13.

(65) This same City was again besieged by the rebels of Devonshire and
Cornwall the 3. of E. 6. under the leading of Hum, Arundel, Holmes, Winslow,
and Bury, but was rescued by Io. L. Russel, with the L. Gray, and 4000. of
them slain, 1549.

(66) On Black Heath again was fought a sore battle by Tho. Flamock gent.
Michael Joseph Blackesmith, and Iam. Twichet. L. Audley, with the
Cornish-rebels, where 2000. of them were slain by Giles L. Daubeney general for
the King, and 1500. taken prisoners. Iu. 22. 1497. H. 7.

(67) Floden-field the 9. of Sep. and 5. of K. H. 8. was fought against the
Scots, by L. Tho. Howard, E. of Surrey, lieutenant general for the King, where
James 4. K. of Scots with 3. Bishops, 2. Lord Abbots, 12. Earls, 17 Lords, and
8000. soldiers were slain, the dead body of K. James wrapped in lead, was
brought to Shine in Surrey, and there cast into a corner, not long since
remaining and seen.

(68) At Solommosse 15000. Scots under the leading of the L. Maxwel: by Tho.
bastard Dacres, and Jack Musgraue, were valiantly vanquished, and 21. of their
nobility (whereof eight were Earls) brought as prisoners to London, and 200.
more of great account, besides 800. common soldiers slain and taken, for very
grief whereof King James fell sick, and shortly after dyed. 1542. H. 8.32.

(69) Muscleborrow-field fought Sep. 10. 1546. by Edw. D. of Somerset L.
Protector, and Ioh. Dudley E. of Warw. against the Scots, where 14000. were
slain, and 1500. taken prisoners, only 60. English then slain. E. 6.1.

(70) At Norwich in a commotion led by Rob. Ket Tanner of Windham, Will. Lord
Marquis of Northampto^ was put to flight, and the L. Sheffield slain, the City
fired, and many outrages done, 1549. E. 6.3.

(71) At Mount Surrey the rebels, with their leader Rob. Ket, were by Ioh.
Dudley E. of Warwick overcome and forced to yield, 5000. of them being slain,
and Ket taken and hanged on the Castle of Norwich, or as some have, upon the
Oak of reformation, Aug. 27. 1549. E. 6.3.

(72) Sir Tho. Wiat with his company of Kentishmen driven to march from
Southwark to Kingston and thence to S. James, yielded himself at Temple Bar,
with the loss only of 40. persons on both parts, Feb. 7. 1554. Mar. 1.

(73) At Tadcaster Tho. Percie Earl of Northumb* and Charles Neuil E. of
Westmerland in their co^motions took 200. footmen repairing toward York for
the defense of the City against those rebels, 1569. Eliz. 12.

(74) Durham taken by the rebels of the North, under the leading of Percie and
Neuil Earls, which had gathered 7000. and surprised Barnards Castle* were by
the Earl of Sussex, lieutenant general for the Queen, forced into Scotland,
and many of their Associates worthily put to death, 1569. And lastly (which God
grant may be the last) Tho* late Earl of Northumb. was beheaded in York. Aug.
20. 1572. Eliz. 14.

1) Wexford conquered by Robert Fitz-Stephen, May 1. 1170. Anno. H. 2.16. 2)
Dublin and Waterford won by Richard Strongbow Earl of Chepstow, 1170. Reg. H.
2.16. 3) Down and Vlster conquered by John Curcy a strong Englishman, Anno
1177. Reg. H. 2.23. 4) A battle fought against Roderick K. of Vlster, who
prevailed against King H. 2. 1177. Reg. 23. 5) At Colraine in Vlster Edward
Bruce entitled King of Ireland, put the English power to flight, and took many
of the Nobles prisoners, E. 2.9. 1315. 6) Armagh battle fought against Edw.
Bruce, who was there taken, and beheaded at Dundalk, and with him 6200. Scots
lost their lives, Ann. 1318. Reg. E. 2.12. 7) At Kilkenny R. 2. with an host
of 30000 strong besieged Mackmur, but little prevailed, through the sudden
arriual into England of H. Bullingbrook Earl of Hereford, Anno 1399. Reg. R.
2.23. 8) At Dundalk Sham Oneal with the loss of 3500. men was put to flight by
S. Henry Sidney Knight, and flying for succor to the wild Scots, was by them
murdered in Clan Abbey, Elizab. 9. 1567. 9) At Smerwick the Italians and
Spaniards sent by the Pope to aid Desmond in his rebellions, entrench
themselves under the Popes banner, where the Lord Gray slew 400. of them, and
put the rest to their ransom. Eliz. 22. 1580 10) James Earl of Desmond, after
many notorious rebellions by him committed, wandering from place to place in
great distress, was lastly slain in his cabin by an Irishman, December. 13.
1580. Reg. Eliz. 22. 11) Clanowan in Thomond fortified against her Majesty by
Mahown Obrion, but himself was slain, and his castle worthily raced by S.
Richard Bingham Knight, An. 1585. Eliz. 27. 12) In the Country of Mayo the
Burkes stir rebellion against her Majesty's Civil government, but were
dispersed and overthrown by captain John Bingham and the Earl of Clanrikard,
1586. Reg. Eliz. 28. 13) At Ardnary 2000. Scots brought in to aid the Burkes,
upon promise to enjoy that Country, were by Sir Richard Bingham all slain
except 80. persons that saved themselves by swimming the river Mayo: their
leaders the Burkes with them also dyed, 1586. Reg. Eliz. 28. 14) Tyrone in his
rebellions against her sacred Majesty, has ouerlong troubled the peace of
Ireland, but chiefly the Province of Vlster, whose treacherous acts and savage
cruelties has moved her Highness to send forces thitherward, for whose
prosperous success, with the overthrow of all treasons and rebellions, let all
true hearted Subjects pray.
Collected by JOHN SPEED Citizen of London. Anno 1600.


