A MOVZELL FOR MELASTOMVS, The Cynicall Bayter of, and foul mouthed Barker
against EVAHS SEX.

Or an Apologeticall Answer to that Irreligious and Illiterate Pamphlet made
by Io. Sw. and by him Entitled, The Arraignement of Women.

By Rachel Speght.

PROVERBS 26. 5.

Answer a fool according to his foolishness, lest he be wise in his own
conceit.

LONDON,

Printed by Nicholas Oaks for Thomas Archer, and are to be sold at his shop in
Popeshead-Pa^^^ce. 1617.

To all virtuous Ladies Honorable or Worshipful, and to all other of Heuahs
sex fearing God, and leuing their just reputation, grace and peace through
Christ, to eternal glory.
IT was the similie of that wise and learned Lactantius, that if fire, though
but with a small spark kindled, be not at the first quenched, it may work
great mischief and damage: So likewise may the scandals and defamations of
the malevolent in time prove pernicious, if they be not nipt in the head at
their first appearance. The consideration of this (right Honorable and
Worshipful Ladies) has incited me (though young, and the unworthiest of
thousands) to encounter with a furious enemy to our sex, least if his unjust
imputations should continue without answer, he might insult and account
himself a victor; and by such a conceit deal, as Historiographers report the
viper to do, who in the Winter time does vomit forth her poison, and in the
spring time sucketh the same up again, which becomes twice as deadly as the
former: And this our pestiferous enemy, by thinking to provide a more deadly
poison for women, then already he has foamed forth, may euaporate, by an
addition unto his former illeterate Pamphlet (entitled The Arraignement of
Women) a more contagious obtrectation then he has already done, and indeed
has threatened to do. Secondly, if it should have had free passage without any
answer at all (seeing that Tacere is, quasi consentire) the vulgar ignorant
might have believed his Diabolical infamies to be infallible truths, not to
be infringed; whereas now they may plainly perceive them to be but the
scumme of Heathenish brains, or a building raised without a foundation (at
least from sacred Scripture) which the wind of Gods truth must needs cast
down to the ground. A third reason why I have adventured to fling this stone
at vaunting Goliath is, to comfort the minds of all Heuahs sex, both rich and
poor, learned and unlearned, with this Antidote, that if the fear of God
reside in their hearts, maugre all adversaries, they are highly esteemed and
accounted of in the eyes of their gracious Redeemer, so that they need not
fear the darts of envy or obtrectators: For shame and disgrace (says
Aristotle) is the end of them that shoot such poisoned shafts. Worthy
therefore of imitation is that example of Seneca, who when he was told that a
certain man did exclaim and rail against him, made this mild answer; Some
dogs bark more upon custom then curstness; and some speak evil of others,
not that the defamed deserve it, but because through custom and corruption of
their hearts they cannot speak well of any. This I allege as a paradigmatical
pattern for all women, noble and ignoble to follow, that they be not enflamed
with choler against this our enraged adversary, but patiently consider of him
according to the portraiture which he has drawn of himself, his Writings
being the very emblem of a monster.

This my brief Apology (Right Honorable and Worshipful) did I enterprise,
not as thinking my self more fit then others to undertake such a task, but as
one, who not perceiving any of our Sex to enter the Lists of encountering with
this our grand enemy among men, I being out of all fear, because armed with
the truth, which though often blamed, yet can never be shamed, and the Word of
Gods Spirit, together with the example of virtues Pupils for a Buckler, did no
whit dread to combat with our said malevolent adversary. And if in so doing I
shall be censured by the judicious to have the victory, and shall have given
content unto the wronged, I have both hit the mark whereat I aimed, and
obtained that prize which I desired. But if Zoilus shall adiudge me
presumptuous in Dedicating this my Chirograph unto personages of so high rank;
both because of my insufficiency in literature and tenderness in years: I
thus Apologize for my self; that seeing the Bayter of Women has opened his
mouth against noble as well as ignoble, against the rich as well as the poor;
therefore meet it is that they should be joint spectators of this encounter:
And withal in regard of my imperfection both in learning and age, I need so
much the more to impetrate patronage from some of power to shield me from the
biting wrongs of Momus, who oftentimes sets a rankling tooth into the sides
of truth. Wherefore I being of Decius his mind, who deemed himself safe under
the shield of Caesar, have presumed to shelter my self under the wings of you
(Honorable personages) against the persecuting heat of this fiery and
furious Dragon; desiring that you would be pleased, not to look so much ad
opus, as ad animum: And so not doubting of the favorable acceptance and
censure of all virtuously affected, I rest

Your Honors and Worships Humbly at commandment. Rachel Speght.

I f Reason had but curbed thy witless will,
O r fear of God restrained thy rauing quill,
S uch venime foul thou would have blushed to spue,
E xcept that Grace have bidden thee adue:
P rewesse disdaines to wrestle with the weak,
H eathenish affected, care not what they speak.
S educer of the vulgar sort of men,
W as Satan crept into thy filthy Pen,
E nflaming thee with such infernal smoke,
T hat (if thou had thy will) should women choke?
N efarious fiends thy sense herein deluded,
A nd from thee all humanity excluded,
M onster of men, worthy no other name,
For that thou did assay our Sex to shame.
RA. SP.
Faults escaped in this Impression.
Page 1. lin. 12. in the Preface for roaring read roauing.

page 4. line 17. for Ironica read Ironia.

page 7. line 19. for not touch read not to touch.

page 11 line 20. for Meriam read Miriam.

page 21. line 13. for tongs read tongues.

page 32. line 21. for adulterous read idolatrous.

page 33. line 20. for Arganox read Organon.

Not unto the veriest Idiot that ever set Pen to Paper, but to the Cynicall
Bayter of Women, or metamorphosed Misogunes, Joseph Swetnam.
FRom standing water, which soon putrifies, can no good fish be expected; for
it produces no other creatures but those that are venomous or noisome, as
snakes, adders, and such like. Semblably, no better stream can we look,
should issue from your idle corrupt brain, then that whereto the ruff of your
fury (to use your own words) has moved you to open the sluice. In which
excrement of your roaring cogitations you have used such irregularities
touching concordance, and observed so disordered a method, as I doubt not to
tell you, that a very Accidence Scholar would have quite put you down in both.
You appear herein not unlike that Painter, who seriously indeuouring to
pourtray Cupids Bow, forgot the String: for you being greedy to botch up
your mingle mangle inuectiue against Women, have not therein observed, in many
places, so much as as Grammar sense. But the empriest Barrel makes the lowdest
sound; and so we will account of you.

Many propositions have you framed, which (as you think) make much against
Women, but if one would make a Logical assumption, the conclusion would be
flat against your own Sex. Your dealing wants so much discretion, that I doubt
whether to bestow so good a name as the Dunce upon you: but Minority bids me
keep within my bounds; and therefore I only say unto you, that your corrupt
Heart and railing Tongue, has made you a fit scribe for the Devil.

In that you have termed your virulent foame, the Beare-bayting of Women, you
have plainly displayed your own disposition to be Cynicall, in that there
appears no other Dog or Bull, to bayte them, but your self. Good had it
been for you to have put on that Muzzell, which Saint James would have all
Christians to wear; Speak not evil one of another: and then James 4. 11.
had you not seemed so like the Serpent Porphirus, as now you do; which,
though full of deadly poison, yet being toothlesse, hurts none so much as
himself. For you having gone beyond the limits not of Humanity alone, but of
Christianity, have done greater harm unto your own soul, then unto women,
as may plainly appear. First, in dishonoring of God by palpable blasphemy,
wresting and perverting every place of Scripture, that you have alleged;
which by the testimony of Saint Peter, 1. Pet. 3. 16.
is to the destruction of them that so do. Secondly, it appears by your
disparaging of, and opprobrious speeches against that excellent work of Gods
hands, which in his great love he perfected for the comfort of man. Thirdly,
and lastly, by this your hodge-podge of heathenish Sentences, Similies, and
Examples, you have set forth your self in your right colors, unto the view of
the world: and I doubt not but the Judicious will account of you according to
your demerit: As for the Vulgar sort, which have no more learning then you have
showed in your Book, it is likely they will applaud you for your pains.

As for your Bugge-beare or advice unto Women, that whatsoever they do think
of your Work, they should conceal it, lest in finding fault, they bewray
their galled backs to the world; in which you allude to that Proverb, Rub a
galled borse, and he will kick: Unto it I answer by way of Apology, that
though every galled horse, being touched, does kick; yet every one that
kickes, is not galled: so that you might as well have said, that because burnt
folks dread the fire, therefore none fear fire but those that are burnt, as
made that illiterate conclusion which you have absurdly inferred.

In your Title Leaf, you arraigne none but lewd, idle, froward and unconstant
women, but in the Sequel (through defect of memory as it seems) forgetting
that you had made a distinction of good from badde, condemning all in general,
you advise men to beware of, and not to match with any of these six sorts of
women, viz. Good and Badde, Fair and Foul, Rich and Poor: But this doctrine
of Devils Saint Paul foreseeing would be broached in the latter 1. Tim. 4. 3.
times, gives warning of.

There also you promise a Commendation of wise, virtuous, and honest women,
when as in the subsequent, the worst words, and filthiest Epithites that you
can devise, you bestow on them in general, excepting no sort of Women. Herein
may you be likened unto a man, which upon the door of a scuruie house sets
this Superscription, Here is a very fair house to be let: whereas the door
being opened, it is no better then a dogge-hole and dark dungeon.

Further, if your own words betrue, that you wrote with your hand, but not
with your heart, then are you an hypocrite in Print: but it is rather to be
thought that your Pen was the bewrayer of the abundance of your mind, and that
this was but a little mortar to dawbe up again the wall, which you intended to
break down.

The revenge of your railing Work we leave to Him, who has appropriated
vengeance unto himself, whose Penman has included Raylers in the Catalogue
of them, that shall not inherit Gods Kingdom, and your self unto the mercy
of that just Judge, who is able to save and to destroy.

Your undeserved friend, RACHEL SPEGHT.

In praise of the Author and her Work.
IF little David that for Isreal's sake,
esteemed neither life nor limb too dear,
In that he did adventure without dread,
to cast at him, whom all the host did fear,
A stone, which brought Goliath to the ground,
Obtained applause with Songs and Timbrels sound.
Then let another young encombatant
receive applause, and thanks, as well as he:
For with an enemy to Women kind,
she has encountered, as each wight may see:
And with the fruit of her industrious toil,
To this Goliath she has given the foil.
Admire her much I may, both for her age,
and this her Mouzell for a blacke-mouth'd wight,
But praise her, and her work, to that desert,
which unto them belongs of equal right
I cannot; only this I say, and end,
She is unto her Sex a faithful friend.
PHILALETHES.
IF he that for his Country does expose
himself unto the fury of his foe,
Does merit praise and due respect of those,
for whom he did that peril undergo:
Then let the Author of this Monzell true
Receive the like, of right it is her due.
For she to shield her Sex from Slanders Dart,
and from inuective obtrectation,
Has ventured by force of Learnings Art,
(in which she has had education)
To combat with him, which does shame his Sex,
By offering feeble women to perplex.
PHILOMATHES.
PRaise is a debt, which does of due belong
To those, that take the path of Virtues trace,
Meating their ways and works by Reasons rule,
Having their hearts so lightened with Gods grace,
That willllingly they would not him offend,
But holily their lives begin and end.
Of such a Pupil unto Piety
As is described, I do intend to speak,
A Virgin young, and of such tender age,
As for encounter may be deemd too weak,
She having not as yet seen twenty years,
Though in her carriage older she appears.
Her wit and learning in this present Work,
More praise does merit, then my quill can write:
Her magnanimity deserves applaua',
In ventring with a fiery foe to fight:
And now in fine, what shall I further say?
But that she bears the triumph quite away.
FAVOR B.
A Mouzell for Melastomus the Cynicall Bayter of, and foulemouthed Barker
against EVAHS Sex.
PROVERBS 18. 22. He that finds a wife, finds a good thing, and receives
favor of the Lord.
IF lawful it be to compare the Potter with his Clay, or the Architect with
the Edifice; then may I, in some sort, resemble that love of God toward man,
in creating woman, unto the affectionate care of Abraham for his son Isaac,
who that he might not take to wife one of the daughters of the Canaanites,
Genesis 24. 4.
did provide him one of his own kindred.

Almighty God, who is rich in mercy, having Fphe. 2 4.
made all things of nothing, and created man in his own image: that is, (as
the Apostle expounds it) In wisdom, righteousness and true Col. 3 30.
holiness; making him Lord over all: to avoid Ephe. 4. 24.
that solitatie condition that he was then in, having none to commerce or
converse withal but dumb creatures, it seemed good unto the Lord, that as of
every creature he had made male and female, and man only being alone without
mate, so likewise to form an help meet for him. Adam for this cause being
cast Genesis 2. 20.
into a heavy sleep, God extracting a rib from his side, thereof made, or
built, Woman; showing thereby, that man was as an imperfect building before
woman was made; and bringing her unto Adam, united and married them together.

Thus the resplendent love of God toward man appeared, in taking care to
provide him an helper before he saw his own want, and in providing him such
an helper as should be meet for him. Soueraignety had he over all creatures,
and they were all serviceable unto him; but yet before woman was formed, there
was not a meet help found for Adam, Man's Genesis 2. 20.
worthiness not meriting this great favor at Gods hands, but his mercy only
moving him thereunto: I may use those words which the Jews uttered when they
saw Christ weep for Lazarus, Behold how he loved him: Behold, and John 11. 36.
that with good regard, Gods love; yea his great love, which from the beginning
he has borne unto man: which, as it appears in all things; so next, his love
in Christ Jesus apparently in this; that for man's sake, that he might not be
an unite, when all other creatures were for procreation duall, he created
woman to be a solace unto him, to participate of his sorrows, partake of his
pleasures, and as a good yokefellow bear part of his burden. Of the
excellency 1. Cor. 11. 9.
of this Structure, I mean of Women, whose foundation and original of
creation, was Gods love, do I intend to dilate.

Of Woman's Excellency, with the causes of her creation, and of the sympathy
which ought to be in man and wife each toward other.

THE work of Creation being finished, this approbation thereof was given by
God Genesis 1. 31.
himself, That All was very good: If All, then Woman, who, excepting man, is
the most excellent creature under the Canopie of heaven. But if it be objected
by any.

First, that woman, though created good, 1 Object.
yet by giving ear to Satan's temptations, brought death and misery upon all
her posterity.

Secondly, That Adam was not deceived, but 2 Object.
that the woman was deceived, and was in the 1. Tim. 2. 14.
transgression.

Thirdly, that Saint Paul says, It were good for 3 Object.
a man not to touch a woman. 1. Cor. 7. 1.


Fourthly, and lastly, that of Solomon, who 4 Object.
seems to speak against all of our sex; I have found one man of a thousand,
but a woman among Eccles. 7. 30.
them all have I not found, whereof in it due place.

To the first of these objections I answer; that 1 Object. answered.
Satan first assailed the woman, because where the hedge is lowest, most easy
it is to get over, and she being the weaker vessel was with more facility to
be seduced: Like as a Cristall glass sooner receives a crack then a strong
stone pot. Yet we shall find the offense of Adam and Eve almost to parallel:
For as an ambitious desire of being made like unto God, was the motive which
caused her to eat, so likewise was it his; as may plainly appear by that
Ironica, Behold, man is become as one of us: Not that he Genesis 3. 22.
was so indeed; but hereby his desire to attain a greater perfection then God
had given him, was reproved. Woman sinned, it is true, by her infidelity in
not believing the Word of God, but giving credit to Satan's fair promises,
that she should not die; but so did the Genesis 3 4.
man too: And if Adam had not approved of that deed which Eve had done, and
been willing to tread the steps which she had gone, he being her Head would
have reproved her, and have made the commandment a bit to restrain him from
breaking his Makers Iniunction: For if a man burn his hand in the fire, the
bellows that blowed the fire are not to be blamed, but himself rather, for
not being careful to avoid the danger: Yet if the bellows had not blowed,
the fire had not burnt; no more is woman simply to be condemned for man's
transgression: for by the free will, which before his fall he enjoyed, he
might have avoided, and been free from being burnt, or singed with that fire
which was kindled by Satan, and blown by Eve. It therefore served not his
turn a whit, afterward to say, The woman which thou gave me, gave me of
the tree, and I did eat: Genesis 3. 12.
For a penalty was inflicted upon him, as well as on the woman, the punishment
of her transgression being particular to her own fex, and to none but the
female kind: but for the sin of man the whole earth was cursed. And he being
better able, then the woman, to have resisted temptation, because Genesis 3. 17.
the stronger vessel, was first called to account, to show, that to whom much
is given, of them much is required; and that he who was the sovereign of all
creatures visible, should have yielded greatest obedience to God.

True it is (as is already confessed) that woman first sinned, yet find we no
mention of spiritual nakedness till man had sinned: then it is said, Their
eyes were opened, the eyes of their Genesis 3. 7.
mind and conscience; and then perceived they themselves naked, that is, not
only bereft of that integrity, which they originally had, but felt the
rebellion and disobedience of their members in the disordered motions of their
now corrupt nature, which made them for shame to cover their nakedness: then
(and not before) is it said that they saw it, as if sin were imperfect, and
unable to bring a deprivation of a blessing received, or death on all mankind,
till man (in whom lay the active power of generation) had transgressed. The
offense therefore of Adam and Eve is by Saint Austin thus distinguished, the
man sinned against God and himself, the woman against God, her self, and her
husband: yet in her giving of the fruit to eat had she no malicious intent
toward him, but did therein show a desire to make her husband partaker of
that happiness, which she thought by their eating they should both have
enjoyed. This her giving Adam of that sauce, wherewith Satan had served her,
whose sowrenesse before he had eaten, she did not perceive, was that, which made
her sin to exceed his: wherefore, that she might not of him, who ought to
honor 1 Pet. 3. 7.
her, be abhorred, the first promise that was made in Paradise, God makes to
woman, that by her Seed should the Serpents head be broken: Genesis 3. 15.
whereupon Adam calls her Heuah, life, that as the woman had been an occasion
of his sin, so should woman bring forth the Savior from sin, which was in
the fulness of time accomplished; by which was manifested, that he is a
Savior of believing women, Galat. 4 4.
no less then of men, that so the blame of sin may not be imputed to his
creature, which is good; but to the will by which Eve sinned, and yet by
Christ's assuming the shape of man was it declared, that his mercy was
equivalent to both Sexes; so that by Herod's blessed Seed (as Saint Paul
affirms) it is brought to pass, that Galat. 3. 28.
male and female are all one in Christ Jesus.

To the second objection I answer, That the 2 Objection answered.
Apostle does not hereby exempt man from sin, but only gives to
understand, that the woman was the primaric transgressour; and not the man, but
that man was not at all deceived, was far from his meaning: for he afterward
expressly says, that as in Adam all die, so 1 Cor. 15. 22.
in Christ shall all be made alive.

For the third objection, It is good for a man 3 Objection answered.
not touch a woman: The Apostle makes it not a positive prohibition, but
speaks it only because of the Corinths present necessity, who were then
persecuted by the enemies of the 1 Cor. 7.
Church, for which cause, and no other, he says, Art thou loosed from a wife?
seek not a wife: meaning whilst the time of these perturbations should
continue in their heat; but if thou art bound, seek not to be loosed: if thou
marriest, thou sinnest not, only increasest thy care: for the married cares,
for the things of this world, And I wish that you were without care, that ye
might cleave fast unto the Lord without separation: For the time remains,
that they which have wives be as though they had none: for the persecuters
shall deprive you of them, either by imprisonment, banishment, or death; so
that manifest it is, that the Apostle does not hereby forbid marriage, but
only advises the Corinths to forbear a while, till God in mercy should
curb the fury of their adversaries. For (as Eusebius writes) Paul was
afterward married himself, the which is very probable, being that
interrogatiuely he says, Have we not power to lead about a wife, being 1.
Corint. 9. 5.
a sister, as well as the rest of the Apostles, and as the brethren of the Lord
and Cephas?

The fourth and last objection, is that of Solomon, 4 Object answered.
I have found one man among a thousand, but a woman among them all have I not
found: for Eccles. 7. 30.
answer of which, if we look into the story of his life, we shall find
therein a Commentary upon this enigmaticall Sentence included: for it is there
said, that Solomon had seven hundred wives, and three hundred concubines, which
number connexed make one thousand. These 1 King. 11. 3.
women turning his heart away from being perfect with the Lord his God,
sufficient cause had he to say, that among the said thousand women found he
not one upright. He says Pagnine.
not, that among a thousand women never any man found one worthy of
commendation, but speaks in the first person singularly, I have not found,
meaning in his own experience: for this assertion is to be holden a part of
the confession of his former follies, and no otherwise, his repentance being
the intended drift of Ecclesiastes.

Thus having (by Gods assistance) removed those stones, whereat some have
stumbled, others broken their shinnes, I will proceed toward the period of my
intended task, which is, to decipher the excellency of women: of whose
Creation I will, for orders sake observe; First, the efficient cause, which was
God; Secondly, the material cause, or that whereof she was made; Thirdly, the
formal cause, or fashion, and proportion of her feature; Fourthly and lastly,
the final cause, the end or purpose for which she was made. To begin with
the first.

The efficient cause of woman's creation, was Jehovah the Eternal; the truth of
which is manifest in Moses his narration of the six days Genesis 1. 28.
works; where he says, God created them male and female: And David exhorting
all the earth to sing unto the Lord; meaning, by a Metonimie, earth, all
creatures that live on the earth, of what nation or Sex soever, gives this
reason, For the Lord has made us. That work then can Psalm. 100. 3.
not choose but be good, yea very good, which is wrought by so excellent a
workman as the Lord: for he being a glorious Creator, must needs effect a
worthy creature. Bitter water can not proceed from a pleasant sweet
fountain, nor bad work from that workman which Psalm. 100. 4.
is perfectly good, and in propriety, none but he. Math. 19. 17.


Secondly, the materi^ll cause, or matter whereof woman was made, was of a
refined mould, if I may so speak: for man was created of the dust of the
earth, but woman was made Genesis 2. 7.
of a part of man, after that he was a living soul: yet was she not produced
from Adams foot, to be his too low inferior; nor from his head to be his
superior, but from his side, near his heart, to be his equal; that where he
is Lord, she may be Lady: and therefore says God concerning man and woman
jointly, Let them rule Genesis 1. 26.
over the fish of the Sea, and over the fowls of the Heaven, and over every
beast that moves upon the earth: By which words, he makes their authority
equal, and all creatures to be in subjection unto them both. This being
rightly considered, does teach men to make such account of their wives, as Adam
did of Eve, This is bone of Genesis 2. 23.
my bone, and flesh of my flesh: As also, that they neither do or wish any
more hurt unto them, then unto their own bodies: for men ought to love their
wives as themselves, because he Ephesians. 5. 28.
that loves his wife, loves himself: And never man hated his own flesh (which
the woman is) unless a monster in nature.

Thirdly, the formal cause, fashion, and proportion of woman was excellent:
For she was neither like the beasts of the earth, fowls of the air, fishes of
the Sea, or any other inferior creature, but Man was the only object, which
she did resemble. For as God gave man a lofty countenance, that he might look
up toward Heaven, so did he likewise give unto woman. And as the temperature of
man's body is excellent, so is woman's. For whereas other Creatures, by reason of
their gross humors, have excrements for their habit, as fowls, their
feathers, beasts, their hair, fishes, their scales, man and woman only, have
their Genesis 1. 26.
skin clear and smoothe. And (that more is) in the Image of God were they
both created; yea and to be brief, all the parts of their bodies, both
external and internal, were correspondent and meet each for other.

Fourthly and lastly, the final cause, or end, for which woman was made, was
to glorify God, and to be a collateral companion for man to glorify God, in
using her body, and all the parts, powers, and faculties thereof, as
instruments for his honor: As with her voice Exodus 15. 20.
to sound forth his praises, like Meriam, and the rest of her company; with
her tongue not to utter words of strife, but to give good council unto her
husband, the which he must not despise. For Abraham was bidden to give ear
Genesis 21. 12
to Sarah his wife. Pilate was willed by his wife not to have any hand in the
condemning of CHRIST; and a sin it was in him, that he Math. 27. 19.
listened not to her: Leah and Rachel councelled Iaacob to do according to the
word of the Lord: Genesis 31. 16
and the Shunamite put her husband in mind of harboring the Prophet Elisha:
her hands should 2 Kings 4. 9.
be open according to her ability, in contributing toward Gods service, and
distressed servants, like to that poor widow, which cast two mites into the
Treasury; and as Marie Luke 8.
Magdalen, Susanna, and Ioanne the wife of Herod's Steward, with many other,
which of their substance ministered unto CHRIST. Her heart should be a
receptacle for Gods Word, like Mary that treasured up the sayings of CHRIST
Luke 1. 51.
in her heart. Her feet should be swift in going to seek the Lord in his
Sanctuary, as Marie Magdalen made haste to seek CHRIST at his Sepulcher.
Finally, no power external or John 20. 1.
internal ought woman to keep idle, but to employ it in some service of GOD,
to the glory of her Creator, and comfort of her own soul.

The other end for which woman was made, was to be a Companion and helper for
man; and if she must be an helper, and but an helper, then are those husbands
to be blamed, which lay the whole burden of domestical affairs and
maintenance on the shoulders of their wives. For, as yoake-fellowes they are to
suftayne part of each others cares, griefs, and calamities: But as if two Oxen
be put in one yoke, the one being bigger then the other, the greater bears
most weight; so the Husband being the stronger vessel is to bear a greater
burden then his wife; And therefore the Lord said to Adam, In the sweat of
thy face shall thou eat thy bread, Genesis 3. 19.
till thou return to the dust. And Saint Paul says, That he that provides
not for his household is 1. Tim. 5. 8.
worse then an Infidel. Nature has taught senseless creatures to help one
another; as the Male Pigeon, when his Hen is weary with sitting on her eggs,
and comes off from them, supplies her place, that in her absence they may
receive no harm, until such time as she is fully refreshed. Of small Birds
the Cock always helps his Hen to build her nest; and while she sits upon her
eggs, he flies abroad to get meat for her, who cannot then provide any for her
self. The crowing Cockrell helps his Hen to defend her Chickens from peril,
and will endanger himself to save her and them from harm. Seeing then that
these unreasonable creatures, by the instinct of nature, bear such affection
each to other, that without any grudge, they willingly, according to their
kind, help one another, I may reason a minore ad maius, that much more should
man and woman, which are reasonable creatures, be helpers each to other in all
things lawful, they having the Law of God to guide them, his Word to be a
Lantern unto their feet, and a Light unto their paths, by which they are
excited to a far more mutual participation of each others burden, then
other creatures. So that neither the wife may say to her husband, nor the
husband unto his wife, I have no need of thee, no more then the members of the
body may so say each to other, between whom there is 1. Cor. 12. 21.
such a sympathy, that if one member suffer, all suffer with it: Therefore
though God bade Abraham forsake his Country and Kindred, yet he bade him not
forsake his wife, who being Flesh of his flesh, and bone of his bone, was to
be copartner with him of whatsoever did betide him, whether joy or sorrow.
Wherefore Solomon says, Woe to him that is alone; for when Eccles 4. 10.
thoughts of discomfort, troubles of this world, and fear of dangers do
possess him, he wants a companion to lift him up from the pit of perplexity,
into which he is fallen: for a good Eccles. 4. 10.
wife, says Plautus, is the wealth of the mind, and the welfare of the heart;
and therefore a meet associate for her husband; And Woman, says Paul, is the
glory of the man. 1. Cor. 11. 7.


Marriage is a merri-age, and this worlds Paradise, where there is mutual
love. Our blessed Savior vouchsafed to honor a marriage with the first
miracle that he wrought, unto which John 2.
miracle matrimonial estate may not unfitly be resembled: For as Christ
turned water into wine, a far more excellent liquor; which, as the Psalmist
says, Makes glad the heart of man; Psalm, 104. 15.
So the single man is by marriage changed from a Batchelour to a Husband, a
far more excellent title: from a solitary life unto a joyful union and
conjunction, with such a creature as God has made meet for man, for whom none
was meet till she was made. The enjoying of this great blessing made Pericles
more unwilling to part from his wife, then to die for his Country; And
Antonius Pius to pour forth that patheticall exclamation against death, for
depriving him of his dearly beloved wife, O cruel hard-hearted death in
bereauing me of her whom I esteemed more then my own life! A virtuous Prou.
12. 4.
woman, says Solomon, is the Crown of her husband; By which metaphor he
shows both the excellency of such a wife, and what account her husband is to
make of her: For a King does not trample his Crown under his feet, but highly
esteems of it, gently handles it, and carefully lays it up, as the evidence
of his Kingdom; and therefore when David destroyed Rabbah he took off the
Crown from their 1. Chron. 20. 2.
Kings head: So husbands should not account their wives as their vassals, but
as those that are heirs together of the grace of life, and with 1. Pet. 3. 7.
all lenity and mild persuasions set their feet in the right way, if they
happen to tread awry, bearing with their infirmities, as Elkanah did 1. Sam. 1.
17.
with his wives barrenness.

The Kingdom of God is compared unto Math. 22.
the marriage of a Kings son: John calls the Reu. 19. 7.
conjunction of Christ and his Chosen, a Marriage: And not few, but many times,
does our blessed Savior in the Canticles, set forth his unspeakable love
toward his Church under the title of an Husband rejoicing with his Wife; and
often vouchsafes to call her his Sister and Spouse, by which is showed that
with God is no respect of persons, Nations, or Romans 2. 11.
Sexes: For whosoever, whether it be man or woman, that does believe in the
Lord Jesus, such shall be saved. And if Gods love even from John 3. 18.
the beginning, had not been as great toward woman as to man, then would he
not have preserved from the deluge of the old world as many women as men; nor
would Christ after his Resurrection have appeared unto a woman first of all
other, had it not been to declare thereby, that the benefits of his death and
resurrection, are as available, by belief, for women as for men; for he
indifferently died for the one sex as well as the other: Yet a truth
vngainesayable 1. Cor. 11. 3.
is it, that the Man is the Woman's Head; by which title yet of Supremacy, no
authority has he given him to domineere, or basely command and employ his
wife, as a servant; but hereby is he taught the duties which he owes unto
her: For as the head of a man is the imaginer and contriuer of proiects
profitable for the safety of his whole body; so the Husband must protect and
defend his Wife from injuries: For he is her Head, as Christ is the Head of his
Church, Ephe. 5. 23.
which he entirely loves, and for which he gave his very life; the decrest
thing any man Job 2. 4.
has in this world; Greater love then this has no John 15. 13.
man, when he bestows his life for his friend, says our Savior: This
president passes all other patterns, it requires great benignity, and
enioyneth an extraordinary affection, For men must love their wives, even as
Christ loved his Church. Secondly, as the Head does not jar or contend with
the members, which being many, as the Apostle says, yet make but one body; no
1. Cor. 12. 20.
more must the husband with the wife, but expelling all bitterness and cruelty
he must live Col. 3. 19.
with her lovingly, and religiously, honoring her as the weaker vessel.
Thirdly, and lastly, as 1. Pet. 3. 7.
he is her Head, he must, by instruction, bring her to the knowledge of her
Creator, that so she may be a fit stone for the Lords building. 1. Cor. 14. 35.
Women for this end must have an especial care to set their affections upon
such as are able to teach them, that as they grow in years, they may grow in
grace, and in the knowledge of Christ 1. Pet. 3. 18.
Jesus our Lord.

Thus if men would remember the duties they are to perform in being heads,
some would not stand a tip-toe as they do, thinking themselves Lords and
Rulers, and account every omission of performing whatsoever they command,
whether lawful or not, to be matter of great disparagement, and indignity done
them; whereas they should consider, that women are enjoined to submit
themselves unto their husbands no otherways then as to the Lord; so that Ephesians
5.
from hence, for man, arises a lesson not to be forgotten, that as the Lord
commands nothing to be done, but that which is right and good, no more must
the husband; for if a wife fulfill the evil command of her husband, she
obeies him as a tempter, as Saphira did Ananias. Acts 5. 2.
But least I should seem too partial in praising women so much as I have
(though no more then warrant from Scripture does allow) I add to the premises,
that I say not, all women are virtuous, for then they should be more excellent
then men, since of Adams sons there was Cain as well as Abel, and of Noah's,
Cham as well as Sem; so that of men as of women, there are two sorts, namely,
good and bad, which in Matthew the five and twenty chapter, are comprehended
under the name of Sheep and Goats. And if women were not sinful, then should
they not need a Savior: but the Virgin Mary a pattern of piety, rejoiced in
God her Savior: Luke 1. 47.
Ergo, she was a sinner. In the Revelation the Church is called the Spouse of
Christ; and in Zachariah, wickedness is called a woman, to Zach. 5. 7.
show that of women there are both godly and ungodly: For Christ would not
Purge his Floor if there were not Chafe among the Wheat; nor should gold
need to be fined, if among it there were no dross. But far be it from any
one, to condemn the righteous with the wicked, Genesis 18. 25.
or good women with the bad (as the Bayter of women does:) For though there are
some scabbed sheep in a Flock, we must not therefore conclude all the rest to
be mangie: And though some men, through excess, abuse Gods creatures, we
must not imagine that all men are Gluttons; the which we may with as good
reason do, as condemn all women in general, for the offenses of some
particulars. Of the good sort is it that I have in this book spoken, and so
would I that all that read it should so understand me: for if otherwise I had
done, I should have incurred that woe, which by the Prophet Isaiah is
pronounced against them that speak well of evil, and should Esaias 5. 20.
have instified the wicked, which Prou. 17. 15.
thing is abominable to the Lord.

The Epilogue or vpshut of the premises.
GReat was the unthankfulness of Pharaohs Butler unto Joseph; for though he
had done him a great pleasure, of which the Genesis 40. 23.
Butler promised requital, yet was he quite forgotten of him: But far
greater is the ingratitude of those men toward God, that dare presume to speak
and exclaim against Woman, whom God did create for man's comfort. What greater
discredit can redound to a workman, then to have the man, for whom he has
made it, say, it is naught? or what greater discurtesie can be offered to one,
that bestows a gift, then to have the receiver give out, that he cares not
for it: For he needs it not? And what greater ingratitude can be showed unto
GOD then the opprobrious speeches and disgraceful inuectiues, which some
diabolical natures do frame against women?

Ingratitude is, and always has been accounted so odious a vice, that Cicero
says, If one doubt what name to give a wicked man, let him call him an
ungrateful person, and then he has said enough. It was so detected among the
Persians, as that by a Law they provided, that such should suffer death as
felons, which proved unthankful for any gift received. And Love (says the
Apostle) is the fulfilling of the Law: Romans 13. 10.
But where Ingratitude is harbored, there Love is banished. Let men therefore
beware of all unthankfulness, but especially of the superlatiue ingratitude,
that which is toward God, which is no way more palpably declared, then by the
contemning of, and railing against women, which sin, of some men (if to be
termed men) no doubt but God will one day avenge, when they shall plainly
perceive, that it had been better for them to have been borne dumb and lame,
then to have used their tongs and hands, the one in repugning, the other in
writing against Gods handie work, their own flesh, women I mean, whom God
has made equal with themselves in dignity, both temporally and eternally, if
they continue in the faith: which God for his mercy sake grant they always
may, to the glory of their Creator, and comfort of their own souls, through
Christ Amen.

To God only wise be glory now and for ever, AMEN.
Certain QVAERES to the bayter of Women.

WITH CONFVTATION of some part of his Diabolical Discipline.

LONDON,

Printed by N. O. for Thomas Archer, and are to be sold at his shop in
Popes-head-Pallace. 1617.

To the Reader.
ALthough (courteous Reader) I am young in years, and more defective in
knowledge, that little smattering in Learning which I have obtained, being only
the fruit of such vacant hours, as I could spare from affairs befitting my
Sex, yet am I not altogether ignorant of that Analogy which ought to be used
in a literate Responsarie: But the Beare-bayting of Women, unto which I have
framed my Apologeticall answer, being altogether without method, irregular,
without Grammatical Concordance, and a promiscuous mingle mangle, it would
admit no such order to be observed in the answering thereof, as a regular
Responsarie requires.

Wherefore (gentle Reader) favorably consider, that as that Painter is not to be
held unskillful, which having a deformed Object, makes the like portraiture; no
more am I justly to be blamed for my immethodicall Apology, since any judicious
Reader may plainly see, that the Bayter of Women his pestiferous obtrectation
is like a Taylers Cushion, that is botcht together of shreddes, so that, were
it not to prevent future infection with that venom, which he has, and daily
does sweat out, I would have been loath to have spent time so idly, as to
answer it at all: but a crooked pot-lid well enough fits a wrie neckt pot, an
unfashioned shoe a misshapen foot, and an illiterate answer an unlearned
irreligious provocation. His absurdities therein contained, are so many, that
to answer them severally, were as frivolous a work, as to make a Trappe for a
Flea, and as tedious as the pursuit of an Arrow to an impotent man. Yet to
prevent his having occasion to say, that I speak of many, but can instance
none, I have thought it meet to present a few of them to his view, as
follows, that if Folly have taken root in him, he may seek to extirpate
it, and to blush at the sight of that fruit, which he has already brought
forth; a fruit I call it (not unfitly I hope) because a Crabbe may so be
termed, as well as a good Apple. Thus, not doubting of the favor of well
affected, and of their kind acceptance of my endeavors, of which I desire not
applaud, but approbation: I rest,

Your friend, RACHEL SPEGHT.

The Preface unto the Subseqnent.
WIth edged tools (says the old Proverb) it is ill sporting; but far more
dangerous: yea damnable is it to dally with Scripture, Hebr. 4. 12.
the two-edged Sword of the Eternal: for so to do is a breach of the third
Commandment; and he James 2. 10.
that fails in one point, is guilty of all. If the magnitude of this sin
had been considered by the Bayter of Women, the lamentable, yet just reward
thereof, as of all other sins without repentance, would, if he had but a
servile fear, have restrained him from transgressing herein. But as one
deuoide of all true fear of Gods indignation against wilful sinners (for as
ignorance does somewhat extenuate a fault, so does knowledge much aggrauate it)
he has made the exordium of his brainesicke exhalation against women, to be a
perverting of a part of holy Writ; ex v^guibus leonem, judge of this Lion by
his pawe. For if the fore foot be monstrous, doubtless the whole body is
correspondent thereto. The Porch indeed is foul, but he that viewes the
sequel, as I have done, shall find a laystall of heathenish Assertions,
Similies, and Examples, illiterate composition, irreligious inuectiues, and
(which is worst) impious blasphemies therein included, filthy rubbish, more
fit to be heaped up by a Pagan, then one that bears the name of a Christian.

But lest it should not only be thought, but also said, that I find fault
where none is; or that I do ill to mislike the Work, and not make the Author
therewith acquainted, that if he please, he may answer for himself: I think
it not amiss to propose some few Quaeres unto the Bayter of Women, which I
have abstracted out of his infamous Book, as himself confesses it to be in
his Epistle to Women.

Certain Quaeres to the Bayter of women, with confutation of some part of his
Diabolical Discipline.
IF it be true, ass you affirm, Page 2. line 26. That women will not give
thanks for a good turn.

I demand whether Deborah and Hannah were not women, who both of them sang
hymns of thanksgiving unto the Lord; the one for his mercy in granting her
victory over Isreal's enemies, the Judge. 5.
other for his favorable giving unto her a son, 1. Sam. 1. 11. and 2. 1.
which she full often and earnestly had desired?

And where-asse you say, Page 4. line 22. that a woman that has a fair face,
it is ever matched with a cruel heart, and her heavenly looks with hellish
thoughts: You therein show your self a contradictor of Scriptures presidents:
For Abigail was a beautiful woman, and tenderhearted; 1. Sam. 25. 3. 18.
Rebekah was both fair of face and Genesis 24. 16. 18.
pitiful. Many examples serving to confute your universal rule might be
produced, but these are sufficient to dispell this your cloud of untruth. As
for your audacitie in judging of women's thoughts, you thereby show your self
an usurper against the King of heauer, the true knowledge of cogitations being
appropriate Math. 12. 25.
unto him alone.

If your assertion, That a woman is better lost then found, better forsaken
then taken (Page 5. line 4.) be to be credited, me thinks, great pity it is,
that before you were borne, there was none so wise as to counsel your father
not to meddle with a woman, that he might have escaped those troubles, which
you affirm, that all married men are cumbred with, Page 2. line 20. As also
that he might not have begotten such a monster in nature Ass your self, who
(like the Priest which forgot he was Parish Clearke) defame and exclaim
against women, as though your self had never had a mother, or you never been
a child.

You affirm (Page 10. line 18.) that for the love of women, David purchased
the displeasure of his God: It had been good that you had cited the place of
story where you find it, For I never yet in Scripture read, that the Almighty
was displeased with David for his love to women, but for his lust to Bathsheba,
which afterward brought forth his adulterous act, and his causing Vriah to be
murdered.

In saying (Page 10. line. 25.) that Jobs wife 2. Sam. 11.
counseled her husband to curse God, you misconster the Text; for the true
construction thereof will show it to be a Scarcasmus or Ironicall speech, and
not an instigation to blasphemy.

Page 11. line 8. you count it Wonderful to see the mad feats of women, for
she will now be merry, then sad: but me thinks it is far more wonder-foole
to have one, that adventures to make his Writing as public as an In-keepers
Sign, which hangs to the view of all passengers, to want Grammatical
Concordance in his said Writing, and join together Women plural, and she
singular, Ass you not only in this place, but also in others have done.

Albeit the Scripture verifieth, that God made woman and brought her to man;
and that Gen 2. 22.
a prudent wife comes of the Lord: yet have Prou. 19. 14.
you not feared blasphemously to say, that women sprung from the devil, Page
15. line 26. But being, as it seems, defective in that whereof you have much
need (for mendacem oportet esse memorem) you suddenly after say, That women
were created by God, and formed by nature, and theresore by policy and
wisdom to be avoided, Page 16. line 12. An impious conclusion to infer,
that because God created, therefore to be avoided: Oh intolerable absurdity!

Men I say may live without women, but women cannot live without men, Page 14.
line 18. If any Religious Author had thus affirmed, I should have wondered, that
unto Satan's suggestions he had so much subjected himself, as to cross the
Almighties providence and care for man's good, who positiuely said, It is not
good for man Genesis 2. 18.
to be alone; But being that the sole testimony hereof in your own dico, I
marvel no whit at the error, but heartily wish, that unto all the untruths
you have uttered in your infamous book, you had subscribed your Dico, that
none of them might be adjudged truths: For mendacis praemium est verbis eius
non adhiberi fidem.

Page 17. line 5. you affirm, that Hosea was brought unto Idolatry by
marrying with a lewd woman, which is as true as the sea burns; and for proof
thereof you cite Hosea 1. in which chapter is no such matter to be found, it
only containing a declaration of the Lords anger against the adulterous Jews,
who had gone a whoring after other Gods, set forth in a parable of an husband
and an adulterous wife.

Page 19. Theodora a monstrous strumpet, Lavia, Floria, and Lais, were three
notable Curtizans.

Was not that noble City of Troy, sacked and spoiled for the fair Helena?
Page 21. Therefore stay not alone in the company of a woman, trusting to thy
own chastity, except thou be more strong then Sampson, more wise then
Solomon, or more holy then David, for these, and many more have been overcome
by the sweet intisements of women, Page 22.

I may as well say Barrabas was a murderer, Luke 23. 19.
Ioab killed Abuer and Amasa, and Pharaoh Necho 2. Sam. 3. 27.
slew Iosiab; therefore stay not alone in the 2. Sam. 20 10.
company of a man, trusting to thy own 2. King 23. 29.
strength, except thou be stronger then Josiah, and more valiant then Abner
and Amasa, for these and many more have been murdered by men. The form of
argumentation is your own, the which if you dislike, blame your self for
proposing such a pattern, and blush at your own folly, Quod te posse non
facile creed: for it is an old saying, how true I know not, that blushing is a
sign of grace.

Page 31. line 15. If God had not made women only to be a plague to man, he
would never have called them necessary evils. Albeit I have not read Seaton or
Ramus, nor so much as seen (though heard of) Aristotle's Arganox, yet by that I
have seen and read in compass of my apprehension, I will adventure to frame
an argument or two, to show what danger, for this your blasphemy your are in.

To fasten a lie upon God is blasphemy: But the Bayter of women fastens a lie
upon God: ergo, the Bayter is a blasphemer.

The Proposition, I trow, none will gainsay, the assumption I thus prove,

Whosoever affirms God to have called women necessary evils, fastens a lie
upon God: For from the beginning of Genesis to the end of the Revelation is no
such instance to be found: But the Bayter affirms God so to have called women,
Ergo, the Bayter fastens a lie upon God.

The reward according to Lave Divine due unto the Bayter of women.
Whosoever blasphemeth God, ought by his Law, to die; The Bayter of Women has
blasphemed God, Ergo, he ought to die the death.

The Proposition is upon record, Leuit. 24. 14. 16. The Assumption is formerly
proved.

If thou marryest a still and a quiet woman, that will seem to thee that thou
ridest but an ambling horse to hell, but if with one that is froward and
unquiet, then thou were as good ride a trotting horse to the devil. Page 35.
line 13.

If this your affirmation be true, then seems it, that hell is the period of
all married men's travails, and the center of their circumference. A man can
but have either a good wife or a bad; and if he have the former, you say he
does but seem to amble to hell; if the latter, he were as good trot to the
devil: But if married men ride, how travail Batchelours? surely, by your rule
they must go on foot, because they want wives; which (inclusiuely) you say are
like horses to carry their husbands to hell. Wherefore in my mind, it was not
without mature consideration that you married in time, because it would be too
irksome for you to travail so tedious a journey on foot.

Now the fire is kindled, let us burn this other faggot. Page 38. line 4.

Beware of making too great a fire, lest the surplussage of that fires effect
which you intended for others, singe your self.

She will make thee wear an Ox feather in thy Cappe. Page 44. line 4.

If Oxen have feathers, their hairs more fitly may be so termed then their
horns.

Page 50. line 28. There is no joy nor pleasure in this world which may be
compared to Marriage, for if the husband be poor and in adversity, then he
bears but the one half of the grief: and furthermore, his wife will comfort
him, with all the comfortable means she can devise.

Page 51. line 16. Many are the joys and sweet pleasures in Marriage, as in
our children, etc.

Page 34. line 5. There are many troubles comes gallopping at the heels of a
woman. If thou were a Servant, or in bondage before, yet when thou marriest, thy
toil is never the nearer ended, but even then, and not before, thou changest
thy golden life, which thou did lead before (in respect of the married) for
a drop of honey, which quickly turns to be as bitter as wormwood.

Page 53. line 19. The husband ought (in sign of love) to impart his secrets
and counsel unto his wife, for many have found much comfort and profit by
taking their wives counsel; and if thou impart any ill hap to thy wife, she
lighteneth thy grief, either by comforting thee lousngly, or else, in bearing
a part thereof patiently.

Page 41. line 12. If thou vnfouldest any thing of secret to a woman, the more
thou chargest her to keep it close, the more she will seem, as it were, with
child, till she have revealed it.

It was the saying of a judicious Writer, that whosoever makes the fruit of his
cogitations extant to the view of all men, should have his work to be as a
well tuned Instrument, in all places according and agreeing, the which I am
sure yours does not: For how reconcile you those dissonant places above cited?
or how make you a consonant diapason of those discords wanting harmony?

Page 34. line 19. You counsel all men, to shun idleness, and yet the first
words of your Epistle to Women are these, musing with my self being idle:
Herein you appear, not unlike unto a Fencer, which teaches another how to
defend himself from enemies blows, and suffers himself to be stricken
without resistance: for you warn others, to eschew that dangerous vice,
wherewith (by your own confession) your self is stained.

Page 57. line 5. If thou like not my reasons to expel love, then thou may
try Ouids Art, for be counsels those that feel this horrible heat to cool
their flames with herbs which are cold of nature as Rue, etc.

Albeit you doubt not but by some to be reputed for a good Archer, yet here
you shot wide from the truth, in saying without contradiction of Ouids error,
that Rue is of a cold nature: For most Physicians (if not all) both ancient and
modern, hold it to be hot and dry in the third degree: and experience will
tell the vser thereof, that the temperature is hot, not cold. And though the
sense of tasting, without further trial, does repel this error, I doubt not
but in citing this prescription, you have verified the opinion of that
philosopher, which said, That there are some, who think they speak wisest,
and write most iudiciously, when they understand not themselves.

But, vt opus ad finem perducam, since I have trod my utmost intended step,
though left one path vngone, I mean the Beare-bayting of Widows vnviewed, in
that I am ignorant of their dispositions, accounting it a folly for me to
talk of Robin-hood, as many do, that never shot in his Bow, I leave the
speculation (with approbation of their Beare-bayting) to those that regard
neither affability nor humanity, and wishing unto every such Misogunes, a
Tiburne Tiffenie for curation of his swollen neck, which only through a
Cynicall inclination will not endure the yoke of lawful Matrimony, I bid
farewell.

F ret, fume or f^um^e at me who will, I care not,
I will thrust forth thy sting to hurt, and sp^re not:
N ow that the task I undertook is ended,
I dread not any harm to me intended,
S ith justly none therein I have offended.
Page 7. line 7. for Herod's read He^^^s


