THE FAERIE QVEENE.

Disposed into twelve books, Fashioning XII. Moral virtues.

ANCHORA SPEI

printer's or publisher's device

LONDON Printed for William Ponsonbie. 1596.

TO THE MOST HIGH, MIGHTY And MAGNIFICENT EMPRESS RENOWNED FOR PIETY,
VERTVE, AND ALL GRACIOUS GOVERNMENT ELIZABETH BY THE GRACE OF GOD QVEENE OF
ENGLAND FRANCE AND IRELAND AND OF VIRGINIA, DEFENDOVR OF THE FAITH, etc. HER
MOST HVMBLE SERVAVNT EDMUND SPENSER DOES IN ALL HVMILITIE DEDICATE, PRESENT AND
CONSECRATE THESE HIS LABOVRS TO LIVE WITH THE ETERNITY OF HER FAME.

THE FIRST BOOK OF THE FAERIE QVEENE. Containing THE LEGENDE OF THE KNIGHT OF
THE RED CROSS, OR OF HOLINESS.
LOI the man, whose Muse whilome did mask,
As time her taught in lowly Shepherds weeds,
Am now enforst a far unfitter task,
For trumpets stern to change mine Oaten reeds,
And sing of Knights and Ladies gentle deeds;
Whose praises having slept in silence long,
Me, all too mean, the sacred Muse areeds
To blazon broad emongst her learned throng:
Fierce wars and faithful loves shall moralize my song.
Help then, o holy Virgin chief of nine,
Thy weaker Nouice to perform thy will,
Lay forth out of thine everlasting scryne
The antique rolls, which there lie hidden still,
Of Faerie knights and fairest Tanaquill,
Whom that most noble Briton Prince so long
Sought through the world, and suffered so much ill,
That I must rue his undeserved wrong:
O help thou my weak wit, and sharpen my dull tongue.
And thou most dreaded impe of highest Jove,
Fair Venus son, that with thy cruel dart
At that good knight so cunningly did roue,
That glorious fire it kindled in his heart,
Lay now thy deadly Heben bow apart,
And with thy mother mild come to mine aid:
Come both, and with you bring triumphant Mart,
In loves and gentle iollities arrayd,
After his murdrous spoils and bloody rage allayd.
And with them eke, o Goddess heavenly bright,
Mirror of grace and Majesty divine,
Great Lady of the greatest Isle, whose light
Like Phoebus lamp throughout the world does shine,
Shed thy fair beams into my feeble eyne,
And raise my thoughts too humble and too vile,
To think of that true glorious type of thine,
The argument of mine afflicted style:
The which to hear, vouchsafe, o dearest dred awhile.
Canto I.
The Patron of true Holiness,
Foul Error does defeat:
Hypocrisy him to entrape,
Does to his home entreat.
A Gentle Knight was pricking on the plain,
Y cladd in mighty arms and silver shield,
Wherein old dints of deep wounds did remain,
The cruel marks of many' a bloody field;
Yet arms till that time did he never wield:
His angry steed did chide his foming bitt,
As much disdayning to the curb to yield:
Full jolly knight he seemd, and fair did sit,
As one for knightly giusts and fierce encounters fit.
But on his breast a bloody Cross he bore,
The dear remembrance of his dying Lord,
For whose sweet sake that glorious badge he wore,
And dead as living ever him adored:
Upon his shield the like was also scor'd,
For sovereign hope, which in his help he had:
Right faithful true he was in deed and word,
But of his cheer did seem too solemn sad,
Yet nothing did he dread, but ever was ydrad.
Upon a great adventure he was bond,
That greatest Gloriana to him gave,
That greatest Glorious Queen of Faerie land,
To win him worship, and her grace to have,
Which of all earthly things he most did crave;
And ever as he rode, his heart did earne
To prove his puissance in battle brave
Upon his foe, and his new force to learn;
Upon his foe, a Dragon horrible and stearne.
A lovely Lady rode him fair beside,
Upon a lowly Ass more white then snow,
Yet she much whiter, but the same did hide
Under a vele, that wimpled was full low,
And over all a black stole she did throw,
As one that inly mournd: so was she sad,
And heavy fat upon her palfrey slow;
Seemed in heart some hidden care she had,
And by her in a line a milk white lamb she lad.
So pure an innocent, as that same lamb,
She was in life and every virtuous lore,
And by descent from Royal lynage came
Of ancient Kings and Queens, that had of yore
Their scepters stretched from East to Western shore,
And all the world in their subjection held;
Till that infernal feend with foul uproar
Forwasted all their land, and them expeld:
Whom to avenge, she had this Knight from far co^peld.
Behind her far away a Dwarf did lag,
That lasie seemd in being ever last,
Or wearied with bearing of her bag
Of needments at his back. Thus as they past,
The day with clouds was suddeine ouercast,
And angry Jove an hideous storm of rain
Did pour into his Lemans lap so fast,
That every wight to shroud it did constrain,
And this fair couple eke to shroud themselves were fain.
Enforst to seek some covert nigh at hand,
A shadie grove not far away they spide,
That promised aid the tempest to withstand:
Whose lofty trees yclad with summers pride,
Did spread so broad, that heavens light did hide,
Not perceable with power of any star:
And all within were paths and alleies wide,
With footing worn, and leading inward far:
Fair harbor that them seems; so in they entered arre.
And forth they pass, with pleasure forward led,
Ioying to hear the birds sweet harmony,
Which therein shrouded from the tempest dred,
Seemd in their song to scorn the cruel sky.
Much can they praise the trees so straight and hy,
The sailing Pine, the Cedar proud and tall,
The vine-prop Elm, the Poplar never dry,
The builder Oak, sole king of forests all,
The Aspine good for staves, the Cypress funeral.
The Laurel, meed of mighty Conquerours
And Poets sage, the Fur that weepeth still,
The Willow worn of forlorn Paramours,
The Eugh obedient to the benders will,
The Birch for shaftes, the Sallow for the mill,
The Mirrhe sweet bleeding in the bitter wound,
The warlike Beech, the Ash for nothing ill,
The fruitful Olive, and the Platane round,
The caruer Holme, the Maple seeldom inward sound.
Led with delight, they thus beguile the way,
Until the blustering storm is ouerblowne;
When weening to return, whence they did stray,
The cannot find that path, which first was shown,
But wander too and fro in ways unknown,
Furthest from end then, when they nearest ween,
That makes them doubt, their wits be not their own:
So many paths, so many turnings seen,
That which of them to take, in diverse doubt they been.
At last resolving forward still to fare,
Till that some end they find or in or out,
That path they take, that beaten seemd most bare,
And like to lead the labyrinth about;
Which when by tract they hunted had throughout,
At length it brought them to a hollow cave,
Amid the thickest woods. The Champion stout
Eftsoons dismounted from his courser brave,
And to the Dwarf a while his needless spear he gave.
Be well aware, quoth then that Lady mild,
Least sudden mischief ye too rash provoke:
The danger hid, the place unknown and wild,
Breeds dreadful doubts: Often fire is without smoke,
And peril without show: therefore your hardy stroke
Sir knight withold, till further trial made.
Ah Lady (said he) shame were to revoke
The forward footing for an hidden shade:
Virtue gives her self light, through darkness for to wade.
Yea but (quoth she) the peril of this place
I better wot then you, though now too late,
To wish you back return with foul disgrace,
Yet wisdom warnes, whilst foot is in the gate,
To stay the step, ere forced to retrate.
This is the wandering wood, this Errors den,
A monster vile, whom God and man does hate:
Therefore I read beware. Fly fly (quoth then
The fearful Dwarf:) this is no place for living men.
But full of fire and greedy hardiment,
The youthful knight could not for ought be staide,
But forth unto the darksome hole he went,
And looked in: his glistring armor made
A little glooming light, much like a shade,
By which he saw the ugly monster plain,
Half like a serpent horribly displaide,
But the other half did woman's shape retain,
Most lothsom, filthy, foul, and full of vile disdain.
And as she lay upon the durtie ground,
Her huge long tail her den all ouerspred,
Yet was in knots and many boughtes vpwound,
Pointed with mortal sting. Of her there bred
A thousand young ones, which she daily fed,
Sucking upon her poisonous dugs, eachone
Of sundry shapes, yet all ill favored:
Soon as that uncouth light upon them shone,
Into her mouth they crept, and sudden all were gone.
Their dam vpstart, out of her den effraide,
And rushed forth, hurling her hideous tail
About her cursed head, whose folds displaid
Were stretched now forth at length without entraile.
She looked about, and seeing one in mayle
Armed to point, sought back to turn again;
For light she hated as the deadly bale,
Ay wont in desert darkness to remain,
Where plain none might her see, nor she see any plain.
Which when the valiant Elfe perceiu'ed, he lept
As Lion fierce upon the flying pray,
And with his trenchand blade her boldly kept
From turning back, and forced her to stay:
Therewith enraged she loudly began to bray,
And turning fierce, her speckled tail aduaunst,
Threatening her angry sting, him to dismay:
Who naught aghast, his mighty hand enhaunst:
The stroke down from her head unto her shoulder glaunst.
Much daunted with that dint, her sense was dazd,
Yet kindling rage, her self she gathered round,
And all attonce her beastly body raizd
With doubled forces high above the ground:
Tho wrapping up her wrethed stern arownd,
Lept fierce upon his shield, and her huge train
All suddenly about his body wound,
That hand or foot to stir he strove in vain:
God help the man so wrapped in Errors endless train.
His Lady sad to see his sore constraint,
Cride out, Now now Sir knight, show what ye be,
Add faith unto your force, and be not faint:
Strangle her, else she sure will strangle thee.
That when he heard, in great perplexity,
His gall did grate for grief and high disdain,
And knitting all his force got one hand free,
Wherewith he grypt her gorge with so great pain,
That soon to loose her wicked bands did her constrain.
Therewith she spewd out of her filthy maw
A flood of poison horrible and black,
Full of great lumpes of flesh and gobbets raw,
Which stunck so vildly, that it forced him slack
His grasping hold, and from her turn him back:
Her vomit full of books and papers was,
With loathly frogs and toades, which eyes did lack,
And creeping sought way in the weedy gras:
Her filthy parbreake all the place defiled has.
As when old father Nilus gins to swell
With timely pride above the Egyptian vale,
His fattie waves do fertile slime outwell,
And ouerflow each plain and lowly dale:
But when his later ebb gins to auale,
Huge heaps of mudd he leaves, wherein there breed
Ten thousand kinds of creatures, partly male
And partly female of his fruitful feed;
Such ugly monstrous shapes elsewhere may no man reed.
The same so sore annoyed has the knight,
That welnigh choked with the deadly stink,
His forces fail, ne can no longer fight.
Whose courage when the feend perceived to shrink,
She poured forth out of her hellish sink
Her fruitful cursed spawne of serpents small,
Deformed monsters, foul, and black as ink,
Which swarming all about his legs did crall,
And him encombred sore, but could not hurt at all.
As gentle Shepherd in sweet euen-tide,
When ruddy Phoebus gins to welke in west,
High on an hill, his flock to vewen wide,
Marks which do byte their hasty supper best;
A cloud of combrous gnattes do him molest,
All striving to infixe their feeble stings,
That from their noyance he no where can rest,
But with his clownish hands their tender wings
He brusheth often, and often does mar their murmurings.
Thus ill bestedd, and fearful more of shame,
Then of the certain peril he stood in,
Half furious unto his foe he came,
Resolved in mind all suddenly to win,
Or soon to lose, before he once would lin;
And struck at her with more then manly force,
That from her body full of filthy sin
He rafther hateful head without remorse;
A stream of cole black blood forth gushed from her corse.
Her scattred brood, soon as their Parent dear
They saw so rudely falling to the ground,
Groaning full deadly, all with troublous fear,
Gathred themselves about her body round,
Weening their wonted entrance to have found
At her wide mouth: but being there withstood
They flocked all about her bleeding wound.
And sucked up their dying mothers blood,
Making her death their life, and eke her hurt their good.
That detestable sight him much amazde,
To see th'vnkindly Impes of heaven accursed,
Devour their dam; on whom while so he gazd,
Having all satisfide their bloody thurst,
Their bellies swollen he saw with fullness burst,
And bowels gushing forth: well worthy end
Of such as drunk her life, the which them nursed;
Now needs him no longer labor spend,
His foes have slain themselves, with whom he should contend.
His Lady seeing all, that chaunst, from far
Approcht in have to greet his victory,
And said, Fair knight, borne under happy star,
Who see your vanquished foes before you lie:
Well worthy be you of that Armorie,
Wherein ye have great glory won this day,
And proou'd your strength on a strong enemy,
Your first adventure: many such I pray,
And henceforth ever wish, that like succeed it may.
Then mounted he upon his Steed again,
And with the Lady backward sought to wend;
That path he kept, which beaten was most plain,
Ne ever would to any by-way bend,
But still did follow one unto the end,
The which at last out of the wood them brought.
So forward on his way (with God to friend)
He passes forth, and new adventure sought;
Long way he traveled, before he heard of ought.
At length they chaunst to meet upon the way
An aged Sire, in long black weeds yclad,
His feet all bare, his beard all hoarie gray,
And by his belt his book he hanging had;
Sober he seemde, and very sagely sad,
And to the ground his eyes were lowly bent,
Simple in show, and void of malice bad,
And all the way he prayed, as he went,
And often knock his breast, as one that did repent.
He fair the knight saluted, louting low,
Who fair him quited, as that courteous was:
And after asked him, if he did know
Of strange adventures, which abroad did pas.
Ah my dear Son (quoth he) how should, alas,
Silly old man, that lives in hidden cell,
Bidding his beads all day for his trespass,
Tidings of war and worldly trouble tell?
With holy father sits not with such things to mell.
But if of danger which hereby does dwell,
And homebred evil evil ye desire to hear,
Of a strange man I can you tidings tell,
That wastes all this country far and near,
Of such (said he) I chiefly do inquere,
And shall you well reward to show the place,
In which that wicked wight his days does wear:
For to all knighthood it is foul disgrace,
That such a cursed creature lives so long a space.
Far hence (quoth he) in wastfull wilderness
His dwelling is, by which no lining wight
May ever pass, but thorough great distress.
Now (said the Lady) draws toward night,
And well I wot, that of your later fight
Ye all for wearied be: for what so strong,
But wanting rest will also want of might?
The Sun that measures heaven all day long,
At night does bait his steedes the Ocean waves among.
Then with the Sun take Sir, your timely rest,
And with new day new work at once begin:
Untroubled night they say gives counsel best.
Right well Sir knight ye have advised bin,
(Quoth then that aged man;) the way to win
Is wisely to advise: now day is spent;
Therefore with me ye may take up your In
For this same night. The knight was well content:
So with that godly father to his home they went.
A little lowly Hermitage it was,
Down in a dale, hard by a forests side,
Far from resort of people, that did pas
In travel to and froe: a little wide
There was an holy Chapel edifyde,
Wherein the Hermit dewly wont to say
His holy things each morn and euentyde:
Thereby a Crystal stream did genlty play,
Which from a sacred fountain welled forth always.
Arrived there, the little house they fill,
Ne look for entertainment, where none was:
Rest is their feast, and all things at their will;
The noblest mind the best contentment has.
With fair discourse the evening so they pas:
For that old man of pleasing words had store,
And well could file his tongue as smooth as glass;
He told of Saints and Popes, and euemore
He strowd an Aue-Mary after and before.
The drouping Night thus creeps on them fast,
And the sad humor loading their eye liddes,
As messenger of Morpheus on them cast
Sweet slo^bring deaw, the which to sleep them biddes.
Unto their lodgings then his guestes he riddes:
Where when all drowned in deadly sleep he finds,
He to his study goes, and there amiddes
His Magic books and arts of sundry kinds,
He seeks out mighty charms, to trouble sleepy minds.
Then choosing out few words most horrible,
(Let none them read) thereof did verses frame,
With which and other spelles like terrible,
He bad awake black Plutoes griesly Dame,
And cursed heaven, and spoke reproachful shame
Of highest God, the Lord of life and light;
A bold bad man, that dared to call by name
Great Gorgon, Prince of darkness and dead night,
At which Cocytus quakes, and Styx is put to flight.
And forth he called out of deep darkness dred
Legions of Sprights, the which like little flies
Fluttring about his ever damned head,
A-waite whereto their service he applies,
To aid his friends, or fray his enemies:
Of those he chose out two, the falsest two,
And fittest for to forge true-seeming lies;
The one of them he gave a message too,
The other by him self staide other work to do.
He making speedy way through spersed air,
And through the world of waters wide and deep,
To Morpheus house does hastily repair.
Amid the bowels of the earth full steep,
And low, where dawning day does never peep,
His dwelling is; there Tethys his wet bed
Does ever wash, and Cynthia still does steep
In silver deaw his euer-drouping head,
Whiles sad Night over him her ma^tle black does spread.
Whose double gates he finds locked fast,
The one fair framed of burnisht Yuory,
The other all with silver ouercast;
And wakefull dogs before them far do lie,
Watching to banish Care their enemy,
Who often is wont to trouble gentle sleep.
By them the Sprite does pass in quietly,
And unto Morpheus comes, whom drowned deep
In drowsy fit he finds: of nothing he takes keep.
And more, to lulle him in his slumber soft,
A trickling stream from high rock tumbling down
And euer-drizling rain upon the loft,
Mixed with a murmuring wind, much like the sown
Of swarming Bees, did cast him in a swowne:
No other noise, nor peoples troublous cries,
As still are wont t'annoy the walled town,
Might there be heard: but careless Quiet lies,
Wrapped in eternal silence far from enemies.
The messenger approaching to him spoke,
But his wast words returned to him in vain:
So sound he slept, that naught might him awake.
Then rudely he him trust, and pusht with pain,
Whereat he began to stretch: but he again
Shook him so hard, that forced him to speak.
As one then in a dream, whose dryer brain
Is tossed with troubled sights and fancies weak,
He mumbled soft, but would not all his silence break.
The Sprite then began more boldly him to wake,
And threatened unto him the dreaded name
Of Hecate: whereat he began to quake,
And lifting up his lumpish head, with blame
Half angry asked him, for what he came.
Hither (quoth he) me Archimago sent,
He that the stubborn Sprites can wisely tame,
He bids thee to him send for his intent
A fit false dream, that can delude the sleepers sent.
The God obayde, and calling forth straight way
A diverse dream out of his prison dark,
Delivered it to him, and down did lay
His heavy head, deuoide of careful carke,
Whose senses all were straight benumbd and stark.
He back returning by the Yuorie door,
Remounted up as light as cheerful Lark,
And on his little wings the dream he bore
In have unto his Lord, where he him left before.
Who all this while with charms and hidden arts,
Had made a Lady of that other Spright,
And framed of liquid air her tender parts
So lively, and so like in all men's sight,
That weaker sense it could have ravished quight:
The maker self for all his wondrous wit,
Was nigh beguiled with so goodly sight:
Her all in white he clad, and over it
Cast a black stole, most like to seem for Vna fit.
Now when that idle dream was to him brought,
Unto that Elfin knight he bad him fly,
Where he slept soundly void of evil thought,
And with false shows abuse his fantasy,
In sort as he him schooled privily:
And that new creature borne without her dew,
Full of the makers guile, with usage fly
He taught to imitate that Lady true,
Whose semblance she did carry under feigned hew.
Thus well instructed, to their work they have,
And coming where the knight in slomber lay,
The one upon his hardy head him plast,
And made him dream of loves and lustful play,
That nigh his manly heart did melt away,
Bathed in wanton blis and wicked joy:
Then seemed him his Lady by him lay,
And to him playnd, how that false winged boy,
Her chaste heart had subdewd, to learn Dame pleasures toy.
And she her self of beauty sovereign Queen,
Fair Venus seemde unto his bed to bring
Her, whom he waking evermore did ween,
To be the chastest flower, that ay did spring
On earthly branch, the daughter of a king,
Now a loose Leman to vile service bound:
And eke the Graces seemed all to sing,
Hymen io Hymen, dancing all around,
Whilst freshest Flora her Yuie girlond crowned.
In this great passion of unwonted lust,
Or wonted fear of doing ought amiss,
He started up, as seeming to mistrust,
Some secret ill, or hidden foe of his:
Lo there before his face his Lady is,
Under blake stole hyding her bayted hook,
And as half blushing offered him to kis,
With gentle blandishment and lovely look,
Most like that virgin true, which for her knight him took.
All clean dismayed to see so uncouth sight,
And half enraged at her shameless guise,
He thought have slain her in his fierce despite:
But hasty heat tempring with sufferance wise,
He stayde his hand, and began himself advise
To prove his sense, and tempt her feigned truth.
Wringing her hands in wemens pitteous wise,
Tho can she weep, to stir up gentle ruth,
Both for her noble blood, and for her tender youth.
And said, Ah Sir, my liege Lord and my love,
Shall I accuse the hidden cruel fate,
And mighty causes wrought in heaven above,
Or the blind God, that does me thus amate,
For hoped love to win me certain hate?
Yet thus perforce he bids me do, or die.
Die is my dew: yet rue my wretched state
You, whom my hard auenging destiny
Has made judge of my life or death indifferently.
Your own dear sake forced me at first to leave
My Fathers kingdom, There she stopped with tears;
Her swollen heart her speech seemd to bereave,
And then again begun, My weaker years
Captived to fortune and frail worldly fears,
Fly to your faith for succor and sure aid:
Let me not dye in languor and long tears.
Why Dame (quoth he) what has ye thus dismayed?
What frayes ye, that were wont to comfort me affrayd?
Love of your self, she said, and dear constraint
Lets me not sleep, but wast the weary night
In secret anguish and vnpittied plaint,
Whiles you in careless sleep are drowned quight.
Her doubtful words made that redoubted knight
Suspect her truth: yet since no' untruth he knew,
Her fawning love with foul disdainefull spite
He would not shend, but said, Dear dame I rue,
That for my sake unknown such grief unto you grew.
Assure your self, it fell not all to ground;
For all so dear as life is to my heart,
I deem your love, and hold me to you bound;
Ne let vain fears procure your needless smart,
Where cause is none, but to your rest depart.
Not all content, yet seemd she to appease
Her mournful plaintes, beguiled of her art,
And fed with words, that could not choose but please,
So slyding softly forth, she turned as to her ease.
Long after lay he musing at her mood,
Much grieved to think that gentle Dame so light,
For whose defense he was to shed his blood.
At last dull weariness of former fight
Having yrockt a sleep his irksome spright,
That troublous dream began freshly toss his brain,
With bowres, and beds, and Ladies dear delight:
But when he saw his labor all was vain,
With that misformed spright he back returned again.
Cant. II.
The guilefull great Enchaunter parts
The Redcrosse Knight from Truth:
Into whose stead fair falsehood steps,
And works him woeful ruth.
BY this the Northern wagoner had set
His seuenfold teme behind the steadfast star,
That was in Ocean waves yet never wet,
But firm is fixed, and sends light from far
To all, that in the wide deep wandering arre:
And cheerful Chaunticlere with his note shrill
Had warned once, that Phoebus fiery carre
In have was climbing up the Eastern hill,
Full envious that night so long his room did fill.
When those accursed messengers of hell,
That feigning dream, and that faire-forged Spright
Came to their wicked master, and began tell
Their bootelesse pains, and ill succeeding night:
Who all in rage to see his skillful might
Deluded so, began threaten hellish pain
And sad Proserpines wrath, them to affright.
But when he saw his threatening was but vain,
He cast about, and searched his balefull books again.
Eftsoons he took that miscreated fair,
And that false other Spright, on whom he spread
A seeming body of the subtle air,
Like a young Squire, in loves and lusty-hed
His wanton days that ever loosely led,
Without regard of arms and dreaded fight:
Those two he took, and in a secret bed,
Covered with darkness and misdeeming night,
Them both together laid, to joy in vain delight.
Forthwith he runs with feigned faithful have
Unto his guest, who after troublous sights
And dreams, began now to take more sound repast,
Whom suddenly he wakes with fearful frights,
As one aghast with feends or damned sprights,
And to him calls, Rise rise unhappy Swain,
That here wex old in sleep, whiles wicked wights
Have knit themselves in Venus shameful chain;
Come see, where your false Lady does her honor stain.
All in amaze he suddenly up start
With sword in hand, and with the old man went;
Who soon him brought into a secret part,
Where that false couple were full closely meant
In wanton lust and lewd embracement:
Which when he saw, he burnt with gealous fire,
The eye of reason was with rage yblent,
And would have slain them in his furious ire,
But hardly was restreined of that aged sire.
Returning to his bed in torment great,
And bitter anguish of his guilty sight,
He could not rest, but did his stout heart eat,
And wast his inward gall with deep despite,
Yrkesome of life, and too long lingering night.
At last fair Hesperus in highest sky
Had spent his lamp, and brought forth dawning light,
Then up he rose, and clad him hastily;
The Dwarf him brought his steed so both away do fly.
Now when the rosy-fingred Morning fair,
Weary of aged Tithones saffron bed,
Had spread her purple robe through deawy air,
And the high hills Titan discovered,
The royal virgin shook off drowsy-hed,
And rising forth out of her baser bower,
Looked for her knight, who far away was fled,
And for her Dwarf, that wont to wait each hour;
Then began she wail and weep, to see that woeful stowre.
And after him she rode with so much speed
As her slow beast could make; but all in vain:
For him so far had borne his light-foot steed,
Pricked with wrath and fiery fierce disdain,
That him to follow was but fruitless pain;
Yet she her weary limbs would never rest
But every hill and dale, each wood and plain
Did search, sore grieved in her gentle breast,
He so ungently left her, whom she love best.
But subtle Archimago, when his guests
He saw divided into double parts,
And Vna wandering in woods and forests,
The End of his drift, he praisd his devilish arts,
That had such might over true meaning hearts;
Yet rests not so, but other means does make,
How he may work unto her further smarts:
For her he hated as the hissing snake,
And in her many troubles did most pleasure take.
He then deuisde himself how to disguise;
For by his mighty science he could take
As many forms and shapes in seeming wise,
As ever Proteus to himself could make:
Sometime a foul, sometime a fish in lake,
Now like a fox, now like a dragon fell,
That of himself he often for fear would quake,
And often would fly away. O who can tell
The hidden power of herbs, and might of Magic spell?
But now seemde best, the person to put on
Of that good knight, his late beguiled guest:
In mighty arms he was yclad anon:
And silver shield, upon his coward breast
A bloody cross, and on his crauen crest
A bounch of hairs discolourd diversely:
Full jolly knight he seemde, and well addressed,
And when he sat upon his courser free,
Saint George himself ye would have deemed him to be.
But he the knight, whose semblaunt he did bear,
The true Saint George was wandered far away,
Still flying from his thoughts and gealous fear;
Will was his guide, and grief led him astray.
At last him chaunst to meet upon the way
A faithless Sarazin all armed to point,
In whose great shield was writ with letters gay
Sans foy: full large of limb and every joint
He was, and cared not for God or man a point.
He had a fair companion of his way,
A goodly Lady clad in scarlot red,
Purfled with gold and pearl of rich assay,
And like a Persian mitre on her head
She wore, with crowns and owches garnished,
The which her lavish lovers to her gave;
Her wanton palfrey all was ouerspred
With tinsell trappings, wouen like a wave,
Whose bridle rung with golden bells and bosses brave.
With fair disport and courting dalliaunce
She intertainde her lover all the way:
But when she saw the knight his spear advance,
She soon left off her mirth and wanton play,
And bad her knight address him to the fray:
His foe was nigh at hand. He pricked with pride
And hope to win his Ladies heart that day,
Forth spurred fast: adowne his coursers side
The red blood trickling staind the way, as he did ride.
The knight of the Redcrosse when him he spide,
Spurring so hot with rage dispiteous,
Began fairly couch his spear, and toward ride:
Soon meet they both, both fell and furious,
That daunted with their forces hideous,
Their steeds do stagger, and amazed stand,
And eke themselves too rudely rigorous,
Astonished with the stroke of their own hand,
Do back rebut, and each to other yields land.
As when two rams stird with ambitious pride,
Fight for the rule of the rich fleeced flock,
Their horned fronts so fierce on either side
Do meet, that with the terror of the shocke
Astonished both, stand senseless as ablocke,
Forgetful of the hanging victory:
So stood these twain, unmoved as a rock,
Both staring fierce, and holding idely,
The broken relics of their former cruelty.
The Sarazin sore daunted with the buffe
Snatcheth his sword, and fiercely to him flies;
Who well it wards, and quyteth cuff with cuff:
Each others equal puissaunce enuies,
And through their iron sides with cruelties
Does seek to perce: repining courage yields
No foot to foe. The flashing fire flies
As from a forge out of their burning shields,
And streams of purple blood new dies the verda^t fields.
Curse on that Cross (quoth then the Sarazin)
That keeps thy body from the bitter fit;
Dead long ygoe I wot thou had bin,
Had not that charm from thee forwarned it:
But yet I warn thee now assured sit,
And hide thy head. Therewith upon his crest
With rigor so outrageous he smitt,
That a large share it hewd out of the rest,
And glauncing down his shield, from blame him fairly blessed.
Who thereat wondrous wroth, the sleeping spark
Of native virtue began eftsoons revive,
And at his haughty helmet making mark,
So hugely stroke, that it the steel did riue,
And cleft his head. He tumbling down alive.
With bloody mouth his mother earth did kis,
Greeting his grave: his grudging ghost did strive
With the frail flesh; at last it flitted is,
Whither the souls do fly of men, that live amiss.
The Lady when she saw her champion fall,
Like the old ruins of a broken tower,
Staid not to wail his woeful funeral,
But from him fled away with all her power;
Who after her as hastily began scowre,
Bidding the Dwarf with him to bring away
The Sarazins shield, sign of the conqueroure.
Her soon he ouertooke, and bad to stay,
For present cause was none of dread her to dismay.
She turning back with ruefull countenance,
Cride, Mercy mercy Sir vouchsafe to show
On silly Dame, subject to hard mischaunce,
And to your mighty will. Her humblesse low
In so rich weeds and seeming glorious show,
Did much emmoue his stout heroicke heart,
And said, Dear dame, your suddein overthrow
Much rueth me; but now put fear apart,
And tell, both who ye be, and who that took your part.
Melting in tears, then began she thus lament;
The wretched woman, whom unhappy hour
Has now made thrall to your commandment,
Before that angry heavens lift to lowre,
And fortune false betraide me to your power,
Was, (O what now avails that I was!)
Borne the sole daughter of an Emperor,
He that the wide West under his rule has,
And high has set his throne, where Tiberis does pas.
He in the first flower of my freshest age,
Betrothed me unto the only hair
Of a most mighty king, most rich and sage;
Was never Prince so faithful and so fair,
Was never Prince so meek and debonaire;
But ere my hoped day of spousall shone,
My dearest Lord fell from high honors staire,
Into the hands of his accursed fone,
And cruelly was slain, that shall I ever moan.
His blessed body spoild of lively breath,
Was afterward, I know not how, conuaid
And fro me hid: of whose most innocent death
When tidings came to me unhappy maid,
O how great sorrow my sad soul assaid.
Then forth I went his woeful corse to find,
And many years throughout the world I straid,
A virgin widow, whose deep wounded mind
With love, long time did languish as the stricken hind.
At last it chanced this proud Sarazin,
To meet me wandering, who perforce me led
With him away, but yet could never win
The Fort, that Ladies hold in sovereign dread.
There lies he now with foul dishonor dead,
Who whiles he liu'de, was called proud Sans foy,
The eldest of three brethren, all three bred
Of one bad sire, whose youngest is Sans joy,
And twixt them both was borne the bloody bold Sans loy.
In this sad plight, friendlesse, unfortunate,
Now miserable I Fidessa dwell,
Craving of you in pity of my state,
To do none ill, if please ye not do well.
He in great passion all this while did dwell,
More busying his quick eyes, her face to view,
Then his dull ears, to hear what she did tell;
And said, fair Lady heart of flint would rue
The undeserved woes and sorrows, which ye show.
Henceforth in safe assurance may ye rest,
Having both found a new friend you to aid,
And lost an old foe, that did you molest:
Better new friend then an old foe is said.
With change of cheer the seeming simple maid
Let fall her eyes, as shamefast to the earth,
And yielding soft, in that she naught gainsaid,
So forth they rode, he feining seemly merth,
And she coy looks: so dainty they say makes derth.
Longtime they thus together traueiled,
Till weary of their way, they came at last,
Where grew two goodly trees, that fair did spread
Their arms abroad, with gray moss ouercast,
And their green leaves trembling with every blast,
Made a calm shadow far in compass round:
The fearful Shepherd often there aghast
Under them never sat, ne wont there sound
His merry oaten pipe, but shund th'vnlucky ground.
But this good knight soon as he them can spy,
For the cool shade thither hastly got:
For golden Phoebus now that mounted hie,
From fiery wheels of his fair chariot
Hurled his beam so scorching cruel hot,
That living creature mote it not abide;
And his new Lady it endured not.
There they alight, in hope themselves to hide
From the fierce heat, and rest their weary limbs a tide.
Fair seemly pleasaunce each to other makes,
With goodly purposes there as they sit:
And in his falsed fancy he her takes
To be the fairest wight, that lived yet;
Which to express, he bends his gentle wit,
And thinking of those branches green to frame
A girlond for her dainty forehead fit,
He plucked a bough; out of whose rift there came
Small drops of gory blood, that trickled down the same.
Therewith a piteous yelling voice was heard,
Crying, O spare with guilty hands to tear
My tender sides in this rough rynd embard,
But fly, ah fly far hence away, for fear
Least to you hap, that happened to me hear,
And to this wretched Lady, my dear love,
O too dear love, love bought with death too dear.
Astond he stood, and up his hair did houe,
And with that suddein horror could no member move.
At last whenas the dreadful passion
Was ouerpast, and manhood well awake,
Yet musing at the strange occasion,
And doubting much his sense, he thus bespake;
What voice of damned Ghost from Limbo lake,
Or guilefull spright wandering in empty air,
Both which frail men do oftentimes mistake,
Sends to my doubtful ears these speeches rare,
And ruefull plaints, me bidding guitlesse blood to spare?
Then groaning deep, Nor damned Ghost, (quoth he,)
Nor guilefull sprite to thee these words does speak,
But once a man Fradubio, now a tree,
Wretched man, wretched tree; whose nature weak,
A cruel witch her cursed will to wreake,
Has thus transformd, and plast in open plains,
Where Bore as does blow full bitter bleake,
And scorching Sun does dry my secret veins:
For though a tree I seem, yet cold and heat me pains.
Say on Fradubio then, or man, or tree,
Quoth then the knight, by whose mischievous arts
Art thou misshaped thus, as now I see?
He often finds medicine, who his grief imparts;
But double griefs afflict concealing hearts,
As raging flames who strives to suppress.
The author then (said he) of all my smarts,
Is one Duessa a false sorceresse,
That many erra^t knights has brought to wretchedness.
In prime of youthly years, when courage hot
The fire of love and joy of cheualree
First kindled in my breast, it was my lot
To love this gentle Lady, whom ye see,
Now not a Lady, but a seeming tree;
With whom as once I rode accompanyde,
Me chanced of a knight encountered be,
That had a like fair Lady by his side,
Like a fair Lady, but did foul Duessa hyde.
Whose forged beauty he did take in hand,
All other Dames to have exceeded far;
I in defense of mine did likewise stand,
Mine, that did then shine as the Morning star:
So both to battle fierce arraunged arre,
In which his harder fortune was to fall
Under my spear: such is the dye of war:
His Lady left as a prise martial,
Did yield her comely person, to be at my call.
So doubly loved of Ladies unlike fair,
The One seeming such, the other such indeed,
One day in doubt I cast for to compare,
Whether in beauties glory did exceed;
A Rosy girlond was the victors meede:
Both seemde to win, and both seemde won to be,
So hard the discord was to be agreede.
Fraelissa was as fair, as fair mote be,
And ever false Duessa seemde as fair as she.
The wicked witch now seeing all this while
The doubtful ballaunce equally to sway,
What not by right, she cast to win by guile,
And by her hellish science raisd straight way
A foggy mist, that ouercast the day,
And a dull blast, that breathing on her face,
Dimmed her former beauties shining ray,
And with foul ugly form did her disgrace:
Then was she fair alone, when none was fair in place.
Then cride she out, fie, fie, deformed wight,
Whose borrowed beauty now appears plain
To have before bewitched all men's sight;
O leave her soon, or let her soon be slain.
Her loathly visage viewing with disdain,
Eftsoons I thought her such, as she me told,
And would have killed her; but with feigned pain,
The false witch did my wrathful hand withold;
So left her, where she now is turned to treen mould.
Then forth I took Duessa for my Dame,
And in the witch vnweening ioyd long time,
Ne ever wist, but that she was the same,
Till on a day (that day is every Prime,
When Witches wont do penance for their crime)
I chaunst to see her in her proper hew,
Bathing her self in origane and thyme:
A filthy foul old woman I did view,
That ever to have touched her, I did deadly rue.
Her nether parts misshapen, monstrous,
Were hidd in water, that I could not see,
But they did seem more foul and hideous,
Then woman's shape man would believe to be.
Then forth from her most beastly company
I began refrain, in mind to slip away,
Soon as appeard safe opportunity:
For danger great, if not assured decay
I saw before mine eyes, if I were known to stray.
The devilish hag by chaunges of my cheer
Perceived my thought, and drowned in sleepie night,
With wicked herbs and ointments did besmeare
My body all, through charms and magic might,
That all my senses were bereaved quight:
Then brought she me into this desert waste,
And by my wretched lovers side me pight,
Where now enclosd in wooden walls full fast,
Banished from living wights, our weary days we waste.
But how long time, said then the Elfin knight,
Are you in this misformed house to dwell?
We may not change (quoth he) this evil plight,
Till we be bathed in a lining well;
That is the term prescribed by the spell.
O how, said he, mote I that well out find,
That may restore you to your wonted well?
Time and suffised fates to former kind
Shall us restore, none else from hence may us vnbynd.
The false Duessa, now Fidessa hight,
Heard how in vain Fradubio did lament,
And knew well all was true. But the good knight
Full of sad fear and ghastly dreriment,
When all this speech the living tree had spent,
The bleeding bough did thrust into the ground,
That from the blood he might be innocent,
And with fresh clay did close the wooden wound:
Then turning to his Lady, dead with fear her found.
Her seeming dead he found with feigned fear,
As all vnweeting of that well she knew,
And paynd himself with busy care to rear
Her out of careless swowne. Her eylids blew
And dimmed sight with pale and deadly hew
At last she up began lift: with trembling cheer
Her up he took, too simple and too true,
And often her kissed. At length all passed fear,
He set her on her steed, and forward forth did bear.
Cant. III.
Forsaken Truth long seeks her love,
And makes the Lion mylde,
Marres blind Devotions mart, and falls
In hand of leachour vylde.
Naught is there under heavens wide hollownesse,
That moves more dear compassion of mind,
Then beauty brought t'vnworthy wretchedness
Through enuies snares or fortunes freakes unkind:
I, whether lately through her brightness blind,
Or through allegiance and fast fealty,
Which I do owe unto all woman kind,
Feel my heart perst with so great agony,
When such I see, that all for pity I could die.
And now it is empassioned so deep,
For fairest: Vnaes sake, of whom I sing,
That my frail eyes these lines with tears do steep,
To think how she through guilefull handeling,
Though true as touch, though daughter of a king,
Though fair as ever living wight was fair,
Though nor in word nor deed ill meriting,
Is from her knight divorced in despair
And her due loves derived to that vile witches share.
Yet she most faithful Lady all this while
Forsaken, woeful, solitary maid
Far from all peoples prease, as in exile,
In wilderness and wastfull deserts strayd,
To seek her knight; who subtly betrayed
Through that late vision, which th'Enchaunter wrought,
Had her abandond. She of naught affrayd,
Through woods and wastnesse wide him daily sought;
Yet wished tidings none of him unto her brought.
One day nigh weary of the yrkesome way,
From her vnhastie beast she did alight,
And on the grass her dainty limbs did lay
In secret shadow, far from all men's sight:
From her fair head her fillet she vndight,
And laid her stole aside. Her angels face
As the great eye of heaven shyned bright,
And made a sunshine in the shadie place;
Did never mortal eye behold such heavenly grace.
It fortuned out of the thickest wood
A ramping Lion rushed suddenly,
Hunting full greedy after saluage blood;
Soon as the royal virgin he did spy,
With gaping mouth at her ran greedily,
To have attonce devoured her tender corse:
But to the pray when as he drew more ny,
His bloody rage assuaged with remorse,
And with the sight amazd, forgot his furious forse.
In stead thereof he kissed her weary feet,
And lickt her lilly hands with fawning tongue,
As he her wronged innocence did weet.
O how can beauty master the most strong,
And simple truth subdue auenging wrong?
Whose yielded pride and proud submission,
Still dreading death, when she had marked long,
Her heart began melt in great compassion,
And drizling tears did shed for pure affection.
The Lion Lord of every beast in field
Quoth she, his princely puissance does abate,
And mighty proud to humble weak does yield,
Forgetful of the hungry rage, which late
Him pricked, in pity of my sad estate:
But he my Lion, and my noble Lord
How does he find in cruel heart to hate
Her that him loved, and ever most adord,
As the God of my life? why has he me abhord?
Redounding tears did choke the end of her plaint,
Which softly ecchoed from the neighbor wood;
And sad to see her sorrowful constraint
The kingly beast upon her gazing stood;
With pity calmd, down fell his angry mood.
At last in close heart shutting up her pain,
Arose the virgin borne of heavenly brood,
And to her snowy Palfrey got again,
To seek her strayed Champion, if she might attain.
The Lion would not leave her desolate,
But with her went along, as a strong guard
Of her chaste person, and a faithful mate
Of her sad troubles and misfortunes hard:
Still when she slept, he kept both watch and ward,
And when she wakt, he waited diligent,
With humble service to her will prepared:
From her fair eyes he took commandment,
And ever by her looks conceived her intent.
Long she thus traueiled through deserts wide,
By which she thought her wandering knight should pas,
Yet never show of living wight espyde;
Till that at length she found the trodden gras,
In which the tract of peoples footing was,
Under the steep foot of a mountain hoar;
The same she follows, till at last she has
A damzell spyde slow footing her before,
That on her shoulders sad a pot of water bore.
To Whom approaching she to her began call,
To weet, if dwelling place were nigh at hand;
But the rude wench her answered naught at all,
She could not hear, nor speak, nor understand;
Till seeing by her side the Lion stand,
With sudden fear her pitcher down she threw,
And fled away: for never in that land
Face of fair Lady she before did view,
And that dread Lions look her cast in deadly hew.
Full fast she fled, ne ever looked behynd,
As if her life upon the wager lay,
And home she came, whereas her mother blind
Sat in eternal night: naught could she say,
But sudden catching hold, did her dismay
With quaking hands, and other signs of fear:
Who full of ghastly fright and cold affray,
Began shut the door. By this arrived there
Dame Vna, weary Dame, and entrance did requere.
Which when none yielded, her unruly Page
With his rude claws the wicket open rent,
And let her in; where of his cruel rage
Nigh dead with fear, and faint astonishment,
She found them both in darkesome corner pent;
Where that old woman day and night did pray
Upon her beads devoutly penitent;
Nine hundred Pater nosters every day,
And thrice nine hundred Aues she was wont to say.
And to augment her painful penance more,
Thrice every week in ashes she did sit,
And next her wrinkled skin rough sackcloth wore,
And thrice three times did fast from any bit:
But now for fear her beads she did forget.
Whose needless dread for to remove away,
Fair Vna framed words and countenance fit:
Which hardly done, at length she began them pray,
That in their cotage small, that night she rest her may.
The day is spent, and comes drowsy night,
When every creature shrouded is in sleep;
Sad Vna down her lays in weary plight,
And at her feet the Lion watch does keep:
In stead of rest, she does lament, and weep
For the late loss of her dear loved knight,
And sighs, and groans, and evermore does steep
Her tender breast in bitter tears all night,
All night she thinks too long, and often looks for light.
Now when Aldeboran was mounted hie
Above the shynie Cassiopeias chair,
And all in deadly sleep did drowned lie,
One knocked at the door, and in would fare;
He knocked fast, and often cursed, and swear,
That ready entrance was not at his call:
For on his back a heavy load he bare
Of nightly stelths and pillage several,
Which he had got abroad by purchase criminal.
He was to weete a stout and sturdie thief,
Wont to rob Churches of their ornaments,
And poor men's boxes of their due relief,
Which given was to them for good intents;
The holy Saints of their rich vestiments
He did disrobe, when all men careless slept,
And spoild the Priests of their habiliments,
Whiles none the holy things in safety kept;
Then he by cunning sleights in at the window crept.
And all that he by right or wrong could find,
Unto this house he brought, and did bestow
Upon the daughter of this woman blind,
Abessa daughter of Corceca slow,
With whom he whoredom vsd, that few did know,
And fed her fat with feast of offerings,
And plenty, which in all the land did grow;
Ne spared he to give her gold and rings:
And now he to her brought part of his stolen things.
Thus long the door with rage and threats he bet,
Yet of those fearful women none durst rize,
The Lion frayed them, him in to let:
He would no longer stay him to aduize,
But open breaks the door in furious wize,
And entering is; when that disdainful beast
Encountering fierce, him sudden does surprise,
And seizing cruel claws on trembling breast,
Under his Lordly foot him proudly has suppressed.
Him booteth not resist, nor succor call,
His bleeding heart is in the vengers hand,
Who straight him rent in thousand pieces small,
And quite dismembered has: the thirsty land
Drunk up his life; his corse left on the strand.
His fearful friends wear out the woeful night,
Ne dare to weep, nor seem to understand
The heavy hap, which on them is alight,
Afraid, least to themselves the like mishappen might.
Now when broad day the world discovered has,
Up Vna rose, up rose the Lion eke,
And on their former journey forward pas,
In ways unknown, her wandering knight to seek,
With pains far passing that long wandering Greek,
That for his love refused deity;
Such were the labors of this Lady meek,
Still seeking him, that from her still did fly,
Then furthest from her hope, when most she weenednie.
Soon as she parted thence, the fearful twain,
That blind old woman and her daughter dear
Came forth, and finding Kirkrapine there slain,
For anguish great they began to rend their hear,
And beat their breasts, and naked flesh to tear.
And when they both had wept and wayld their fill,
Then forth they ran like two amazed dear,
Half mad through malice, and revenging will,
To follow her, that was the causer of their ill.
Whom ouertaking, they began loudly bray,
With hollow howling, and lamenting cry,
Shamefully at her railing all the way,
And her accusing of dishonesty,
That was the flower of faith and chastity;
And still amidst her railing, she did pray,
That plagues, and mischiefs, and long misery
Might fall on her, and follow all the way,
And that in endless error she might ever stray.
But when she saw her prayers naught prevail,
She back returned with some labor lost;
And in the way as she did weep and wail,
A knight her met in mighty arms embost,
Yet knight was not for all his bragging bost,
But subtle Archimag, that Vna, sought
By traynes into new troubles to have tossed:
Of that old woman tidings he besought,
If that of such a Lady she could tellen ought.
Therewith she began her passion to renew,
And cry, and curse, and rail, and rend her hear,
Saying, that harlot she too lately knew,
That causd her shed so many a bitter tear,
And so forth told the story of her fear:
Much seemed he to moan her hapless chance,
And after for that Lady did inquire;
Which being taught, he forward began advance*
His fair enchaunted steed, and eke his charmed lance.
Ere long he came, where Vna traueild slow,
And that wild Champion waiting her beside:
Whom seeing such, for dread he durst not show
Himself too nigh at hand, but turned wide
Unto an hill; from whence when she him spyde,
By his like seeming shield, her knight by name
She weend it was, and toward him began ride:
Approaching nigh, she wist it was the same,
And with fair fearful humblesse toward him she came.
And weeping said, Ah my long lacked Lord,
Where have ye been thus long out of my sight?
Much feared I to have been quite abhord,
Or ought have done, that ye displeasen might,
That should as death unto my dear heart light:
For since mine eye your joyous sight did mis,
My cheerful day is turned to chearelesse night,
And eke my night of death the shadow is;
But welcome now my light, and shining lamp of blis.
He thereto meeting said, My dearest Dame,
Far be it from your thought, and fro my will,
To think that knighthood I so much should shame,
As you to leave, that have me loved still,
And chose in Faery court of mere goodwill,
Where noblest knights were to be found on earth:
The earth shall sooner leave her kindly skill
To bring forth fruit, and make eternal derth,
Then I leave you, my liefe, yborne of heavenly berth.
And sooth to say, why I left you so long,
Was for to seek adventure in strange place,
Where Archimago said a felon strong
To many knights did daily work disgrace;
But knight he now shall never more deface:
Good cause of mine excuse; that mote ye please
Well to accept, and evermore embrace
My faithful service, that by land and seas
Have vowed you to defend, now then your plaint appease.
His lovely words her seemd due recompense
Of all her passed pains: one loving hour
For many years of sorrow can dispense:
A dram of sweet is worth a pound of sour:
She has forgot, how many a woeful stowre
For him she late endured; she speaks no more
Of past: true is, that true love has no power
To looken back; his eyes be fixed before.
Before her stands her knight, for whom she toyld so sore.
Much like, as when the beaten marinere,
That long has wandered in the Ocean wide,
Often soust in swelling Tethys saltish tear,
And long time having tand his tawney hide
With blustering breath of heaven, that none can bide,
And scorching flames of fierce Orions hound,
Soon as the port from far he has espide,
His cheerful whistle merrily does sound,
And Nereus crowns with cups; his mates him pledge around.
Such joy made Vna, when her knight she found;
And eke th'enchaunter joyous seemd no less,
Then the glad merchant, that does view from ground
His ship far come from watrie wilderness,
He hurles out vows, and Neptune often does bless:
So forth they past, and all the way they spent
Discoursing of her dreadful late distress,
In which he asked her, what the Lion meant:
Who told her all that fell in journey as she went.
They had not ridden far, when they might see
One pricking toward them with hasty heat,
Full strongly armd, and on a courser free,
That through his fierceness fomed all with swear,
And the sharp iron did for anger eat,
When his hot ryder spurd his chauffed side;
His look was stern, and seemed still to threat
Cruel revenge, which he in heart did hyde,
And on his shield Sans loy in bloody lines was did.
When nigh he drew unto this gentle pair
And saw the Red-crosse, which the knight did bear,
He burnt in fire, and began eftsoons prepare
Himself to battle with his couched spear.
Lo thwas that other, and did faint through fea,
To taste th'vntryed dint of deadly steel;
But yet his Lady did so well him cheer,
That hope of new goodhap he began to feel;
So bent his spear, and spurnd his horse with iron heel.
But that proud Paynim forward came so fierce,
And full of wrath, that with his sharp-head spear
Through vainly crossed shield he quite did pierce,
And had his staggering steed not shrunk for fear,
Through shield and body eke he should him bear:
Yet so great was the puissance of his push,
That from his saddle quite he did him bear:
He tombling rudely down to ground did rush,
And from his gored wound a well of blood did gush.
Dismounting lightly from his lofty steed,
He to him lept, in mind to reaue his life,
And proudly said, Lo there the worthy meed
Of him, that slew Sansfoy with bloody knife;
Henceforth his ghost freed from repining strife,
In peace may passen over Lethe lake,
When morning altars purgd with enemies life,
The black infernal Furies done aslake:
Life from Sansfoy thou tookst, Sansloy shall from thee take.
Therewith in haste his helmet began unlace,
Till Vna cride, O hold that heavy hand,
Dear Sir, what ever that thou be in place:
Enough is, that thy foe does vanquished stand
Now at thy mercy: Mercy not withstand:
For he is one the truest knight alive,
Though conquered now he lie on lowly land,
And whilst him fortune favored, fair did thrive
In bloody field: therefore of life him not deprive.
Her piteous words might not abate his rage,
But rudely rending up his helmet, would
Have slain him straight: but when he sees his age,
And hoarie head of Archimago old,
His hasty hand he does amazed hold,
And half ashamed, wondered at the sight:
For the old man well knew he, though untold,
In charms and magic to have wondrous might,
Ne ever wont in field, ne in round lists to fight.
And said, Why Archimago, lucklesse sire,
What do I see? what hard mishap is this,
That has thee hither brought to taste mineyre?
Or thine the fault, or mine the error is,
In stead of foe to wound my friend amiss?
He answered naught, but in a trance still lay,
And on those guilefull dazed eyes of his
The cloud of death did sit. Which done away,
He left him lying so, ne would no longer stay.
But to the virgin comes, who all this while
Amassed stands, her self so mocked to see
By him, who has the guerdon of his guile,
For so misfeigning her true knight to be:
Yet is she now in more perplexity,
Left in the hand of that same Paynim bold,
From whom her booteth not at all to fly,
Who by her cleanly garment catching hold,
Her from her Palfrey plucked, her visage to behold.
But her fierce servant full of kingly awe
And high disdain, whenas his sovereign Dame
So rudely handled by her foe he saw,
With gaping jaws full greedy at him came,
And ramping on his shield, did ween the same
Have reft away with his sharp rending claws:
But he was stout, and lust did now inflame
His courage more, that from his griping paws
He has his shield redeemed, and forth his swerd he draws.
O then too weak and feeble was the forse
Of saluage beast, his puissance to withstand:
For he was strong, and of so mighty corse,
As ever wielded spear in warlike hand,
And feats of arms did wisely understand.
Eftsoons he perced through his chaufed chest
With thrilling point of deadly iron brand,
And launcht his Lordly heart: with death oppressed
He roared aloud, whiles life forsook his stubborn breast.
Who now is left to keep the forlorn maid
From raging spoil of lawless victors will?
Her faithful guard removed, her hope dismayed,
Her self a yielded pray to save or spill.
He now Lord of the fied, his pride to fill,
With foul reproaches, and disdainful spite
Her vildly entertaines, and will or nill,
Bears her away upon his courser light:
Her prayers naught prevail, his rage is more of might.
And all the way, with great lamenting pain,
And piteous plaints she fills his dull ears,
That stony heart could riuen have in twain,
And all the way she wets with flowing tears:
But he enraged with rancor, nothing hears.
Her servile beast yet would not leave her so,
But follows her far off, ne ought he fears,
To be partaker of her wandering woe,
More mild in beastly kind, then that her beastly foe.
Cant. IIII
To sinful house of Pride, Duessa
guides the faithful knight,
Where brothers death to wreak Sansioy
does challenge him to fight.
YOung knight, what ever that do arms profess,
And through long labors huntest after fame,
Beware of fraud, beware of fickleness,
In choice, and change of thy dear loved Dame,
Least thou of her believe too lightly blame,
And rash misweening do thy heart remove:
For unto knight there is no greater shame,
Then lightness and inconstancy in love;
That does this Redcrosse knights ensample plainly prove.
Who after that he had fair Vna lorne,
Through light misdeeming of her loialtie,
And false Duessa in her sted had borne,
Called Fidess', and so supposd to be;
Long with her traueild, till at last they see
A goodly building, bravely garnished,
The house of mighty Prince it seemd to be:
And toward it a broad high way that led,
All bare through peoples feet, which thither traueiled.
Great troops of people traueild thitherward
Both day and night, of each degree and place,
But few returned, having escaped hard,
With balefull beggerie, or foul disgrace,
Which ever after in most wretched case,
Like loathsome lazars, by the hedges lay.
Thither Duessa bad him bend his pace:
For she is weary of the toilesome way,
And also nigh consumed is the lingering day.
A stately Palace built of squared brick,
Which cunningly was without mortar laid,
Whose walls were high, but nothing strong, nor thick,
And golden foil all over them displaid,
That purest sky with brightness they dismayed:
High lifted up were many lofty towers,
And goodly galleries far over laid,
Full of fair windows, and delightful bowres;
And on the top a Dial told the timely hours.
It was a goodly heap for to behold,
And spoke the praises of the workmans wit;
But full great pity, that so fair a mould
Did on so weak foundation ever sit:
For on a sandy hill, that still did flit,
And fall away, it mounted was full hie,
That every breath of heaven shaked it:
And all the hinder parts, that few could spy,
Were ruinous and old, but painted cunningly.
Arrived there they passed in forth right;
For still to all the gates stood open wide,
Yet charge of them was to a Porter hight
Called Maluenu, who entrance none denide:
Thence to the hall, which was on every side
With rich array and costly arras dight:
Infinite sorts of people did abide
There waiting long, to win the wished sight
Of her, that was the Lady of that Palace bright.
By them they pass, all gazing on them round,
And to the Presence mount; whose glorious view
Their frail amazed senses did confound:
In living Princes court none ever knew
Such endless richesse, and so sumptuous show;
Ne Persia self, the nourse of pompous pride
Like ever saw. And there a noble crew
Of Lords and Ladies stood on every side,
Which with their presence fair, the place much beautifide.
High above all a cloth of State was spread,
And a rich throne, as bright as sunny day,
On which there sat most brave embellished
With royal robes and gorgeous array,
A maiden Queen, that shone as Titans ray,
In glistring gold, and peerless precious stone:
Yet her bright blazing beauty did assay
To dim the brightness of her glorious throne,
As envying her self, that too exceeding shone.
Exceeding shone, like Phoebus fairest child,
That did presume his fathers fiery wayne,
And flaming mouths of steedes unwonted wild
Through highest heaven with weaker hand to rain;
Proud of such glory and advancement vain,
While flashing beams do daze his feeble eyes,
He leaves the welkin way most beaten plain,
And rapt with whirling wheels, inflames the skyen,
With fire not made to burn, but fairly for to shine.
So proud she shyned in her Princely state,
Looking to heaven; for earth she did disdain,
And sitting high; for lowly she did hate:
Lo underneath her scornful feet, was layne
A dreadful Dragon with an hideous train,
And in her hand she held a mirrhour bright,
Wherein her face she often vewed feign,
And in her selfe-lou'd semblance took delight;
For she was wondrous fair, as any living wight.
Of griesly Pluto she the daughter was,
And sad Proserpina the Queen of hell;
Yet did she think her pearelesse wroth to pas
That parentage, with pride so did she swell,
And thundering Jove, that high in heaven does dwell,
And wield the world, she claymed for her sire,
Or if that any else did Jove excel:
For to the highest she did still aspyre,
Or if ought higher were then that, did it desire.
And proud Lucifera men did her call,
That made her self Queen, and crowned to be,
Yet rightful kingdom she had none at all,
Ne heritage of native soueraintie,
But did usurp with wrong and tyranny
Upon the scepter, which she now did hold:
Ne ruld her Realms with laws, but policy,
And strong aduizement of six wisards old,
That with their counsels bad her kingdom did uphold.
Soon as the Elfing knight in presence came,
And false Duessa seeming Lady fair,
A gentle Husher, Vanity by name
Made rowme, and passage for them did prepaire:
So goodly brought them to the lowest staire
Of her high throne, where they on humble knee
Making obeyssance, did the cause declare,
Why they were come, her royal state to see,
To prove the wide report of her great Maiestee.
With lofty eyes, half loath to look so low,
She thanked them in her disdainefull wise,
Ne other grace vouchsafed them to show
Of Princess worthy, scarce them bad arise.
Her Lords and Ladies all this while devise
Themselves to setten forth to strangers sight:
Some frounce their curled hair in courtly guise,
Some prancke their ruffes, and others trimly dight
Their gay attire: each others greater pride does spite.
Goodly they all that knight do entertain,
Right glad with him to have increast their crew:
But to Duess' each one himself did pain
All kindness and fair courtesy to show;
For in that court whylome her well they knew:
Yet the stout Faerie among the midst crowd
Thought all their glory vain in knightly view,
And that great Princess too exceeding proud,
That to strange knight no better countenance allowd.
Suddein vpriseth from her stately place
The royal Dame, and for her coche does call:
All hurtlen forth, and she with Princely pace,
As fair Aurora in her purple pall,
Out of the East the dawning day does call:
So forth she comes: her brightness broad does blaze;
The heaps of people thronging in the hall,
Do ride each other, upon her to gaze:
Her glorious glitter and light does all men's eyes amaze.
So forth she comes, and to her coche does clyme,
Adorned all with gold, and girlonds gay,
That seemd as fresh as Flora in her prime,
And strove to match, in royal rich array,
Great Iunoes golden chair, the which they say
The Gods stand gazing on, when she does ride
To Jove's high house through heavens bras-paued way
Drawn of fair Pecocks, that excel in pride,
And full of Argus eyes their tails dispredden wide.
But this was drawn of six unequal beasts,
On which her six sage Counselors did ride,
Taught to obey their bestiall beheasts,
With like conditions to their kinds applyde:
Of which the first, that all the rest did guide,
Was sluggish Idleness the nourse of sin;
Upon a slothful Ass he chose to ride,
Arayd in habit black, and amiss thin,
Like to an holy Monck, the service to begin.
And in his hand his Portesse still he bare,
That much was worn, but therein little red,
For of devotion he had little care,
Still drowned in sleep, and most of his days ded;
Scarce could he once uphold his heavy head,
To looken, whether it were night or day:
May seem the wayne was very evil led,
When such an one had guiding of the way,
That knew not, whether right he went, or else astray.
From worldly cares himself he did esloyne,
And greatly shunned manly exercise,
For every work he challenged essoyne,
For contemplation sake: yet otherwise,
His life he led in lawless riotise;
By which he grew to grievous malady;
For in his lustlesse limbs through evil guise
A shaking fever raignd continually:
Such one was Idleness, first of this company.
And by his side rode loathsome Gluttony,
Deformed creature, on a filthy swyne,
His belly was vp-blowne with luxury,
And eke with fatness swollen were his eyne,
And like a Crane his neck was long and fine,
With which he swallowd up excessive feast,
For want whereof poor people often did pyne;
And all the way, most like a brutish beast,
He spued up his gorge, that all did him deteast.
In green vine leaves he was right fitly clad;
For other clothes he could not wear for heat,
And on his head an yuie girland had,
From under which fast trickled down the sweat:
Still as he rode, he somewhat still did eat,
And in his hand did bear a bouzing can,
Of which he supt so often, that on his seat
His dronken corse he scarce vpholden can,
In shape and life more like a monster, then a man.
Unfit he was for any worldly thing,
And eke unable once to stir or go,
Not meet to be of counsel to a king,
Whose mind in meat and drink was drowned so,
That from his friend he seldom knew his so:
Full of diseases was his carcas blew,
And a dry dropsy through his flesh did flow:
Which by misdiet daily greater grew:
Such one was Gluttony, the second of that crew.
And next to him rode lustful Lechery,
Upon a bearded Goat, whose rugged hair,
And whally eyes (the sign of gelosy,)
Was like the person self, whom he did bear:
Who rough, and black, and filthy did appear,
Unseemly man to please fair Ladies eye;
Yet he of Ladies often was loved dear,
When fairer faces were bid standen by:
O who does know the bent of women's fantasy?
In a green gown he clothed was full fair,
Which underneath did hide his filthiness,
And in his hand a burning heart he bare,
Full of vain follies, and new fanglenesse:
For he was false, and fraught with sicklenesse,
And learned had to love with secret looks,
And well could dance, and sing with ruefulnesse,
And fortunes tell, and read in loving books,
And thousand other ways, to bait his fleshly hooks.
Inconstant man, that loved all he saw,
And lusted after all, that he did love,
Ne would his looser life be tide to law,
But ioyd weak wemens hearts to tempt and prove
If from their loyal loves he might them move;
Which lewdness filled him with reproachful pain
Of that foul evil, which all men reprove,
That rots the marrow, and consumes the brain:
Such one was Lechery, the third of all this train.
And greedy Avarice by him did ride,
Upon a Camel laden all with gold;
Two iron coffers hong on either side,
With precious metal full, as they might hold,
And in his lap an heap of coin he told;
For of his wicked pelf his God he made,
And unto hell him self for money sold;
Accursed usury was all his trade,
And right and wrong ylike in equal ballaunce waide.
His life was nigh unto deaths door yplast,
And threadbare cote, and cobled shoes he ware,
Ne scarce good morsel all his life did taste,
But both from back and belly still did spare,
To fill his bags, and richesse to compare;
Yet child ne kinsman living had he none
To leave them to; but thorough daily care
To get, and nightly fear to lose his own,
He led a wretched life unto him self unknown.
Most wretched wight, whom nothing might suffice,
Whose greedy lust did lack in greatest store,
Whose need had end, but no end couetise,
Whose wealth was want, whose plenty made him pore,
Who had enough, yet wished ever more;
A vile disease, and eke in foot and hand
A grievous gout tormented him full sore,
That well he could not touch, nor go, nor stand:
Such one was Avarice, the fourth of this fair band.
And next to him malicious Envy rode,
Upon a ravenous wolf, and still did chaw
Between his cankred teeth a venomous tode,
That all the poison ran about his chaw;
But inwardly he chawed his own maw
At neighbors wealth, that made him ever sad;
For death it was, when any good he saw,
And wept, that cause of weeping none he had,
But when he heard of harm, he wexed wondrous glad.
All in a kirtle of discolourd say
He clothed was, ypainted full of eyes;
And in his bosom secretly there lay
An hateful Snake, the which his tail vptyes
In many folds, and mortal sting implies.
Still as he rode, he gnasht his teeth, to see
Those heaps of gold with griple Couetyse,
And grudged at the great felicity
Of proud Lucifera, and his own company.
He hated all good works and virtuous deeds,
And him no less, that any like did use,
And who with gracious bread the hungry feeds,
His alms for want of faith he does accuse;
So every good to bad he does abuse:
And eke the verse of famous Poets wit
He does backebite, and spightfull poison spues
From leprous mouth on all, that ever writ:
Such one vile Envy was, that first in row did sit.
And him beside rides fierce revenging Wrath,
Upon a Lion, loath for to be led;
And in his hand a burning brond he has,
The which he brandisheth about his head;
His eyes did hurl forth sparkles fiery red,
And stared stern on all, that him beheld,
As ashes pale of hew and seeming ded;
And on his dagger still his hand he held,
Trembling through hasty rage, when choler in him sweld.
His ruffin raiment all was staind with blood,
Which he had spilt, and all to rags yrent,
Through vnaduized rashness woxen wood;
For of his hands he had no government,
Ne cared for blood in his auengement:
But when the furious fit was ouerpast,
His cruel facts he often would repent;
Yet wilful man he never would forecast,
How many mischieues should ensue his heedlesse have.
Full many mischiefs follow cruel Wrath;
Abhorred bloodshed, and tumultuous strife,
Unmanly murder, and unthrifty scath,
Bitter despite, with rancours rusty knife,
And fretting grief the enemy of life;
All these, and many evils more haunt ire,
The swelling Spleen, and Frenzy raging rife,
The shaking Palsy, and Saint Fraunces fire:
Such one was Wrath, the last of this ungodly tire.
And after all, upon the wagon beam
Rode Satan, with a smarting whip in hand,
With which he forward lasht the laesie teme,
So often as Slowth still in the mire did stand.
Huge routs of people did about them band,
Showting for joy, and still before their way
A foggy mist had covered all the land;
And underneath their feet, all scattered lay
Dead sculs and bones of men, whose life had gone astray.
So forth they marchen in this goodly sort,
To take the solace of the open air,
And in fresh flowring fields themselves to sport;
Emongst the rest rode that false Lady fair,
The foul Duessa, next unto the chair
Of proud Lucifera, as one of the train:
But that good knight would not so nigh repair,
Him self estraunging from their ioyaunce vain,
Whose fellowship seemd far unfit for warlike swain.
So having solaced themselves a space
With pleasaunce of the breathing fields yfed,
They back returned to the Princely Place;
Whereas an errant knight in arms ycled,
And heathnish shield, wherein with letters red
Was writ Sans joy, they new arrived find:
Enflamed with fury and fires hardy-hed,
He seemd in heart to harbor thoughts unkind,
And nourish bloody vengeance in his bitter mind.
Who when the shamed shield of slain Sans foy
He spide with that same Faery champions page,
Bewraying him, that did of late destroy
His eldest brother, burning all with rage
He to him leapt, and that same envious gage
Of victors glory from him snatched away:
But the Elfin knight, which ought that warlike wage,
Disdaind to loose the meed he won in fray,
And him rencountring fierce, reskewd the noble pray.
Therewith they began to hurtlen greedily,
Redoubted battle ready to darrayne,
And clash their shields, and shake their swords on hy,
That with their stir they troubled all the train;
Till that great Queen upon eternal pain
Of high displeasure, that ensewen might,
Commanded them their fury to refrain,
And if that either to that shield had right,
In equal lists they should the morrow next it fight.
Ah dearest Dame, (quoth then the Paynim bold,)
Pardon the error of enraged wight,
Whom great grief made forget the raines to hold
Of reasons rule, to see this recreant knight,
No knight, but treachour full of false despite
And shameful treason, who through guile has slain
The prowest knight, that ever field did fight,
Even stout Sans foy (O who can then refrayn?)
Whose shield he bears renuerst, the more to heap disdayn.
And to augment the glory of his guile,
His dearest love the fair Fidessa lo
Is there possessed of the traitor vile,
Who reapes the harvest sown by his foe,
Sown in bloody field, and bought with woe:
That brothers hand shall dearly well requight
So be, o Queen, you equal favor show.
Him little answered the angry Elfin knight;
He never meant with words, but swords to plead his right.
But threw his gauntlet as a sacred pledge,
His cause in combat the next day to try:
So been they parted both, with hearts on edge,
To be aueng'd each on his enemy.
That night they pas in joy and iollity,
Feasting and courting both in bower and hall;
For Steward was excessive Gluttony,
That of his plenty poured forth to all;
Which done, the Chamberlain Slowth did to rest them call.
Now whenas darkesome night had all displayed
Her coleblacke curtein over brightest sky,
The warlike youths on dayntie couches laid,
Did chase away sweet sleep from sluggish eye,
To muse on means of hoped victory.
But whenas Morpheus had with leaden mace
Arrested all that courtly company,
Vp-rose Duessa from her resting place,
And to the Paynims lodging comes with silent pace.
Whom broad awake she finds, in troublous fit,
Forecasting, how his foe he might annoy,
And him amoues with speeches seeming fit:
Ah dear Sans joy, next dearest to Sans foy,
Cause of my new grief, cause of new joy,
Joyous, to see his image in mine eye,
And grieved, to think how foe did him destroy,
That was the flower of grace and cheualrye;
Lo his Fidessa to thy secret faith I fly.
With gentle words he can her fairly greet,
And bad say on the secret of her heart.
Then sighing soft, I learn that little sweet
Often tempred is (quoth she) with muchell smart:
For since my breast was launcht with lovely dart
Of dear Sansfoy, I never ioyed hour,
But in eternal woes my weaker heart
Have wasted, loving him with all my power,
And for his sake have felt full many an heavy stowre.
At last when perils all I weened past,
And hoped to reap the crop of all my care,
Into new woes vnweeting I was cast,
By this false faytor, who unworthy ware
His worthy shield, whom he with guilefull snare
Entrapped slew, and brought to shameful grave.
Me silly maid away with him he bare,
And ever since has kept in darksome cave,
For that I would not yield, that to Sans-foy I gave.
But since fair Sun has sperst that lowering clowd,
And to my loathed life now shows some light,
Under your beams I will me safely shroud,
From dreaded storm of his disdainful spite:
To you the inheritance belongs by right
Of brothers praise, to you eke longs his love.
Let not his love, let not his restless spright
Be unrevenged, that calls to you above
From wandering Stygian shores, where it does endless move.
Thereto said he, fair Dame be naught dismayed
For sorrows past; their grief is with them gone:
Ne yet of present peril be afraid,
For needless fear did never vantage none,
And helpless hap it booteth not to moan.
Dead is Sans foy, his vital pains are past,
Though grieved ghost for vengeance deep do groan:
He lives, that shall him pay his duties last,
And guilty Elsin blood shall sacrifice in have.
O but I fear the fickle freakes (quoth she)
Of fortune false, and odds of arms in field.
Why dame (quoth he) what odds can ever be,
Where both do fight alike, to win or yield?
Yea but (quoth she) he bears a charmed shield,
And eke enchaunted arms, that none can perce,
Ne none can wound the man, that does them wield.
Charmd or enchaunted (answered he then ferce)
I no whit reck, ne you the like need to reherce.
But fair Fidessa, since fortunes guile,
Or enemies power has now captiued you,
Return from whence ye came, and rest a while
Till morrow next, that I the Elfe subdew,
And with Sans-foyes dead dowry you endew.
Ay me, that is a double death (she said)
With proud foes sight my sorrow to renew:
Where ever yet I be, my secret aid
Shall follow you. So passing forth she him obaid.
Cant. V.
The faithful knight in equal field
subdewes his faithless foe.
Whom false Duessa saues, and for
his cure to hell does go.
THe noble heart, that harbors virtuous thought,
And is with child of glorious great intent,
Can never rest, until it forth have brought
The Eternal brood of glory excellent:
Such restless passion did all night torment
The flaming courage of that Faery knight,
Deuizing, how that doughtie turnament
With greatest honor he atchieuen might;
Still did wake, and still did watch for dawning light.
At last the golden Oriental gate,
Of greatest heaven began to open fair,
And Phoebus fresh, as bridegroom to his mate,
Came dancing forth, shaking his deawie hair:
And hurls his glistring beams through gloomy air
Which when the wakeful Elfe perceived, straight way
He started up, and did him self prepaire,
In sun-bright arms, and battailous array:
For with that Pagan proud he combat will that day.
And forth he comes into the commune hall,
Where early wait him many a gazing eye,
To weet what end to stranger knights may fall.
There many Minstrales maken melody,
To drive away the dull melancholy,
And many Bardes, that to the trembling chord
Can tune their timely voices cunningly,
And many Chroniclers, that can record
Old loves, and wars for Ladies done by many a Lord.
Soon after comes the cruel Sarazin,
In wouen maile all armed warily,
And sternly looks at him, who not a pin
Does care for look of living creatures eye.
They bring them wines of Greece and Araby,
And dainty spices fetched from furthest Ynd,
To kindle heat of courage privily:
And in the wine a solemn oath they bynd
T'obserue the sacred laws of arms, that are assynd.
At last forth comes that far renowned Queen,
With royal pomp and Princely majesty;
She is ybrought unto a paled green,
And placed under stately canapee,
The warlike feats of both those knights to see.
On the other side in all men's open view
Duessa placed is, and on a tree
Sans-foy his shield is hanged with bloody hew:
Both those the laurel girlonds to the victor dew.
A shrilling trompet sownded from on hye,
And unto battaill bad them selves address:
Their shining shieldes about their wrestes they tie,
And burning blades about their heads do bless,
The instruments of wrath and heaviness:
With greedy force each other does assail,
And strike so fiercely, that they do impresse
Deep dinted furrows in the battred mayle;
The iron walls to ward their blows are weak and frail.
The Sarazin was stout, and wondrous strong,
And heaped blows like iron hammers great:
For after blood and vengeance he did long.
The knight was fires, and full of youthly heat:
And doubled strokes, like dreaded thunders threat:
For all for praise and honor he did fight.
Both stricken strike, and beaten both do beat,
That from their shields forth flies fiery light,
And helmets hewn deep, show marks of eithers might*
So the one for wrong, the other strives for right:
As when a Gryfon seized of his pray,
A Dragon fires encountreth in his flight,
Through widest air making his idle way,
That would his rightful rauine rend away:
With hideous horror both together smight,
And souce so sore, that they the heavens affray:
The wise Southsayer seeing so sad sight,
The Amazed vulgar tells of wars and mortal fight.
So the one for wrong, the other strives for right,
And each to deadly shame would drive his foe:
The cruel steel so greedily does bight
In tender flesh, that streams of blood down flow,
With which the arms, that erst so bright did show
Into a pure vermillion now are did:
Great ruth in all the gazers hearts did grow,
Seeing the gored wounds to gape so wide,
That victory they dare not wish to either side.
At last the Paynim chaunst to cast his eye,
His suddein eye, flaming with wrathful fire,
Upon his brothers shield, which hong thereby:
Therewith redoubled was his raging ire,
And said, Ah wretched son of woeful sire,
Do thou sit wayling by black Stygian lake,
Whilst here thy shield is hanged for victors hyre,
And sluggish german do thy forces slake,
To after-send his foe, that him may overtake?
Go caytiue Elfe, him quickly overtake,
And soon redeem from his long wandering woe;
Go guilty ghost, to him my message make,
That I his shield have quit from dying foe.
Therewith upon his crest he stroke him so,
That twice he reeled, ready twice to fall;
End of the doubtful battle deemed tho
The lookers on, and loud to him began call
The false Duessa, Thine the shield, and I, and all.
Soon as the Faerie heard his Lady speak,
Out of his swowning dream he began awake,
And quickening faith, that erst was woxen weak,
The creeping deadly cold away did shake:
Tho moved with wrath, and shame, and Ladies sake,
Of all attonce he cast auengd to be,
And with so'exceeding fury at him struck,
That forced him to stoop upon his knee;
Had he not stouped so, he should have cloven be.
And to him said, Go now proud Miscreant,
Thy self thy message do to german dear,
Alone he wandering thee too long does want:
Go say, his foe thy shield with his does bear.
Therewith his heavy hand he high began rear,
Him to have slain; when lo a darkesome clowd
Upon him fell: he no where does appear,
But vanished is. The Elfe him calls alowd,
But answer none receives: the darkness him does shroud.
In haste Duessa from her place arose,
And to him running said, O prowest knight,
That ever Lady to her love did chose,
Let now abate the terror of your might,
And quench the flame of furious despite,
And bloody vengeance; lo the infernal powers
Covering your foe with cloud of deadly night,
Have borne him hence to Plutoes balefull bowres.
The conquest yours, I yours, the shield, and glory yours.
Not all so satisfide, with greedy eye
He sought all round about, his thirsty blade
To bath in blood of faithless enemy;
Who all that while lay hid in secret shade:
He stands amazed, how he thence should fade.
At last the trumpets, Triumph sound on hie,
And running Heralds humble homage made,
Greeting him goodly with new victory,
And to him brought the shield, the cause of enmity.
Wherewith he goes to that sovereign Queen,
And falling her before on lowly knee,
To her makes present of his service seen:
Which she accepts, with thanks, and goodly gree,
Greatly aduauncing his gay cheualree.
So marches home, and by her takes the knight,
Whom all the people follow with great glee,
Shouting, and clapping all their hands on hight,
That all the air it fills, and flies to heaven bright.
Home is he brought, and laid in sumptuous bed:
Where many skillful leaches him abide,
To salve his hurts, that yet still freshly bled.
In wine and oil they wash his wounds wide,
And softly can embalme on every side.
And all the while, most heavenly melody
About the bed sweet music did divide,
Him to beguile of grief and agony:
And all the while Duessa wept full bitterly.
As when a weary traveler that strayes
By muddy shore of broad seuen-mouthed Nile,
Vnweeting of the perilous wandering ways,
Does meet a cruel crafty Crocodile,
Which in false grief hyding his harmefull guile,
Does weep full sore, and sheddeth tender tears:
The foolish man, that pitties all this while
His mournful plight, is swallowd up unawares,
Forgetful of his own, that minds another cares.
So wept Duessa until euentide,
That shyning lamps in Jove's high house were light:
Then forth she rose, ne longer would abide,
But comes unto the place, where th'Hethen knight
In slombring swownd nigh void of vital spright,
Lay covered with inchaunted cloud all day:
Whom when she found, as she him left in plight,
To wayle his woeful case she would not stay,
But to the eastern coast of heaven makes speedy way.
Where griesly Night, with visage deadly sad,
That Phoebus cheerful face durst never view,
And in a foul black pitchie mantle clad,
She finds forth coming from her darkesome mew,
Where she all day did hide her hated hew.
Before the door her iron charet stood,
Already harnessed for journey new;
And coleblacke steedes yborne of hellish brood,
That on their rustie bits did champ, as they were wood.
Who when she saw Duessa sunny bright,
Adornd with gold and jewels shining clear,
She greatly grew amazed at the sight,
And th'vnacquainted light began to fear:
For never did such brightness there appear,
And would have back retired to her cave,
Until the witches speech she began to hear,
Saying, yet o thou dreaded Dame, I crave
Abide, till I have told the message, which I have.
She stayed, and forth Duessa began proceed,
O thou most ancient Grandmother of all,
More old then Jove, whom thou at first did breed,
Or that great house of Gods caelestiall,
Which wast begot in Daemogorgons hall,
And sawst the secrets of the world unmade,
Why suffredst thou thy Nephews dear to fall
With Elfin sword, most shamefully betrade?
Lo where the stout Sansioy does sleep in deadly shade.
And him before, I saw with bitter eyes
The bold Sansfoy shrink underneath his spear;
And now the pray of fowls in field he lies,
Nor wayld of friends, nor laid on groaning bear,
That whylome was to me too dearly dear.
O what of Gods then boots it to be borne,
If old Aveugles sons so evil hear?
Or who shall not great Nights children scorn,
When two of three her Nephews are so foul forlorn?
Up then, up dreary Dame, of darkness Queen,
Go gather up the relics of thy race,
Or else go them avenge, and let be seen,
That dreaded Night in brightest day has place,
And can the children of fair light deface.
Her feeling speeches some compassion moved
In heart, and change in that great mothers face:
Yet pity in her heart was never proved
Till then: and evermore she hated, never loved.
And said, Dear daughter rightly may I rue
The fall of famous children borne of me,
And good successes, which their foes ensew:
But who can turn the stream of destinee,
Or break the chain of strong necessitee,
Which fast is tide to Jove's eternal seat?
The sons of Day he favors, I see,
And by my ruins thinks to make them great:
To make one great by others loss, is bad excheat.
Yet shall they not escape so freely all;
For some shall pay the price of others guilt:
And he the man that made Sansfoy to fall,
Shall with his own blood price that he has spilt.
But what art thou, that telst of Nephews kilt?
I that do seem not I, Duessa am,
(Quoth she) how ever now in garments gilt,
And gorgeous gold arayd I to thee came;
Duessa I, the daughter of Deceit and Shame.
Then bowing down her aged back, she kissed
The wicked witch, saying; In that fair face
The false resemblance of Deceit, I wist
Did closely lurk; yet so true-seeming grace
It carried, that I scarce in darkesome place
Could it discern, though I the mother be
Of falsehood, and root of Duessaes race.
O welcome child, whom I have longd to see,
And now have seen unawares. Lo now I go with thee.
Then to her iron wagon she betakes,
And with her bears the foul welfauourd witch:
Through mirkesome air her ready way she makes.
Her twyfold Teme, of which two black as pitch,
And two were brown, yet each to each vnlich,
Did softly swim away, ne ever stamp,
Unless she chau^st their stubborn mouths to twitch;
Then foming tar, their bridles they would champe,
And trampling the fine element, would fiercely rampe.
So well they sped, that they become at length
Unto the place, whereas the Paynim lay,
Deuoid of outward sense, and native strength,
Couerd with charmed cloud from view of day,
And sight of men, since his late luckelesse fray.
His cruel wounds with cruddy blood congealed,
They binden up so wisely, as they may,
And handle softly, till they can be healed:
So lay him in her charet, close in night concealed.
And all the while she stood upon the ground,
The wakefull dogs did never cease to bay,
As giving warning of th'vnwonted sound,
With which her iron wheels did them affray,
And her dark griesly look them much dismay;
The messenger of death, the ghastly Owl
With drearie shriekes did also her bewray;
And hungry Wolves continually did howl,
At her abhorred face, so filtey and so foul.
Thence turning back in silence soft they stole,
And brought the heavy corse with easy pace
To yawning gulf of deep Auernus hole.
By that same hole an entrance dark and bace
With smoke and sulphur hiding all the place,
Descends to hell: there creature never past,
That back returned without heavenly grace;
But dreadful Furies, which their chains have brast,
And damned sprights sent forth to make ill men aghast.
By that same way the direful dames do drive
Their mournful charet, filled with rusty blood,
And down to Plutoes house are come biliue:
Which passing through, on every side them stood
The trembling ghosts with sad amazed mood,
Chattring their iron teeth, and staring wide
With stony eyes; and all the hellish brood
Of feends infernal flockt on every side,
To gaze on earthly wight, that with the Night durst ride.
They pas the bitter waves of Acheron,
Where many souls sit wailing woefully,
And come to fiery flood of Phlegeton,
Whereas the damned ghosts in torments fry,
And with sharp shrilling shriekes do bootlesse cry,
Cursing high Jove, the which them thither sent.
The house of endless pain is built thereby,
In which ten thousand sorts of punishment
The cursed creatures do eternally torment.
Before the threshold dreadful Cerberus
His three deformed heads did lay along,
Curled with thousand adders venomous,
And lilled forth his bloody flaming tongue:
At them he began to rear his bristles strong,
And felly gnarre, until days enemy
Did him appease; then down his tail he hong
And suffered them to passen quietly:
For she in hell and heaven had power equally.
There was Ixion turned on a wheel,
For daring tempt the Queen of heaven to sin;
And Sisyphus an huge round stone did reele
Against an hill, ne might from labor lin;
There thirsty Tantalus hong by the chin;
And Tityus fed a vulture on his maw;
Typhoeus joints were stretched on a gin,
Theseus condemned to endless sloth by law,
And fifty sisters water in leake vessels draw.
They all beholding worldly wights in place,
Leave off their work, unmindful of their smart,
To gaze on them; who forth by them do pace,
Till they be come unto the furthest part:
Where was a Cave ywrought by wondrous art,
Deep, dark, uneasy, doleful, comfortless,
In which sad Aesculapius far a part
Emprisond was in chains remediless,
For that Hippolytus rent corse he did redress.
Hippolytus a jolly huntsman was,
That wont in charet chase the foming Bore;
He all his Peers in beauty did surpas,
But Ladies love as loss of time forbore:
His wanton stepdame loved him the more,
But when she saw her offered sweets refused
Her love she turned to hate, and him before
His father fierce of treason false accused,
And with her gealous terms his open ears abused.
Who all in rage his Sea-god fire besought,
Some cursed vengeance on his son to cast:
From surging gulf two monsters straight were brought,
With dread whereof his chasing steedes aghast,
Both charet swift and huntsman ouercast.
His goodly corpse on ragged clifts yrent,
Was quite dismembered, and his members chaste
Scattered on every mountain, as he went,
That of Hippolytus was left no moniment.
His cruel stepdame seeing what was done,
Her wicked days with wretched knife did end,
In death auowing th'innocence of her son.
Which hearing his rash Sire, began to rend
His hair, and hasty tongue, that did offend:
Tho gathering up the relics of his smart
By Dianes means, who was Hippolyts friend,
Them brought to Aesculape, that by his art
Did heal them all again, and joined every part.
Such wondrous science in man's wit to rain
When Jove auizd, that could the dead revive,
And fates expired could renew again,
Of endless life he might him not deprive,
But unto hell did thrust him down alive,
With flashing thunderbolt ywounded sore:
Where long remaining, he did always strive
Himself with salues to health for to restore,
And slake the heavenly fire, that raged evermore.
There ancient Night arriving, did alight
From her high weary waine, and in her arms
To Aesculapius brought the wounded knight:
Whom having softly disarayd of arms,
Tho began to him discover all his harms,
Beseeching him with prayer, and with praise,
If either salues, or oils, or herbs, or charms
A fordonne wight from door of death mote raise,
He would at her request prolong her nephews days.
Ah Dame (quoth he) thou temptest me in vain,
To dare the thing, which daily yet I rue,
And the old cause of my continued pain
With like attempt to like end to renew.
Is not enough, that thrust from heaven dew
Here endless penance for one fault I pay,
But that redoubled crime with vengeance new
Thou biddest me to eeke? Can Night defray
The wrath of thundering Jove, that rules both night and day?
Not so (quoth she) but since that heavens king
From hope of heaven has thee excluded quight,
Why fear thou, that can not hope for thing,
And fear not, that more thee hurten might,
Now in the power of everlasting Night?
Go to then, o thou far renowned son
Of great Apollo, show thy famous might
In medicine, that else has to thee won
Great pains, and greater praise, both never to be done.
Her words preuaild: And then the learned leach
His cunning hand began to his wounds to lay,
And all things else, the which his art did teach:
Which having seen, from thence arose away
The mother of dread darkness, and let stay
Aueugles son there in the leaches cure,
And back returning took her wonted way,
To run her timely race, whilst Phoebus pure
In western waves his weary wagon did recure.
The false Duessa leaving noyous Night,
Returned to stately palace of dame Pride;
Where when she came, she found the Faery knight
Departed thence, albe his wounds wide
Not thoroughly heald, unready were to ride.
Good cause he had to hasten thence away;
For on a day his wary Dwarf had spide,
Where in a dongeon deep huge numbers lay
Of caytiue wretched thrals, that wayled night and day.
A ruefull sight, as could be seen with eye;
Of whom he learned had in secret wise
The hidden cause of their captivity,
How mortgaging their lives to Couetise,
Through wastfull Pride, and wanton Riotise,
They were by law of that proud Tyranness
Prouokt with Wrath, and Enuies false surmise,
Condemned to that Dongeon merciless,
Where they should live in woe, and die in wretchedness.
There was that great proud king of Babylon,
That would compel all nations to adore,
And him as only God to call upon,
Till through celestial doom thrown out of door,
Into an Ox he was transformed of yore:
There also was king Craesus, that enhaunst
His heart too high through his great riches store;
And proud Antiochus, the which aduaunst
His cursed hand against God, and on his altars daunst.
And them long time before, great Nimrod was,
That first the world with sword and fire warrayd;
And after him old Ninus far did pas
In princely pomp, of all the world obayd;
There also was that mighty Monarch laid
Low under all, yet above all in pride,
That name of native sire did foul upbraid,
And would as Ammons son be magnifide,
Till scornd of God and man a shameful death he did.
All these together in one heap were thrown,
Like carkases of beasts in butchers stall.
And in another corner wide were strowne
The antique ruins of the Romans fall:
Great Romulus the Grandsyre of them all,
Proud Tarquin, and too lordly Lentulus,
Stout Scipio, and stubborn Hanniball,
Ambitious Sylla, and stern Marius,
High Caesar, great Pompey, and fierce Antonius.
Amongst these mighty men were women mixed,
Proud women, vain, forgetful of their yoke:
The bold Semiramis, whose sides transfixt
With sons own blade, her foul reproaches spoke;
Fair Sthenoboea, that her self did choke
With wilful cord, for wanting of her will;
High minded Cleopatra, that with stroke
Of Aspes sting her self did stoutly kill:
And thousands more the like, that did that dongeon fill.
Besides the endless routs of wretched thralles,
Which thither were assembled day by day,
From all the world after their woeful falls,
Through wicked pride, and wasted wealths decay.
But most of all, which in the Dongeon lay
Fell from high Princes courts, or Ladies bowres,
Where they in idle pomp, or wanton play,
Consumed had their goods, and thriftlesse hours,
And lastly thrown themselves into these heavy stowres.
Whose case when as the careful Dwarf had told,
And made ensample of their mournful sight
Unto his master, he no longer would
There dwell in peril of like painful plight,
But early rose, and ere that dawning light
Discovered had the world to heaven wide,
He by a privy Posterne took his flight,
That of no envious eyes he mote be spyde:
For doubtless death ensewd, if any him descryde.
Scarce could he footing find in that foul way,
For many corses, like a great Lay-stall
Of murdered men which therein strowed lay,
Without remorse, or decent funeral:
Which all through that great Princess pride did fall
And came to shameful end. And them beside
Forth ryding underneath the castle wall,
A donghill of dead carkases he spide,
The dreadful spectacle of that sad house of Pride.
Cant. VI.
From lawless lust by wondrous grace
fair Vna is releast:
Whom saluage nation does adore,
and learnes her wise beheast.
AS when a ship, that flies fair under sail,
An hidden rock escaped has unawares,
That lay in wait her wrack for to bewail,
The Mariner yet half amazed stares
At peril past, and yet it doubt ne dares
To joy at his foole-happie oversight:
So doubly is distressed twixt joy and cares
The dreadlesse courage of this Elfin knight,
Having escapt so sad ensamples in his sight.
Yet sad he was that his too hasty speed
The fair Duess' had forced him leave behind;
And yet more sad, that Vna his dear dreed
Her truth had staind with treason so unkind;
Yet crime in her could never creature find,
But for his love, and for her own self sake,
She wandered had from one to other Ynd,
Him for to seek, ne ever would forsake,
Till her unawares the fierce Sansloy did overtake.
Who after Archimagoes foul defeat,
Led her away into a forest wild,
And turning wrathful fire to lustful heat,
With beastly sin thought her to have defilde,
And made the vassal of his pleasures vilde.
Yet first he cast by treaty, and by traynes,
Her to persuade, that stubborn fort to yilde:
For greater conquest of hard love he gaynes,
That works it to his will, then he that it constraines.
With fawning words he courted her a while,
And looking lovely, and often sighing sore,
Her constant heart did tempt with diverse guile:
But words and looks, and sighs she did abhore,
As rock of Diamond steadfast evermore.
Yet for to feed his fyrie lustful eye,
He snatched the vele, that hong her face before;
Then began her beauty shine, as brightest sky,
And burnt his beastly heart t'efforce her chastitye.
So when he saw his flattering arts to fail,
And subtle engines bet from batteree,
With greedy force he began the fort assail,
Whereof he weend possessed soon to be,
And with rich spoil of ransackt chastetee.
Ah heavens, that do this hideous act behold,
And heavenly virgin thus outraged see,
How can ye vengeance just so long withhold,
And hurl not flashing flames upon that Paynim bold?
The pitteous maiden careful comfortless,
Does throw out thrilling shriekes, and shrieking cries,
The last vain help of women's great distress,
And with loud plaints importuneth the skies,
That molten stars do drop like weeping eyes;
And Phoebus flying so most shameful sight,
His blushing face in foggy cloud implies,
And hides for shame. What wit of mortal wight
Can now devise to quit a thrall from such a plight?
Eternal providence exceeding thought,
Where none appears can make her self a way:
A wondrous way it for this Lady wrought,
From Lions claws to pluck the griped pray.
Her shrill outcryes and shriekes so loud did bray,
That all the woods and forestes did resownd;
A troop of Faunes and Satyrs far away
Within the wood were dancing in a rownd,
Whiles old Syluanus slept in shady arber sownd.
Who when they heard that pitteous strained voice,
In have forsook their rural meriment,
And ran toward the far rebownded noyce,
To weet, what wight so loudly did lament.
Unto the place they come incontinent:
Whom when the raging Sarazin espide,
A rude, misshapen, monstrous rablement,
Whose like he never saw, he durst not bide,
But got his ready steed, and fast away began ride.
The wyld woodgods arrived in the place,
There find the virgin doleful desolate,
With ruffled rayments, and fair blubbred face,
As her outrageous foe had left her late,
And trembling yet through fear of former hate;
All stand amazed at so uncouth sight,
And gin to pity her unhappy state,
All stand astonished at her beauty bright,
In their rude eyes unworthy of so woeful plight.
She more amazed, in double dread does dwell;
And every tender part for fear does shake:
As when a greedy Wolf through hunger fell
A seely Lamb far from the flock does take,
Of whom he means his bloody feast to make,
A Lion spies fast running toward him,
The innocent pray in have he does forsake,
Which quit from death yet quakes in every lim
With change of fear, to see the Lion look so grim.
Such fearful fit assaid her trembling heart,
Ne word to speak, ne joint to move she had:
The saluage nation feel her secret smart,
And read her sorrow in her countenance sad;
Their frowning forheads with rough horns yclad,
And rusticke horror all a side do lay,
And gently grenning, show a semblance glad
To comfort her, and fear to put away,
Their backward bent knees teach her humbly to obey.
The doubtful Damzell dare not yet commit
Her single person to their barbarous truth,
But still twixt fear and hope amazd does sit,
Late learnd what harm to hasty trust ensu'th,
They in compassion of her tender youth,
And wonder of her beauty sovereign,
Are won with pity and unwonted ruth,
And all prostrate upon the lowly plain,
Do kiss her feet, and fawn on her with countenance feign.
Their hearts she ghesseth by their humble guise,
And yieldes her to extremity of time;
So from the ground she fearelesse does arise,
And walks forth without suspect of crime:
They all as glad, as birds of joyous Prime,
Thence lead her forth, about her dancing round,
Shouting, and singing all a shepherds ryme,
And with green branches strowing all the ground,
Do worship her, as Queen, with olive girlond cround.
And all the way their merry pipes they sound,
That all the woods with doubled Echo ring,
And with their horned feet do wear the ground,
Leaping like wanton kids in pleasant Spring.
So toward old Syluanus they her bring;
Who with the noise awaked, comes out,
To weet the cause, his weak steps governing,
And aged limbs on Cypress stadle stout,
And with an yuie twyne his wast is girt about.
Far off he wonders, what them makes so glad,
Of Bacchus merry fruit they did invent,
Or Cybeles frantic rites have made them mad;
They drawing nigh, unto their God present
That flower of faith and beauty excellent.
The God himself vewing that mirrhour rare,
Stood long amazd, and burnt in his intent;
His own fair Dryope now he thinks not fair,
And Pholoe foul, when her to this he does compaire.
The woodborne people fall before her flat,
And worship her as Goddess of the wood;
And old Syluanus self bethinkes not, what
To think of wight so fair, but gazing stood,
In doubt to deem her borne of earthly brood;
Sometimes Dame Venus self he seems to see,
But Venus never had so sober mood;
Sometimes Diana he her takes to be,
But misseth bow, and shaftes, and buskins to her knee.
By view of her he ginneth to revive
His ancient love, and dearest Cyparisse,
And calls to mind his pourtraiture alive,
How fair he was, and yet not fair to this,
And how he slew with glauncing dart amiss
A gentle Hynd, the which the lovely boy
Did love as life, above all worldly bliss;
For grief whereof the lad n'ould after joy,
But pynd away in anguish and selfe-wild annoy.
The woody Nymphs, fair Hamadryades
Her to behold do thither run apace,
And all the troop of light-foot Naiades,
Flock all about to see her lovely face:
But when they vewed have her heavenly grace,
They envy her in their malicious mind,
And fly away for fear of foul disgrace:
But all the Satyrs scorn their woody kind,
And henceforth nothing fair, but her on earth they find.
Glad of such luck, the luckelesse lucky maid,
Did her content to please their feeble eyes,
And long time with that saluage people staid,
To gather breath in many miseries.
During which time her gentle wit she plyes,
To teach them truth, which worshipped her in vain,
And made her The Image of Idoiatryes;
But when their bootlesse zeal she did restrain
From her own worship, they her Ass would worship fayn.
It fortuned a noble warlike knight
By just occasion to that forest came,
To seek his kindred, and the lignage right,
From whence he took his well deserved name:
He had in arms abroad won muchell same,
And filled far lands with glory of his might,
Plain, faithful, true, and enemy of shame,
And ever loved to fight for Ladies right,
But in vain glorious frayes he little did delight.
A Satyrs son yborne in forest wyld,
By strange adventure as it did betyde,
And there begotten of a Lady myld,
Fair Thyamis the daughter of Labryde,
That was in sacred bands of wedlock tide
To Therion, a loose unruly swayne;
Who had more joy to raunge the forest wide,
And chase the saluage beast with busy pain,
Then serve his Ladies love, and wast in pleasures vain.
The forlorn maid did with loves longing burn,
And could not lack her lovers company,
But to the wood she goes, to serve her turn,
And seek her spouse, that from her still does fly,
And follows other game and venery:
A Satyr chaunst her wandering for to find,
And kindling coals of lustin brutish eye,
The loyal links of wedlock did unbind,
And made her person thrall unto his beastly kind.
So long in secret cabin there he held
Her captive to his sensual desire,
Till that with timely fruit her belly sweld,
And bore a boy unto that saluage fire:
Then home he suffered her for to retire,
For ransom leaving him the late borne child;
Whom till to ryper years he began aspire,
He noursled up in life and manners wild,
Emongst wild beasts and woods, from laws of men exilde.
For all he taught the tender ymp, was but
To banish cowardice and bastard fear;
His trembling hand he would him force to put
Upon the Lion and the rugged Bear,
And from the she Bears teats her whelps to tear;
And eke wyld roaring Bulls he would him make
To tame, and ride their backs not made to bear;
And the Robuckes in flight to overtake,
That every beast for fear of him did fly and quake.
Thereby so fearelesse, and so fell he grew,
That his own sire and master of his guise
Did often tremble at his horrid view,
And often for dread of hurt would him advise,
The angry beasts not rashly to despise,
Nor too much to provoke; for he would learn
The Lion stoup to him in lowly wise,
(A lesson hard) and make the Libbard stern
Leave roaring, when in rage he for revenge did earne.
And for to make his power approved more,
Wyld beasts in iron yokes he would compel;
The spotted Panther, and the tusked Bore,
The Pardale swift, and the Tigre cruel;
The Antelope, and Wolf both fierce and fell;
And them constrain in equal teme to draw.
Such joy he had, their stubborn hearts to quell,
And sturdie courage tame with dreadful aw,
That his beheast they feared, as tyrans law.
His loving mother came upon a day
Unto the woods, to see her little son;
And chaunst unawares to meet him in the way,
After his sportes, and cruel pastime done,
When after him a Lioness did run,
That roaring all with rage, did loud requere
Her children dear, whom he away had won:
The Lion whelps she saw how he did bear,
And lull in rugged arms, withouten childish fear.
The fearful Dame all quaked at the sight,
And turning back, began fast to fly away,
Until with love reuokt from vain affright,
She hardly yet persuaded was to stay,
And then to him these womanish words began say;
Ah Satyrane, my dearling, and my joy,
For love of me leave off this dreadful play;
To dally thus with death, is no fit toy,
Go find some other play-fellowes, mine own sweet boy.
In these and like delights of bloody game
He trained was, till ryper years he raught,
And there abode, whilst any beast of name
Walked in that forest, whom he had not taught
To fear his force: and then his courage haught
Desird of foreign foemen to be known,
And far abroad for strange adventures sought:
In which his might was never overthrown,
But through all Faery land his famous worth was blown.
Yet evermore it was his manner fair,
After long labors and adventures spent,
Unto those native woods for to repair,
To see his fire and offspring ancient.
And now he thither came for like intent;
Where he unawares the fairest Vna found,
Strange Lady, in so strange habiliment,
Teaching the Satyrs, which her sat around,
True sacred lore, which from her sweet lips did redound
He wondered at her wisdom heavenly rare,
Whose like in women's wit he never knew;
And when her courteous deeds he did compare,
Began her admire, and her sad sorrows rue,
Blaming of Fortune, which such troubles threw,
And ioyd to make proof of her cruelty
On gentle Dame, so hurtlesse, and so true:
Thenceforth he kept her goodly company,
And learnd her discipline of faith and verity.
But she all vowed unto the Redcrosse knight,
His wandering peril closely did lament,
Ne in this new acquaintance could delight,
But her dear heart with anguish did torment,
And all her wit in secret counsels spent,
How to escape. At last in privy wise
To Satyrane she showed her intent;
Who glad to gain such favor, began devise,
How with that pensive Maid he best might thence arise.
So on a day when Satyrs all were gone,
To do their service to Syluanus old,
The gentle virgin left behind alone
He led away with courage stout and bold.
Too late it was, to Satyrs to be told,
Or ever hope recover her again:
In vain he seeks that having cannot hold.
So fast he carried her with careful pain,
That they the woods are past, and come now to the plain.
The better part now of the lingering day,
They traueild had, when as they far espide
A weary wight forwandring by the way,
And toward him they began in have to ride,
To weet of news, that did abroad betide,
Or tidings of her knight of the Redcrosse.
But he them spying, began to turn aside,
For fear as seemd, or for some feigned loss;
More greedy they of news, fast toward him do cross.
A silly man, in simple weeds forworne,
And soild with dust of the long dried way;
His sandales were with toilesome travel torn,
And face all tand with scorching sunny ray,
As he had traueild many a summers day,
Through boiling sands of Arabie and Ynde;
And in his hand a Jacobs staff, to stay
His weary limbs upon: and eke behind,
His scrip did hang, in which his needments he did bind.
The knight approaching nigh, of him inquerd
Tidings of war, and of adventures new;
But wars, nor new adventures none he herd.
Then Vna began to ask, if ought he knew,
Or heard abroad of that her champion true,
That in his armor bare a croslet red.
Aye me, Dear dame (quoth he) well may I rue
To tell the sad sight, which mine eyes have red:
These eyes did see that knight both living and eke ded.
That cruel word her tender heart so thrild,
That suddein cold did run through every vain,
And stony horror all her senses filled
With dying fit, that down she fell for pain.
The knight her lightly reared up again,
And comforted with courteous kind relief:
Then won from death, she bad him tellen plain
The further process of her hidden grief;
The lesser pangs can bear, who has endured the chief.
Then began the Pilgrim thus, I chaunst this day,
This fatal day, that shall I ever rue,
To see two knights in travel on my way
(A sorry fight) arraung'd in battle new,
Both breathing vengeance, both of wrathful hew:
My fearful flesh did tremble at their strife,
To see their blades so greedily imbrew,
That drunk with blood, yet thristed after life:
What more? the Redcrosse knight was slain with Paynim knife.
Ah dearest Lord (quoth she) how might that be,
And he the stoutest knight, that ever won?
Ah dearest dame (quoth he) how might I see
The thing, that might not be, and yet was done?
Where is (said Satyrane) that Paynims son,
That him of life, and us of joy has rest?
Not far away (quoth he) he hence does won
Foreby a fountain, where I late him left
Washing his bloody wounds, that through the steel were cleft.
Therewith the knight thence marched forth in have,
Whiles Vna with huge heaviness oppressed,
Could not for sorrow follow him so fast;
And soon he came, as he the place had ghest,
Whereas that Pagan proud him self did rest,
In secret shadow by a fountain side:
Even he it was, that erst would have suppressed
Fair Vna: whom when Satyrane espide,
With foul reproachful words he boldly him defide.
And said, Arise thou cursed Miscreaunt,
That have with knightlesse guile and treacherous train
Fair knighthood fowly shamed, and do vaunt
That good knight of the Redcrosse to have slain:
Arise, and with like treason now maintain
Thy guilty wrong, or else thee guilty yield.
The Sarazin this hearing, rose amain,
And catching up in have his three square shield,
And shining helmet, soon him buckled to the field.
And drawing nigh him said, Ah misborne Elfe,
In evil hour thy foes thee hither sent,
Another wrongs to wreake upon thy self:
Yet ill thou blamest me, for having blent
My name with guile and traitorous intent;
That Redcrosse knight, perdie, I never slew,
But had he been, where erst his arms were lent,
Th'enchaunter vain his error should not rue:
But thou his error shall, I hope now prouen true.
Therewith they began, both furious and fell,
To thunder blows, and fiersly to assail
Each other bent his enemy to quell,
That with their force they perst both plate and maile,
And made wide furrows in their fleshes frail,
That it would pity any living eye.
Large floods of blood adowne their sides did rail;
But floods of blood could not them satisfy:
Both hungered after death: both chose to win, or die.
So long they fight, and fell revenge pursue,
That fainting each, themselves to breathen let,
And often refreshed, battle often renew:
As when two Bores with rancling malice met,
Their gory sides fresh bleeding fiercely fret,
Till breathless both them selves aside retire,
Where foming wrath, their cruel tuskes they whet,
And trample the earth, the whiles they may respire;
Then back to fight again, new breathed and entire.
So fiersly, when these knights had breathed once,
They began to fight return, increasing more
Their puissant force, and cruel rage attonce,
With heaped strokes more hugely, then before,
That with their drerie wounds and bloody gore
They both deformed, scarsely could be known.
By this sad Vna fraught with anguish sore,
Led with their noise, which through the air was thrown:
Arrived, where they in earth their fruitles blood had sown.
Whom all so soon as that proud Sarazin
Espide, he began revive the memory
Of his lewd lusts, and late attempted sin,
And left the doubtful battle hastily,
To catch her, newly offered to his eye:
But Satyrane with strokes him turning, staid,
And sternely bad him other business plie,
Then hunt the steps of pure unspotted Maid:
Wherewith he all enraged, these bitter speeches said.
O foolish faeries son, what fury mad
Has thee incenst, to have thy doleful fete?
Were it not better, I that Lady had,
Then that thou had repented it too late?
Most senseless man he, that himself does hate,
To love another. Lo then for thine aid
Here take thy lovers token on thy pate.
So they two fight; the whiles the royal Maid
Fled far away, of that proud Paynim sore afraid.
But that false Pilgrim, which that leasing told,
Being in deed old Archimage, did stay
In secret shadow, all this to behold,
And much rejoiced in their bloody fray:
But when he saw the Damsel pass away
He left his stond, and her pursewd apace,
In hope to bring her to her last decay.
But for to tell her lamentable case,
And eke this battles end, will need another place.
Cant. VII.
The Redcrosse knight is capture made
By Gyaunt proud oppressed,
Prince Arthur meets with Vna greatly with those news distressed.
WHat man so wise, what earthly wit so ware,
As to descry the crafty cunning train,
By which deceit does mask in visour fair,
And cast her colors dyed deep in grain,
To seem like Truth, whose shape she well can feign,
And fitting gestures to her purpose frame;
The guiltless man with guile to entertain?
Great maistresse of her art was that false Dame,
The false Duessa, cloked with Fidessaes name.
Who when returning from the drery Night,
She fownd not in that perilous house of Pride,
Where she had left, the noble Redcrosse knight,
Her hoped pray; she would no longer bide,
But forth she went, to seek him far and wide.
Ere long she fownd, whereas he weary sat,
To rest him self, foreby a fountain side,
Disarmed all of yron-coted Plate,
And by his side his steed the grassy forage ate.
He seeds upon the cooling shade, and bays
His sweatie forehead in the breathing wind,
Which through the tre^bling leaves full gently play
Wherein the cherefull birds of sundry kind
Do chaunt sweet music, to delight his mind:
The Witch approaching began him fairly greet,
And with reproach of carelessness unkind
Upbraid, for leaving her in place unmeet,
With foul words tempring fair, sour gall with honey sweet.
Unkindness past, they began of solace treat,
And bathe in pleasaunce of the joyous shade,
Which shielded them against the boiling heat,
And with green boughs decking a gloomy glade,
About the fountain like a girlond made;
Whose bubbling wave did ever freshly well,
Ne ever would through fervent summer fade:
The sacred Nymph, which therein wont to dwell,
Was out of Dianes favor, as it then befell.
The cause was this: one day when Phoebe fair
With all her band was following the chase,
This Nymph, quite tired with heat of scorching air
Sat down to rest in midst of the race:
The goddess wroth began fowly he disgrace,
And bad the waters, which from her did flow,
Be such as she her self was then in place.
Thenceforth her waters waxed dull and slow,
And all that drunk thereof, did faint and feeble grow.
Hereof this gentle knight vnweeting was,
And lying down upon the sandy graile,
Drunk of the stream, as clear as cristall glass,
Eftsoons his manly forces began to fail,
And mighty strong was turned to feeble frail.
His changed powers at first them selves not felt,
Till crudled cold his courage began assail,
And cheerful blood in faintness chill did melt,
Which like a fever fit through all his body swelt.
Yet goodly court he made still to his Dame,
Pourd out in loosnesse on the grassy grownd,
Both careless of his health, and of his fame:
Till at the last he heard a dreadful sownd,
Which through the wood loud bellowing, did rebownd,
That all the earth for terror seemd to shake,
And trees did tremble. Th'Elfe therewith astownd,
Vpstarted lightly from his looser make,
And his unready weapons began in hand to take.
But ere he could his armor on him dight,
Or get his shield, his monstrous enemy
With sturdie steps came stalking in his sight,
An hideous Geant horrible and hye,
That with his tallness seemd to threat the sky,
The ground eke groned under him for dreed;
His living like saw never living eye,
Ne durst behold: his stature did exceed
The hight of three the tallest sons of mortal seed.
The greatest Earth his uncouth mother was,
And blustering AEolus his boasted sire,
Who with his breath, which through the world dot^ pas
Her hollow womb did secretly inspire,
And filled her hidden caves with stormy ire,
That she conceived; and trebling the dew time,
In which the wombes of women do expire,
Brought forth this monstrous mass of earthly slime
Puffed up with empty wind, and filled with sinful crime.
So grown great through arrogant delight
Of the high descent, whereof he was yborne,
And through presumption of his matchless might,
All other powers and knighthood he did scorn.
Such now he marches to this man forlorn,
And left to loss: his stalking steps are stayde
Upon a snaggy Oak, which he had torn
Out of his mothers bowelles, and it made
His mortal mace, wherewith his foemen he dismayde.
That when the knight he spide, he began advance
With huge force and insupportable main,
And toward him with dreadful fury praunce;
Who hapless, and eke hopeless, all in vain
Did to him pace, sad battle to darrayne,
Disarmd, disgrast, and inwardly dismayde,
And eke so faint in every joint and vain,
Through that frail fountain, which him feeble made
That scarsely could he weeld his bootlesse single blade.
The Geaunt struck so maynly merciless,
That could have overthrown a stony tower,
And were not heavenly grace, that him did bless,
He had been pouldred all, as thin as flower:
But he was wary of that deadly stowre,
And lightly lept from underneath the blow:
Yet so exceeding was the villeins power,
That with the wind it did him overthrow,
And all his senses stound, that still he lay full low.
As when that devilish iron Engine wrought
In deepest Hell, and framd by Furies skill,
With windy Nitre and quick Sulphur fraught,
And ramd with bullet round, ordaind to kill,
Conceiueth fire, the heavens it does fill
With thundering noise, and all the air does choke,
That none can breath, nor see, nor hear at will,
Through smouldry cloud of duskish stinking smoke,
That the only breath him daunts, who has escapt the stroke.
So daunted when the Geaunt saw the knight
His heavy hand he heaued up on hye,
And him to dust thought to have battred quight,
Until Duessa loud to him began cry;
O great Orgoglio, greatest under sky,
O hold thy mortal hand for Ladies sake,
Hold for my sake, and do him not to dye,
But vanquished thine eternal bondslaue make,
And me thy worthy meed unto thy Leman take.
He hearkened, and did stay from further harms,
To gain so goodly guerdon, as she spoke:
So willingly she came into his arms,
Who her as willingly to grace did take,
And was possessed of his new found make.
Then up he took the slombred senseless corse,
And ere he could out of his swowne awake,
Him to his castle brought with hasty forse,
And in a Dongeon deep him threw without remorse.
From that day forth Duessa was his dear,
And highly honored in his haughty eye,
He gave her gold and purple pall to wear,
And triple crown set on her head full hye,
And her endowd with royal majesty:
Then for to make her dreaded more of men,
And peoples hearts with awful terror tie,
A monstrous beast ybred in filthy fen
He chose, which he had kept long time in darksome den
Such one it was, as that renowned Snake
Which great Alcides in Stremona slew,
Long fostred in the filth of Lerna lake,
Whose many heads out budding ever new,
Did breed him endless labor to subdew:
But this same Monster much more ugly was;
For seven great heads out of his body grew,
An iron breast, and back of scaly bras,
And all embrewd in blood, his eyes did shine as glass.
His tail was stretched out in wondrous length,
That to the house of heavenly gods it raught,
And with extorted power, and borrowed strength,
The euer-burning lamps from thence it brought,
And prowdly threw to ground, as things of naught
And underneath his filthy feet did tread
The sacred things, and holy heasts foretaught.
Upon this dreadful Beast with seuenfoldhead
He set the false Duessa, for more aw and dread.
The woeful Dwarf, which saw his masters fall,
Whiles he had keeping of his grasing steed,
And valiant knight become a caytiue thrall,
When all was past, took up his forlorn weed,
His mighty armor, missing most at need;
His silver shield, now idle maisterlesse;
His poynant spear, that many made to bleed,
The ruefull moniments of heaviness,
And with them all departes, to tell his great distress.
He had not trauaild long, when on the way
He woeful Lady, woeful Vna met,
Fast flying from the Paynims greedy pray,
Whilst Satyrane him from pursuit did let:
Who when her eyes she on the Dwarf had set,
And saw the signs, that deadly tidings spoke,
She fell to ground for sorrowful regret,
And lively breath her sad breast did forsake,
Yet might her pitteous heart be seen to pant and quake.
The messenger of so unhappy news,
Would feign have did: dead was his heart within,
Yet outwardly some little comfort shows:
At last recovering heart, he does begin
To rub her temples, and to chause her chin,
And every tender part does toss and turn:
So hardly he the flitted life does win,
Unto her native prison to return:
Then gins her grieved ghost thus to lament and mourn.
Ye dreary instruments of doleful sight,
That do this deadly spectacle behold,
Why do ye longer feed on loathed light,
Or liking find to gaze on earthly mould,
Since cruel fates the careful threeds unfold,
The which my life and love together tide?
Now let the stony dart of senseless cold
Perce to my heart, and pas through every side,
And let eternal night so sad sight fro me hide.
O lightsome day, the lamp of highest Jove,
First made by him, men's wandering ways to guide,
When darkness he in deepest dongeon drove,
Henceforth thy hated face for ever hyde,
And shut up heavens windows shyning wide:
For earthly sight can naught but sorrow breed,
And late repentance, which shall long abide.
Mine eyes no more on vanity shall feed,
But seeled up with death, shall have their deadly meed.
Then down again she fell unto the ground;
But he her quickly reared up again:
Thrice did she sink adowne in deadly swownd,
And thrice he her reviu'd with busy pain:
At last when life recouer'd had the rain,
And ouer-wrestled his strong enemy,
With foltring tongue, and trembling every vain,
Tell on (quoth she) the woeful Tragedy,
The which these relics sad present unto mine eye.
Tempestuous fortune has spent all her spite,
And thrilling sorrow thrown his utmost dart;
Thy sad tongue cannot tell more heavy plight,
Then that I feel, and harbor in mine heart:
Who has endured the whole, can bear each part.
If death it be, it is not the first wound,
That launched has my breast with bleeding smart.
Begin, and end the bitter balefull stound;
If less, then that I fear more favor I have found.
Then began the Dwarf the whole discourse declare,
The subtle trains of Archimago old;
The wanton loves of false Fidessa fair,
Bought with the blood of vanquished Paynim bold:
The wretched pair transformed to treen mould;
The house of Pride, and perils round about;
The combat, which he with Sansioy did hold;
The lucklesse conflict with the Giant stout,
Wherein captived, of life or death he stood in doubt.
She heard with patience all unto the end,
And strove to master sorrowful assay,
Which greater grew, the more she did contend,
And almost rent her tender heart in tway;
And love fresh coals unto her fire did lay:
For greater love, the greater is the loss.
Was never Lady loved dearer day,
Then she did love the knight of the Redcrosse;
For whose dear sake so many troubles her did toss.
At last when fervent sorrow slaked was,
She up arose, resolving him to find
A live or dead: and forward forth does pas,
All as the Dwarf the way to her assynd:
And evermore in constant care full mind
She fed her wound with fresh renewed bale;
Long tossed with storms, and bet with bitter wind,
High over hills, and low adowne the dale,
She wandered many a wood, and measurd many a vale.
At last she chanced by good hap to meet
A goodly knight, fair marching by the way
Together with his Squire, arrayed meet:
His glitterand armor shined far away,
Like glauncing light of Phoebus brightest ray;
From top to toe no place appeared bare,
That deadly dint of steel endanger may:
Athwart his breast a bauldrick brave he ware,
That shynd, like twinkling stars, with stons most precious rare.
And in the midst thereof one precious stone
Of wondrous worth, and eke of wondrous mights,
Shapt like a Ladies head, exceeding shone,
Like Hesperus emongst the lesser lights,
And strove for to amaze the weaker sights;
Thereby his mortal blade full comely hong
In yuory sheath, ycaru'd with curious slights;
Whose hilts were burnisht gold, and handle strong
Of mother pearl, and buckled with a golden tongue.
His haughty helmet, horrid all with gold,
Both glorious brightness, and great terror bred;
For all the crest a Dragon did enfold
With greedy paws, and over all did spread
His golden wings: his dreadful hideous head
Close couched on the beuer, seemed to throw
From flaming mouth bright sparkles fiery red,
That suddeine horror to faint hearts did show;
And scaly tail was stretched adowne his back full low.
Upon the top of all his lofty crest,
A bunch of hairs discolourd diversely,
With sprincled pearl, and gold full richly dressed,
Did shake, and seemed to dance for iollity,
Like to an Almond tree ymounted hye
On top of green Selinis all alone,
With blossoms brave bedecked daintily;
Whose tender locks do tremble every one
At every little breath, that under heaven is blown.
His warlike shield all closely covered was,
Ne might of mortal eye be ever seen;
Not made of steel, nor of enduring bras,
Such earthlymettals soon consumed been:
But all of Diamond perfect pure and cleene
It framed was, one massy entire mould,
Hewn out of Adamant rock with engines keen,
That point of spear it never percen could,
Ne dint of direful sword divide the substance would.
The same to wight he never wont disclose,
But when as monsters huge he would dismay,
Or daunt unequal armies of his foes,
Or when the flying heavens he would affray;
For so exceeding shone his glistring ray,
That Phoebus golden face it did attaint,
As when a cloud his beams does ouer-lay;
And silver Cynthia wexed pale and faint,
As when her face is staynd with magic arts constraint.
No magic arts hereof had any might,
Nor bloody words of bold Enchaunters call,
But all that was not such, as seemd in sight,
Before that shield did fade, and suddeine fall:
And when him list the rascal routes appall,
Men into stones therewith he could transmew,
And stones to dust, and dust to naught at all;
And when him list the prouder looks subdew,
He would them gazing blind, or turn to other hew.
Ne let it seem, that credence this exceedes,
For he that made the same, was known right well
To have done much more admirable deeds.
It Merlin was, which whylome did excel
All living wightes in might of magic spell:
Both shield, and sword, and armor all he wrought
For this young Prince, when first to arms he fell;
But when he did, the Faerie Queen it brought
To Faerie land, where yet it may be seen, if sought.
A gentle youth, his dearly loved Squire
His spear of heben wood behind him bare,
Whose harmefull head, thrice heated in the fire,
Had riuen many a breast with pikehead square;
A goodly person, and could menage fair,
His stubborn steed with curbed canon bit,
Who under him did trample as the air,
And chauft, that any on his back should sit;
The iron rowels into frothy some he bit.
When as this knight nigh to the Lady drew,
With lovely court he began her entertain;
But when he heard her answers loath, he knew
Some secret sorrow did her heart distraine:
Which to allay, and calm her storming pain,
Fair feeling words he wisely began display,
And for her humor fitting purpose feign,
To tempt the cause it self for to bewray;
Wherewith emmou'd, these bleeding words she began to say.
What worlds delight, or joy of lining speech
Can heart, so plunged in sea of sorrows deep,
And heaped with so huge misfortunes, reach?
The careful cold begins for to creep,
And in my heart his iron arrow steep,
Soon as I think upon my bitter bale:
Such helpless harms yts better hidden keep,
Then rip up grief, where it may not avail,
My last left comfort is, my woes to weep and wail.
Ah Lady dear, quoth then the gentle knight,
Well may I ween, your grief is wondrous great;
For wondrous great grief groneth in my spright,
Whiles thus I hear you of your sorrows treat.
But woeful Lady let me you intrete,
For to unfold the anguish of your heart:
Mishaps are maistred by advice discrete,
And counsel mittigates the greatest smart;
Found never help, who never would his hurts impart.
O but (quoth she) great grief will not be told,
And can more easily be thought, then said.
Right so; (quoth he) but he, that never would,
Could never: will to might gives greatest aid.
But grief (quoth she) does greater grow displaid,
If then it find not help, and breeds despair.
Despair breeds not (quoth he) where faith is staid.
No faith so fast (quoth she) but flesh does pair.
Flesh may empaire (quoth he) but reason can repair.
His goodly reason, and well guided speech
So deep did settle in her gracious thought,
That her persuaded to disclose the breach,
Which love and fortune in her heart had wrought,
And said; fair Sir, I hope good hap has brought
You to inquire the secrets of my grief,
Or that your wisdom will direct my thought,
Or that your prowess can me yield relief:
Then hear the story sad, which I shall tell you brief.
The forlorn Maiden, whom your eyes have seen
The laughing stock of fortunes mockeries,
Am the only daughter of a King and Queen,
Whose parents dear, whilst equal destinies
Did run about, and their felicities
The favorable heavens did not envy,
Did spread their rule through all the territories,
Which Phison and Euphrates flows by,
And Gebons golden waves do wash continually.
At last by subtle sleights she him betrayed
Unto his foe, a Giant huge and tall,
Who him disarmed, dissolute, dismayed,
Unawares surprised, and with mighty mall
The monster merciless him made to fall,
Whose fall did never foe before behold;
And now in darkesome dungeon, wretched thrall,
Remediless, for aie he does him hold;
This is my cause of grief, more great, then may be told.
Ere she had ended all, she began to faint:
But he her comforted and fair bespake,
Certes, Madame, ye have great cause of plaint,
That stoutest heart, I ween, could cause to quake.
But be of cheer, and comfort to you take:
For till I have acquit your captive knight,
Assure your self, I will you not forsake.
His cheerful words revived her chearelesse spright
So forth they went, the Dwarf them guiding ever right
Cant. VIII.
Fair virgin to redeem her dear
brings Arthur to the fight:
Who slayes that Giant, wounds the beast,
and strips Duessa quight.
AY me, how many perils do enfold
The righteous man, to make him daily fall?
Were not, that heavenly grace does him uphold,
And steadfast truth acquit him out of all.
Her love is firm, her care continual,
So often as he through his own foolish pride,
Or weakness is to sinful bands made thrall:
Else should this Redcrosse knight in bands have did,
For whose deliverance she this Prince does thither guide.
They sadly traueild thus, until they came
Nigh to a castle builded strong and hie:
Then cryde the Dwarf, lo yonder is the same,
In which my Lord my liege does lucklesse lie,
Thrall to that Giants hateful tyranny:
Therefore, dear Sir, your mighty powers assay.
The noble knight alighted by and by
From lofty steed, and bad the Lady stay,
To see what end of fight should him befall that day.
So with the Squire, th'admirer of his might,
He marched forth toward that castle wall;
Whose gates he found fast shut, ne lining wight
To ward the same, nor answer comers call.
Then took that Squire an home of bugle small,
Which hong adowne his side in twisted gold,
And tassels gay. Wide wonders over all
Of that same horns great virtues weren told,
Which had approved been in uses manifold.
Was never wight, that heard that shrilling sound,
But trembling fear did feel in every vain;
Three miles it might be easy heard around,
And Echoes three answered it self again:
No false enchauntment, nor deceiptfull train
Might once abide the terror of that blast,
But presently was void and wholly vain:
No gate so strong, no lock so firm and fast,
But with that percing noise flew open quite, or brast.
The same before the Geants gate he blew,
That all the castle quaked from the ground,
And every door of freewill open flew.
The Giant self dismayed with that sownd,
Where he with his Duessa dalliance fownd,
In have came rushing forth from inner bower,
With staring countenance stern, as one astownd,
And staggering steps, to weet, what suddein stowre,
Had wrought that horror strange, and dared his dreaded power
And after him the proud Duessa came,
High mounted on her many headed beast,
And every head with fyrie tongue did flame,
And every head was crowned on his creast,
And bloody mouthed with late cruel feast.
That when the knight beheld, his mighty shild
Upon his manly arm he soon addressed,
And at him fiercely flew, with courage filled,
And eger greediness through every member thrild.
Therewith the Giant buckled him to fight,
Inflamed with scornful wrath and high disdain,
And lifting up his dreadful club on hight,
All armed with ragged snubbes and knottie grain,
Him thought at first encounter to have slain.
But wise and wary was that noble Pere,
And lightly leaping from so monstrous maine,
Did fair avoid the violence him nere;
It booted naught, to think, such thunderbolts to bear
Ne shame he thought to shun so hideous might:
The idle stroke, enforcing furious way,
Missing the mark of his misaymed sight
Did fall to ground, and with his heavy sway
So deeply dinted in the driven clay,
That three yardes deep a furrow up did throw:
The sad earth wounded with so sore assay,
Did groan full grievous underneath the blow,
And trembling with strange fear, did like an earthquake show.
As when almighty love in wrathful mood,
To wreake the guilt of mortal sins is bent,
Hurles forth his thundering dart with deadly food,
Enrold in flames, and smouldring dreriment,
Through riuen clouds and molten firmament;
The fierce threeforked engine making way,
Both lofty towers and highest trees has rent,
And all that might his angry passage stay,
And shooting in the earth, casts up a mount of clay.
His boystrous club, so buried in the ground,
He could not rearen up again so light,
But that the knight him at auantage found,
And whiles he strove his combred clubbe to quight
Out of the earth, with blade all burning bright
He smote off his left arm, which like a block
Did fall to ground, deprived of native might;
Large streams of blood out of the truncked stock
Forth gushed, like fresh water stream from riuen rock.
Dismayed with so desperate deadly wound,
And eke impatient of unwonted pain,
He loudly brayd with beastly yelling sound,
That all the fields rebellowed again;
As great a noise, as when in Cymbrian plain
An heard of Bulls, whom kindly rage does sting,
Do for the milkie mothers want complain,
And fill the fields with troublous bellowing,
The neighbor woods around with hollow murmuring.
That when his dear Duessa heard, and saw
The evil stownd, that daungerd her estate,
Unto his aid she hastily did draw
Her dreadful beast, who swollen with blood of late
Came ramping forth with proud presumpteous gate
And threatened all his heads like flaming brands.
But him the Squire made quickly to retrate,
Encountering fierce with single sword in hand,
And twixt him and his Lord did like a bulwark stand.
The proud Duessa full of wrathful spite,
And fierce disdain, to be affronted so,
Enforst her purple beast with all her might
That stop out of the way to ouerthroe,
Scorning the let of so unequal foe:
But nathemore would that courageous swayne
To her yield passage, against his Lord to go,
But with outrageous strokes did him restrain,
And with his body bard the way atwixt them twain.
Then took the angry witch her golden cup,
Which still she bore, replete with magic arts;
Death and despeyre did many thereof sup,
And secret poison through their inner parts,
The Eternal bale of heavy wounded hearts;
Which after charms and some enchauntments said
She lightly sprinkled on his weaker parts;
Therewith his sturdie courage soon was quayd,
And all his senses were with suddeine dread dismayed.
So down he fell before the cruel beast,
Who on his neck his bloody claws did seize,
That life night crushed out of his panting breast:
No power he had to stir, nor will to rize.
That when the careful knight began well auise,
He lightly left the foe, with whom he fought,
And to the beast began turn his enterprise;
For wondrous anguish in his heart it wrought,
To see his loved Squire into such thraldom brought.
And high aduauncing his bloud-thirstie blade,
Stroke one of those deformed heads so sore,
That of his puissance proud ensample made;
His monstrous scalpe down to his teeth it tore,
And that misformed shape mis-shaped more:
A sea of blood gusht from the gaping wound,
That her gay garments staynd with filthy gore,
And ouerflowed all the field around;
That over shoes in blood he waded on the ground.
Thereat he roared for exceeding pain,
That to have heard, great horror would have bred,
And scourging th'emptie air with his long train,
Through great impatience of his grieved head
His gorgeous ryder from her lofty sted
Would have cast down, and trod in durtie mire,
Had not the Giant soon her succored;
Who all enraged with smart and frantic ire,
Came hurtling in full fierce, and forced the knight retire.
The force, which wont in two to be dispersed,
In one alone left hand he now unites,
Which is through rage more strong then both were erst;
With which his hideous club aloft he dites,
And at his foe with furious rigor smites,
That strongest Oak might seem to overthrow:
The stroke upon his shield so heavy lites,
That to the ground it doubleth him full low
What mortal wight could ever bear so monstrous blow?
And in his fall his shield, that covered was,
Did loose his vele by chance, and open flew:
The light whereof, that heavens light did pas,
Such blazing brightness through the aier threw,
That eye mote not the same endure to view.
Which when the Gyaunt spyde with staring eye,
He down let fall his arm, and soft withdrew
His weapon huge, that heaued was on hye
For to have slain the man, that on the ground did lie.
And eke the fruitfull-headed beast, amazed
At flashing beams of that sunshiny shield,
Became stark blind, and all his senses daz'd,
That down he tumbled on the durtie field,
And seemed himself as conquered to yield.
Whom when his maistresse proud perceived to fall,
Whiles yet his feeble feet for faintness reeld,
Unto the Giant loudly she began call,
O help Orgoglio, help, or else we perish all.
At her so pitteous cry was much amoou'd,
Her champion stout, and for to aid his friend,
Again his wonted angry weapon proou'd:
But all in vain: for he has read his end
In that bright shield, and all their forces spend
Themselves in vain: for since that glauncing sight,
He has no power to hurt, nor to defend;
As where The Almighty's lightning brond does light
It dimmes the dazed eyes, and daunts the senses quight.
Whom when the Prince, to battle new addressed,
And threatening high his dreadful stroke did see,
His sparkling blade about his head he blessed,
And smote off quite his right leg by the knee,
That down he tombled; as an aged tree,
High growing on the top of rocky clift,
Whose hartstrings with keen steel nigh hewn be,
The mighty trunck half rent, with ragged rift
Does roll adowne the rocks, and fall with fearful drift.
Or as a Castle reared high and round,
By subtle engines and malicious slight
Is undermined from the lowest ground,
And her foundation forced, and feebled quight,
At last down falls, and with her heaped hight
Her hasty ruin does more heavy make,
And yields it self unto the victours might;
Such was this Gyaunts fall, that seemd to shake
The steadfast globe of earth, as it for fear did quake.
The knight then lightly leaping to the pray,
With mortal steel him smot again so sore,
That headless his unwieldy body lay,
All wallowd in his own foul bloody gore,
Which flowed from his wounds in wondrous store,
But soon as breath out of his breast did pas,
That huge great body, which the Gyaunt bore,
Was vanished quite, and of that monstrous mas
Was nothing left, but like an empty bladder was.
Whose grievous fall, when false Duessa spide,
Her golden cup she cast unto the ground,
And crowned mitre rudely threw aside;
Such percing grief her stubborn heart did wound,
That she could not endure that doleful stound,
But leaving all behind her, fled away:
The light-foot Squire her quickly turned around,
And by hard means enforcing her to stay,
^o brought unto his Lord, as his deserved pray.
The royal Virgin, which beheld from far,
In pensive plight, and sad perplexity,
The whole atchieuement of this doubtful war,
Came running fast to greet his victory,
With sober gladness, and myld modesty,
And with sweet joyous cheer him thus bespake;
Fair branch of noblesse, flower of cheualrie,
That with your worth the world amazed make,
How shall I quite the pains, ye suffer for my sake?
And you fresh bud of virtue springing fast,
Whom these sad eyes saw nigh unto deaths door,
What has poor Virgin for such peril past,
Wherewith you to reward? Accept therefore
My simple self, and service evermore;
And he that high does sit, and all things see
With equal eyes, their merits to restore,
Behold what ye this day have done for me,
And what I cannot quite, requite with vsuree.
But since the heavens, and your fair handeling
Have made you master of the field this day,
Your fortune master eke with governing,
And well begun end all so well, I pray,
Ne let that wicked woman escape away;
For she it is, that did my Lord bethrall,
My dearest Lord, and deep in dongeon lay,
Where he his better days has wasted all.
O hear, how piteous he to you for aid does call.
Forthwith he gave in charge unto his Squire,
That scarlot whore to keepen carefully;
Whiles he himself with greedy great desire
Into the Castle entered forcibly.
Where living creature none he did espy;
Then began he lowdly through the house to call:
But no man cared to answer to his cry.
There raignd a solemn silence over all,
Nor voice was heard, nor wight was seen in bower or hall.
At last with creeping crooked pace forth came
And old old man, with beard as white as snow,
That on a staff his feeble steps did frame,
And guide his weary gate both too and fro:
For his eye sight him failed long ygo,
And on his arm a bounch of keys he bore,
The which unused rust did ouergrow:
Those were the keys of every inner door,
But he could not them use, but kept them still in store.
But very uncouth sight was to behold,
How he did fashion his untoward pace,
For as he forward moved his footing old,
So backward still was turned his wrincled face,
Unlike to men, who ever as they trace,
Both feet and face one way are wont to lead.
This was the ancient keeper of that place,
And foster father of the Giant dead;
His name Ignaro did his nature right aread.
His reverend hairs and holy gravity
The knight much honored, as beseemed well,
And gently asked, where all the people be,
Which in that stately building wont to dwell.
Who answered him full soft, he could not tell.
Again he asked, where that same knight was laid,
Whom great Orgoglio with his puissaunce fell
Had made his caytiue thrall, again he said,
^e could not tell: ne ever other answer made.
Then asked he, which way he in might pas:
He could not tell, again he answered.
Thereat the courteous knight displeased was,
And said, Old sire, it seems thou have not red
How ill it fits with that same silver head
In vain to mock, or mocked in vain to be:
But if thou be, as thou art pourtrahed
With natures pen, in ages grave degree,
Aread in grauer wise, what I demand of thee.
His answer likewise was, he could not tell.
Whose senseless speech, and doted ignorance
When as the noble Prince had marked well,
He ghest his nature by his countenance,
And calmd his wrath with goodly temperance.
Then to him stepping, from his arm did reach
Those keys, and made himself free entrance.
Each door he opened without any breach;
There was no bar to stop, nor foe him to empeach.
There all within full rich arayd he found,
With royal arras and resplendent gold.
And did with store of every thing abound,
That greatest Princes presence might behold.
But all the floor (too filthy to be told)
With blood of guiltless babes, and innocents true,
Which there were slain, as sheep out of the fold,
Defiled was, that dreadful was to view,
And sacred ashes over it was strowed new.
And there beside of marble stone was built
An Altar, carved with cunning imagery,
On which true Christians blood was often spilt,
And holy Martyrs often done to dye,
With cruel malice and strong tyranny:
Whose blessed sprites from underneath the stone
To God for vengeance cryde continually,
And with great grief were often heard to groan,
That hardest heart would bleed, to hear their piteous moan.
Through every rowme he sought, and every bowr,
But no where could he find that woeful thrall:
At last he came unto an iron door,
That fast was locked, but key found not at all
Emongst that bounch, to open it withal;
But in the same a little grate was pight,
Through which he sent his voice, and loud did call
With all his power, to weet, if living wight
Were housed there within, whom he enlargen might.
^herewith an hollow, dreary, murmuring voice
These piteous plaints and dolours did resound;
O who is that, which brings me happy choice
Of death, that here lie dying every stound,
Yet live perforce in balefull darkness bound?
For now three Moons have changed thrice their hew,
And have been thrice hid underneath the ground,
Since I the heavens cheerful face did view,
O welcome thou, that do of death bring tidings true.
Which when that Champion heard, with percing point
Of pity dear his heart was thrilled sore,
And trembling horror ran through every joint,
For ruth of gentle knight so foul forlore:
Which shaking off, he rent that iron door,
With furious force, and indignation fell;
Where entered in, his foot could find no flore,
But all a deep descent, as dark as hell,
^^at breathed ever forth a filthy banefull smell.
But neither darkness foul, nor filthy bands,
Nor noyous smell his purpose could withhold,
(Entire affection hates nicer hands)
But that with constant zeal, and courage bold,
After long pains and labors manifold,
He found the means that Prisoner up to rear;
Whose feeble thighs, unable to uphold
His pined corse, him scarce to light could bear.
A ruefull spectacle of death and ghastly drere.
His sad dull eyes deep sunck in hollow pits,
Could not endure th'vnwonted sun to view;
His bare thin cheeks for want of better bits,
And empty sides deceived of their dew,
Could make a stony heart his hap to rue;
His rawbone arms, whose mighty brawned bowres
Were wont to riue steel plates, helmets hew,
Were clean consumed, and all his vital powers
Decayed, and all his flesh shronk up like withered flowers
Whom when his Lady saw, to him she ran
With hasty joy: to see him made her glad,
And sad to view his visage pale and wan,
Who erst in flowers of freshest youth was clad.
Tho when her well of tears she wasted had,
She said, Ah dearest Lord, what evil star
On you has fround, and pourd his influence bad,
That of your self ye thus berobbed arre,
And this misseeming hew your manly looks does mar
But welcome now my Lord, in well or woe,
Whose presence I kaue lackt too long a day;
And fie on Fortune mine auowed foe,
Whose wrathful wreakes them selves do now alay.
And for these wrongs shall treble penance pay
Of treble good: good grows of evils priefe.
The chearelesse man, whom sorrow did dismay,
Had no delight to treaten of his grief;
^is long endured famine needed more relief.
^^ire Lady, then said that victorious knight,
The things, that grievous were to do, or bear,
Them to renew, I wot, breeds no delight;
Best music breeds delight in loathing ear:
But the only good, that grows of passed fear,
Is to be wise, and ware of like agein.
This days ensample has this lesson dear
Deep written in my heart with iron pen,
that bliss may not abide in state of mortal men.
^enceforth sir knight, take to you wonted strength,
And master these mishaps with patient might;
Lo where your foe lies stretched in monstrous length,
And lo that wicked woman in your sight,
The root of all your care, and wretched plight,
Now in your power, to let her live, or dye.
To do her dye (quoth Vna) were despite,
And shame t'auenge so weak an enemy;
^ut spoil her of her scarlot robe, and let her fly.
^o as she bad, that witch they disaraid,
And robbed of royal robes, and purple pall,
And ornaments that richly were displaid;
Ne spared they to strip her naked all.
Then when they had despoild her tire and call,
Such as she was, their eyes might her behold,
That her mishaped parts did them appall,
A loathly, wrinckled hag, ill favored, old,
those secret filth good manners bids not be told.
Her crafty head was altogether bald,
And as in hate of honorable eld,
Was ouergrowne with scurfe and filthy scald;
Her teeth out of her rotten gummes were feld,
And her sour breath abhominably smeld;
Her dried dugs, like bladders lacking wind,
Hong down, and filthy matter from them weld;
Her wrizled skin as rough, as maple rind,
So scabby was, that would have loathd all womankind.
Her nether parts, the shame of all her kind,
My chaster Muse for shame does blush to write
But at her rompe she growing had behind
A foxes tail, with dong all fowly dight;
And eke her feet most monstrous were in sight;
For one of them was like an Eagles claw,
With griping talaunts armd to greedy fight,
The other like a Bears uneven paw:
More ugly shape yet never living creature saw.
Which when the knights beheld, amazd they were,
And wondered at so foul deformed wight.
Such then (said Vna) as she seems here,
Such is the face of falsehood, such the sight
Of foul Duessa, when her borrowed light
Is laid away, and counterfesaunce known.
Thus when they had the witch disrobed quight,
And all her filthy feature open shown,
They let her go at will, and wander ways unknown.
She flying fast from heavens hated face,
And from the world that her discovered wide,
Fled to the wastfull wilderness apace,
From living eyes her open shame to hide,
And lurket in rocks and caves long vnespide.
But that fair crew of knights, and Vna fair
Did in that castle afterward abide,
To rest them selves, and weary powers repair,
Where store they found of all, that dainty was and rare.
Cant. IX.
His loves and lignage Arthur tells
The knights knit friendly bands:
Sir Treuisan flies from Despair,
Whom Redcrosse knight withstands.
O Goodly golden chain, wherewith yfere
The virtues linked are in lovely wize:
And noble minds of yore allied were,
In brave poursuit of cheualrous emprize,
That none did others safety despize,
Nor aid envy to him, in need that stands,
But friendly each did others praise deuize,
How to advance with favorable hands,
As this good Prince redeemd the Redcrosse knight from bands.
Who when their powers empaird through labor long,
With dew repast they had recured well,
And that weak captive wight now wexed s trong,
Them list no longer there at leisure dwell,
But forward fare, as their adventures fell,
But ere they parted, Vna fair besought
That stranger knight his name and nation tell;
Least so great good, as he for her had wrought,
Should die unknown, and buried be in thanklesse thought.
Fair virgin (said the Prince) ye me require
A thing without the compass of my wit:
For both the lignage and the certain Sire,
From which I sprung, from me are hidden yet.
For all so soon as life did me admit
Into this world, and showed heavens light,
From mothers pap I taken was unfit:
And straight delivered to a Faery knight,
To be vpbrought in gentle thewes and martial might.
Unto old Timon he me brought by live,
Old Timon, who in youthly years has been
In warlike feats th'expertest man alive,
And is the wisest now on earth I ween;
His dwelling is low in a valley green,
Under the foot of Rauran mossy hoar,
From whence the river Dee as silver cleene
His tombling billows rolls with gentle rore:
There all my days he traind me up in virtuous lore.
Thither the great Magicien Merlin came,
As was his use, ofttimes to visit me:
For he had charge my discipline to frame,
And Tutours nouriture to ouersee.
Him often and often I asked in priuitie,
Of what loins and what lignage I did spring:
Whose answer bad me still assured be,
That I was son and heir unto a king,
As time in her just term the truth to light should bring.
Well worthy impe, said then the Lady gent,
And Pupili fit for such a Tutours hand.
But what adventure, or what high intent
Has brought you hither into Faery land,
Aread Prince Arthur, crown of Martial band?
Full hard it is (quoth he) to read aright
The course of heavenly cause, or understand
The secret meaning or the eternal might,
That rules men's ways, and rules the thoughts of living wight.
For whither he through fatal deep foresight
Me hither sent, for cause to me vnghest,
Or that fresh bleeding wound, which day and night
Whilome does rancle in my riuen breast,
With forced fury following his behest,
Me hither brought by ways yet never found,
You to have helped I hold my self yet blessed.
Ah courteous knight (quoth she) what secret wound
Could ever find, to grieve the gentlest heart on ground?
Dear Dame (quoth he) you sleeping sparks awake,
Which troubled once, into huge flames will grow,
Ne ever will their fervent fury slake,
Till living moisture into smoke do flow,
And wasted life do lie in ashes low.
Yet since silence lesseneth not my fire,
But told it flames, and hidden it does glow,
I will reuele, what ye so much desire:
Ah Love, lay down thy bow, the whiles I may respire.
It was in freshest flower of youthly years,
When courage first does creep in manly chest,
Then first the coal of kindly heat appears
To kindle love in every living breast;
But me had warnd old Timons wise behest,
Those creeping flames by reason to subdew,
Before their rage grew to so great unrest,
As miserable lovers use to rue,
Which still wex old in woe, whiles woe still wexeth new.
That idle name of love, and lovers life,
As loss of time, and virtues enemy
I ever scornd, and ioyd to stir up strife,
In midst of their mournful Tragedy,
Ay wont to laugh, when them I heard to cry,
And blow the fire, which them to ashes brent:
Their God himself, grieved at my liberty,
Shot many a dart at me with fires intent,
But I them warded all with wary government.
But all in vain: no fort can be so strong,
Ne fleshly breast can armed be so sound,
But will at last be won with battrie long,
Orvnwares at disauantage found;
Nothing is sure, that grows on earthly ground:
And who most trustes in arm of fleshly might,
And boasts, in beauties chain not to be bound,
Does soonest fall in disauentrous fight,
And yeeldes his caytiue neck to victours most despite.
Ensample make of him your hapless joy,
And of my self now mated, as ye see;
Whose prouder vaunt that proud auenging boy
Did soon pluck down, and curbd my liberty.
For on a day pricked forth with iollitie
Of looser life, and heat of hardiment,
Raunging the forest wide on courserfree,
The fields, the floods, the heavens with one consent
Did seem to laugh at me, and favor mine intent.
For-wearied with my sports, I did alight
From lofty steed, and down to sleep me laid;
The verdant gras my couch did goodly dight,
And pillow was my helmet fair displayed:
Whiles every sense the humor sweet embayd,
And slombring soft my heart did steal away,
Me seemed, by my side a royal Maid
Her dainty limbs full softly down did lay:
So fair a creature yet saw never sunny day.
Most goodly glee and lovely blandishment
She to me made, and bad me love her dear,
For dearly sure her love was to me bent,
As when just time expired should appear.
But whether dreams delude, or true it were,
Was never heart so ravished with delight,
Ne living man like words did ever hear,
As she to me delivered all that night;
And at her parting said, She Queen of Faeries hight.
When I awoke, and found her place deuoyd,
And naught but pressed gras, where she had lain,
I sorrowed all so much, as erst I ioyd,
And washed all her place with watery eyes.
From that day forth I loved that face divine;
From that day forth I cast in careful mind,
To seek her out with labor, and long tyne,
And never vow to rest, till her I find,
Nine months I seek in vain yet ni'll that vow unbind.
Thus as he spoke, his visage wexed pale,
And change of hew great passion did bewray;
Yet still he strove to cloak his inward bale,
And hide the smoke, that did his fire display,
Till gentle Vna thus to him began say;
O happy Queen of Faeries, that have found
Among many, one that with his prowess may
Defend thine honor, and thy foes confound:
True Loves are often sown, but seldom grow on ground.
Thine, O then, said the gentle Redcrosse knight,
Next to that Ladies love, shall be the place,
O fairest virgin, full of heavenly light,
Whose wondrous faith, exceeding earthly race,
Was firmest fixed in mine extremest case.
And you, my Lord, the Patron of my life,
Of that great Queen may well gain worthy grace:
For only worthy you through prowes priefe
If living man mote worthy be, to be her liefe.
So diversely discoursing of their loves,
The golden Sun his glistring head began show,
And sad remembrance now the Prince amoues,
With fresh desire his voyage to pursew:
Als Vna earnd her traueill to renew.
Then those two knights, fast friendship for to bynd,
And love establish each to other true,
Gave goodly gifts, the signs of grateful mind,
And eke the pledges firm, right hands together joined.
Prince Arthur gave a box of Diamond sure,
Embowd with gold and gorgeous ornament,
Wherein were closd few drops of liquor pure,
Of wondrous worth, and virtue excellent,
That any wound could heal incontinent:
Which to requite, the Redcrosse knight him gave
A book, wherein his Saueours testament
Was writ with golden letters rich and brave;
A work of wondrous grace, and able souls to save.
Thus been they parted, Arthur on his way
To seek his love, and the other for to fight
With Vnaes foe, that all her realm did pray.
But she now weighing the decayed plight,
And shrunken synewes of her chosen knight,
Would not a while her forward course pursew,
Ne bring him forth in face of dreadful fight,
Till he recovered had his former hew:
For him to be yet weak and weary well she knew.
So as they traueild, lo they began espy
An armed knight toward them gallop fast,
That seemed from some feared foe to fly,
Or other griesly thing, that him aghast.
Still as he fled, his eye was backward cast,
As if his fear still followed him behind;
Als flew his steed, as he his bands had brast,
And with his winged heels did tread the wind,
As he had been a fool of Pegasus his kind.
Nigh as he drew, they might perceive his head
To be unarmed, and curld vncombed hears
Vpstaring stiff, dismayed with uncouth dread;
Nor drop of blood in all his face appears
Nor life in limb: and to increase his fears,
In foul reproach of knighthoods fair degree,
About his neck an hempen rope he wears,
That with his glistring arms does ill agree;
But he of rope or arms has now no memoree.
The Redcrosse knight toward him crossed fast,
To weet, what mister wight was so dismayed:
There him he finds all senseless and aghast,
That of him self he seemd to be afraid;
Whom hardly he from flying forward stayed,
Till he these words to him deliver might;
Sir knight, aread who has ye thus arayd,
And eke from whom make ye this hasty flight:
For never knight I saw in such misseeming plight.
He answered naught at all, but adding new
Fear to his first amazment, staring wide
With stony eyes, and hartlesse hollow hew,
Astonished stood, as one that had aspide
Infernal furies, with their chains untied.
Him yet again, and yet again bespake
The gentle knight; who naught to him replide,
But trembling every joint did inly quake,
And foltring tongue at last these words seemd forth to shake
For Gods dear love, Sir knight, do me not stay;
For lo he comes, he comes fast after me.
Eft looking back would feign have run away;
But he him forced to stay, and tellen free
The secret cause of his perplexity:
Yet nathemore by his bold hearty speech,
Could his bloud-frosen heart emboldned be,
But through his boldness rather fear did reach,
Yet forced, at last he made through silence suddein breach.
And am I now in safety sure (quoth he)
From him, that would have forced me to dye?
And is the point of death now turned fro me,
That I may tell this hapless history?
Fear naught: (quoth he) no danger now is nigh?
Then shall I you recount a ruefull case,
(Said he) the which with this unlucky eye
I late beheld, and had not greater grace
Me reft from it, had been partaker of the place.
I lately chaunst (Would I had never chaunst)
With a fair knight to keepen companee,
Sir Terwin hight, that well himself aduaunst
In all affairs, and was both bold and free,
But not so happy as mote happy be:
He loved, as was his lot, a Lady gent,
That him again loved in the least degree:
For she was proud, and of too high intent,
And ioyd to see her lover languish and lament.
From whom returning sad and comfortless,
As on the way together we did fare,
We met that villen (God from him me bless)
That cursed wight, from whom I escaped whyleare,
A man of hell, that calls himself Despair:
Who first us greets, and after fair areedes
Of tidings strange, and of adventures rare:
So creeping close, as Snake in hidden weeds,
Inquireth of our states, and of our knightly deeds.
Which when he knew, and felt our feeble hearts
Embost with bale, and bitter biting grief,
Which love had launched with his deadly darts,
With wounding words and terms of foul repriefe,
He plucked from us all hope of due relief,
That erst us held in love of lingering life;
Then hopeless hartlesse, began the cunning thief
Persuade us die, to stint all further strife:
To me he lent this rope, to him a rustie knife.
With which sad instrument of hasty death,
That woeful lover, loathing longer light,
A wide way made to let forth living breath.
But I more fearful, or more luckie wight,
Dismayed with that deformed dismal sight,
Fled fast away, half dead with dying fear:
Ne yet assured of life by you, Sir knight,
Whose like infirmity like chance may bear:
But God you never let his charmed speeches hear.
How may a man (said he) with idle speech
Be won, to spoil the Castle of his health?
I wot (quoth he) whom trial late did teach,
That like would not for all this worlds wealth:
His subtle tongue, like dropping honny, mealt'h
Into the heart, and searches every vain,
That ere one be aware, by secret stealth
His power is rest, and weakness does remain.
O never Sir desire to try his guilefull train.
Certes (said he) hence shall I never rest,
Till I that treachours art have heard and tried;
And you Sir knight, whose name mote I request,
Of grace do me unto his cabin guide.
I that hight: Treuisan (quoth he) will ride
Against my liking back, to do you grace:
But nor for gold nor glee will I abide
By you, when ye arrive in that same place;
For lever had I die, then see his deadly face.
Ere long they come, where that same wicked wight
His dwelling has, low in an hollow cave,
Far underneath a craggie clift ypight,
Dark, doleful, drearie, like a greedy grave,
That still for carrion carcases does crave:
On top whereof aye dwelt the ghastly Owl,
Shrieking his balefull note, which ever drove
Far from that haunt all other cheerful foul;
And all about it wandering ghostes did wail and howl.
And all about old stocks and stubs of trees,
Whereon nor fruit, nor leaf was ever seen,
Did hang upon the ragged rocky knees;
On which had many wretches hanged been,
Whose carcases were scattered on the green,
And thrown about the clifts. Arrived there,
That bare-head knight for dread and doleful teene,
Would feign have fled, ne durst approchen near,
But the other forced him stay, and comforted in fear.
That darkesome cave they enter, where they find
That cursed man, low sitting on the ground,
Musing full sadly in his sulle in mind;
His griesie locks, long grown, and unbound,
Disordred hong about his shoulders round,
And hid his face; through which his hollow eyne
Look deadly dull, and stared as astound;
His raw-bone cheeks through penury and pine,
Where shronke into his jaws, as he did never dine.
His garment naught but many ragged clouts,
With thorns together pind and patched was,
The which his naked sides he wrapped abouts;
And him beside there lay upon the gras
A drearie corse, whose life away did pas,
All wallowd in his own yet lukewarm blood,
That from his wound yet welled fresh alas;
In which a rustie knife fast fixed stood,
And made an open passage for the gushing flood.
Which piteous spectacle, approving true
The woeful tale that Treuisan had told,
When as the gentle Redcrosse knight did view,
With fiery zeal he burnt in courage bold,
Him to avenge, before his blood were cold,
And to the villein said, Thou damned wight,
The author of this fact, we here behold,
What justice can but judge against thee right,
With thine own blood to price his blood, here shed in sight.
What frantic fit (quoth he) has thus distraught
Thee, foolish man, so rash a doom to give?
What justice ever other judgment taught,
But he should die, who merits not to live?
None else to death this man despayring drive,
But his own guilty mind deserving death.
Is then unjust to each his due to give?
Or let him die, that loatheth liniug breath?
Or let him die at ease, that lives here uneath?
Who travels by the weary wandering way,
To come unto his wished home in haste,
And meets a flood, that does his passage stay,
Is not great grace to help him over past,
Or free his feet, that in the mire stick fast?
Most envious man, that grieves at neighbors good
And fond, that ioyest in the woe thou have,
Why wilt not let him pass, that long has stood
Upon the bank, yet wilt thy self not pass the flood?
He there does now enjoy eternal rest
And happy ease, which thou do want and crave,
And further from it daily wanderest:
What if some little pain the passage have,
That makes frail flesh to fear the bitter wave?
Is not short pain well borne, that brings long ease,
And lays the soul to sleep in quiet grave?
Sleep after toil, port after stormy seas,
Ease after war, death after life does greatly please.
The knight much wondered at his suddeine wit,
And said, The term of life is limited,
Ne may a man prolong, nor shorten it;
The soldier may not move from watchful sted,
Nor leave his stand, until his Captain bed.
Who life did limit by almighty doom,
(Quoth he) knows best the terms established;
And he, that points the Centonell his room,
Does license him depart at sound of morning droome.
Is not his deed, what ever thing is done,
In heaven and earth? did not he all create
To die again? all ends that was begone.
Their times in his eternal book of fate
Are written sure, and have their certain date.
Who then can strive with strong necessity,
That holds the world in his still changing state,
Or shun the death ordaynd by destiny?
When hour of death is come, let none ask whence, nor why.
The longer life, I wot the greater sin,
The greater sin, the greater punishment:
All those great battles, which thou boasts to win,
Through strife, and bloodshed, and auengement,
Now praysd, hereafter dear thou shall repent:
For life must life, and blood must blood repay.
Is not enough thy evil life forespent?
For he, that once has missed the right way,
The further he does go, the further he does stray.
Then do no further go, no further stray,
But here lie down, and to thy rest betake,
The Will to prevent, that life ensewen may.
For what has life, that may it loved make,
And gives not rather cause it to forsake?
Fear, sickness, age, loss, labor, sorrow, strife,
Pain, hunger, cold, that makes the heart to quake;
And ever fickle fortune rages rife,
All which, and thousands mo do make a loathsome life.
Thou wretched man, of death have greatest need,
If in true balance thou will weigh thy state:
For never knight, that dared warlike deed,
More lucklesse disauentures did amate:
Witness the dongeon deep, wherein of late
Thy life shut up, for death so often did call;
And though good luck prolonged has thy date,
Yet death then, would the like mishaps forestall,
Into the which hereafter thou may happen fall.
Why then do thou, o man of sin, desire
To draw thy days forth to their last degree?
Is not the measure of thy sinful hire
High heaped up with huge iniquity,
Against the day of wrath, to burden thee?
Is not enough, that to this Lady mild
Thou falsed have thy faith with perjury,
And sold thy self to serve Duessa vilde,
With whom in all abuse thou have thy self defilde?
Is not he just, that all this does behold
From highest heaven, and bears an equal eye?
Shall he thy sins up in his knowledge fold,
And guilty be of thine impiety?
Is not his law, Let every sinner die:
Die shall all flesh? what then must needs be done,
Is it not better to do willingly,
Then linger, till the glass be all out run?
Death is the end of woes: die soon, O faeries son.
The knight was much enmoued with his speech,
That as a swords point through his heart did perse,
And in his conscience made a secret breach,
Well knowing true all, that he did rehearse,
And to his fresh remembrance did reuerse
The ugly view of his deformed crimes,
That all his manly powers it did disperse,
As he were charmed with inchaunted rimes,
That oftentimes he quakt, and fainted oftentimes.
In which amazement, when the Miscreant
Perceived him to waver weak and frail,
Whiles trembling horror did his conscience dant,
And hellish anguish did his soul assail,
To drive him to despair, and quite to quail,
He showed him painted in a table plain,
The damned ghosts, that do in torments wail,
And thousand feends that do them endless pain
With fire and brimstone, which for ever shall remain.
The sight whereof so thoroughly him dismayed,
That naught but death before his eyes he saw,
And ever burning wrath before him laid,
By righteous sentence of The Almighty's law:
Then began the villein him to ouercraw,
And brought unto him swords, ropes, poison, fire,
And all that might him to perdition draw;
And bad him choose, what death he would desire:
For death was due to him, that had prouokt Gods ire.
But when as none of them he saw him take,
He to him raught a dagger sharp and keen,
And gave it him in hand: his hand did quake,
And tremble like a leaf of Aspin green,
And troubled blood through his pale face was seen
To come, and go with tidings from the heart,
As it a running messenger had been.
At last resolved to work his final smart,
He listed up his hand, that back again did start.
Which when as Vna saw, through every vain
The crudled cold ran to her well of life,
As in a swowne: but soon reliu'd again,
Out of his hand she snatched the cursed knife,
And threw it to the ground, enraged rife,
And to him said, Fie, fie, faint hearted knight,
What meanest thou by this reproachful strife?
Is this the battle, which thou vauntst to fight
With that fire-mouthed Dragon, horrible and bright?
Come, come away, frail, seely, fleshly wight,
Ne let vain words bewitch thy manly heart,
Ne devilish thoughts dismay thy constant spright.
In heavenly mercies have thou not a part?
Why should thou then despeire, that chosen art?
Where justice grows, there grows eke greater grace*
The which does quench the brond of hellish smart,
And that accursed handwriting does deface,
Arise, Sir knight arise, and leave this cursed place.
So up he rose, and thence amounted straight.
Which when the carle beheld, and saw his guest
Would safe depart, for all his subtle slight,
He chose an halter from among the rest,
And with it hung himself, vnbid unblessed.
But death he could not work himself thereby;
For thousand times he so himself had dressed,
Yet nathelesse it could not do him die,
Till he should die his last, that is eternally.
Cant. X.
Her faithful knight fair Vna brings
to house of Holiness,
Where he is taught repentance, and
the way to heavenly bless.
WHat man is he, that boasts of fleshly might,
And vain assurance of mortality,
Which all so soon, as it does come to fight,
Against spiritual foes, yields by and by,
Or from the field most cowardly does fly?
Ne let the man ascribe it to his skill,
That thorough grace has gained victory.
If any strength we have, it is to ill,
But all the good is Gods, both power and eke will.
By that, which lately happened, Vna saw,
That this her knight was feeble, and too faint;
And all his sinews woxen weak and raw,
Through long enprisonment, and hard constraint,
Which he endured in his late restraint,
That yet he was unfit for bloody fight:
Therefore to cherish him with diets daint,
She cast to bring him, where he chearen might,
Till he recovered had his late decayed plight.
There was an ancient house not far away,
Renowmd throughout the world for sacred lore,
And pure unspotted life: so well they say
It gouernd was, and guided evermore,
Through wisdom of a matrone grave and hoar;
Whose only joy was to relieve the needs
Of wretched souls, and help the helpelesse pore:
All night she spent in bidding of her bedes,
And all the day in doing good and godly deeds.
Dame Caelia men did her call, as thought
From heaven to come, or thither to arise,
The mother of three daughters, well vpbrought
In goodly thewes, and godly exercise:
The eldest two most sober, chaste, and wise,
Fidelia and Speranza virgins were,
Though spousd, yet wanting wedlocks solemnize;
But fair Charissa to a lovely fere
Was lincked, and by him had many pledges dear.
Arrived there, the door they find fast locked;
For it was warely watched night and day,
For fear of many foes: but when they knocked,
The Porter opened unto them straight way:
He was an aged sire, all hory gray,
With looks full lowly cast, and gate full slow,
Wont on a staff his feeble steps to stay,
Hight Humilta. They pass in stouping low;
For straight and narrow was the way, which he did show.
Each goodly thing is hardest to begin,
But entered in a spacious court they see,
Both plain, and pleasant to be walked in,
Where them does meet a francklin fair and free,
And entertaines with comely courteous glee,
His name was Zele, that him right well became,
For in his speeches and behavior he
Did labor lively to express the same,
And gladly did them guide, till to the Hall they came.
There fairly them receives a gentle Squire,
Of mild demeanure, and rare courtesy,
Right cleanly clad in comely sad attire;
In word and deed that showed great modesty,
And knew his good to all of each degree,
Hight Reverence. He them with speeches meet
Does fair entreat; no courting nicetie,
But simple true, and eke unfeigned sweet,
As might become a Squire so great persons to greet.
And afterward them to his Dame he leads,
That aged Dame, the Lady of the place:
Who all this while was busy at her beads:
Which done, she up arose with seemly grace,
And toward them full matronely did pace.
Where when that fairest Vna she beheld,
Whom well she knew to spring from heavenly race,
Her heart with joy unwonted inly sweld,
As feeling wondrous comfort in her weaker eld.
And her embracing said, o happic earth,
Whereon thy innocent feet do ever tread,
Most virtuous virgin borne of heavenly berth,
That to redeem thy woeful parents head,
From tyrans rage, and euer-dying dread,
Have wandered through the world now long a day;
Yet ceasest not thy weary soles to lead,
What grace has thee now hither, brought this way?
Or done thy feeble feet vnweeting hither stray?
Strange thing it is an errant knight to see
Here in this place, or any other wight,
That hither turns his steps. So few there be,
That chose the narrow path, or seek the right:
All keep the broad high way, and take delight
With many rather for to go astray,
And be partakers of their evil plight,
Then with a few to walk the rightest way;
O foolish men, why haste ye to your own decay?
Thy self to see, and tired limbs to rest,
O matrone sage (quoth she) I hither came,
And this good knight his way with me addressed,
Led with thy praises and broad-blazed fame,
That up to heaven is blown. The ancient Dame,
Him goodly greeted in her modest guise,
And entertaynd them both, as best became,
With all the court'sies, that she could devise,
Ne wanted ought, to show her bounteous or wise.
Thus as they began of sundry things devise,
Lo two most goodly virgins came in place,
Ylinked arm in arm in lovely wise,
With countenance demure, and modest grace,
They numbered even steps and equal pace:
Of which the eldest, that Fidelia hight,
Like sunny beams threw from her Crystal face,
That could have dazd the rash beholders sight,
And round about her head did shine like heavens light
She was araied all in lilly white,
And in her right hand bore a cup of gold,
With wine and water filled up to the hight,
In which a Serpent did himself enfold,
That horror made to all, that did behold;
But she no whit did change her constant mood:
And in her other hand she fast did hold
A book, that was both signd and sealed with blood,
Wherein dark things were writ, hard to be understood.
Her younger sister, that Speranza hight,
Was clad in blew, that her beseemed well;
Not all so cheerful seemed she of sight,
As was her sister; whether dread did dwell,
Or anguish in her heart, is hard to tell:
Upon her arm a silver anchor lay,
Whereon she leaned ever, as befell:
And ever up to heaven, as she did pray,
Her steadfast eyes were bent, ne swarued other way.
They seeing Vna, toward her began wend,
Who them encounters with like courtesy;
Many kind speeches they between them spend,
And greatly joy each other well to see:
Then to the knight with shamefast modesty
They turn themselves, at Vnaes meek request,
And him salute with well beseeming glee;
Who fair them quites, as him beseemed best,
And goodly began discourse of many a noble gest.
Then Vna thus; But she your sister dear,
The dear Charissa where is she become?
Or wants she health, or busy is elsewhere?
Ah no, said they, but forth she may not come:
For she of late is lightened of her womb,
And has encreast the world with one son more,
That her to see should be but troublesome.
Indeed (quoth she) that should be trouble sore,
But thankt be God, and her increase so evermore.
Then said the aged Coelia, Dear dame,
And you good Sir, I wot that of your toil,
And labors long, through which ye hither came,
Ye both forwearied be: therefore a while
I read you rest, and to your bowres recoyle.
Then called she a Groom, that forth him led
Into a goodly lodge, and began despoile
Of puissant arms, and laid in easy bed;
His name was meek Obedience rightfully ared.
Now when their weary limbs with kindly rest,
And bodies were refresht with due repast,
Fair Vna began Fidelia fair request,
To have her knight into her schoolehouse plaste,
That of her heavenly learning he might taste,
And hear the wisdom of her words divine.
She granted, and that knight so much agraste,
That she him taught celestial discipline,
And opened his dull eyes, that light mote in them shine
And that her sacred Book, with bloody writ,
That none could read, except she did them teach,
She unto him disclosed every whit,
And heavenly documents thereout did preach,
That weaker wit of man could never reach,
Of God, of grace, of justice, of free will,
That wonder was to hear her goodly speech:
For she was able, with her words to kill,
And raise again to life the heart, that she did thrill.
And when she list pour out her larger spright,
She would command the hasty Sun to stay,
Or backward turn his course from heavens hight;
Sometimes great hosts of men she could dismay,
And eke huge mountains from their native seat
She would command, themselves to bear away,
And throw in raging sea with roaring threat.
Almighty God her gave such power, and puissance great.
The faithful knight now grew in little space,
By hearing her, and by her sisters lore,
To such perfection of all heavenly grace,
That wretched world he began for to abhore,
And mortal life began loath, as thing forlore,
Grieved with remembrance of his wicked ways,
And pricked with anguish of his sins so sore,
That he desirde, to end his wretched days:
So much the dart of sinful guilt the soul dismayes.
But wise Speranza gave him comfort sweet,
And taught him how to take assured hold
Upon her silver anchor, as was meet;
Else had his sins so great, and manifold
Made him forget all that Fidelia told.
In this distressed doubtful agony,
When him his dearest Vna did behold,
Disdeining life, desiring leave to die,
She found her self assayld with great perplexity.
And came to Coelia to declare her smart,
Who well acquainted with that commune plight,
Which sinful horror works in wounded heart,
Her wisely comforted all that she might,
With goodly counsel and aduisement right;
And streightway sent with careful diligence,
To fetch a Leach, the which had great insight
In that disease of grieved conscience,
And well could cure the same; His name was Patience.
Who coming to that soule-diseased knight,
Could hardly him entreat, to tell his grief:
Which known, and all that noyd his heavy spright,
Well searched, eftsoons he began apply relief.
Of salues and medicines, which had passing priefe,
And thereto added words of wondrous might:
By which to ease he him recured brief,
And much asswag'd the passion of his plight,
That he his pain endured, as seeming now more light
But yet the cause and root of all his ill,
Inward corruption, and infected sin,
Not purged nor heald, behind remained still,
And festring sore did rankle yet within,
Close creeping twixt the marrow and the skin.
Which to extirpe, he laid him privily
Down in a darkesome lowly place far in,
Whereas he meant his corrosiues to apply,
And with straight diet tame his stubborn malady.
In ashes and sackcloth he did array
His dainty corse, proud humors to abate,
And dieted with fasting every day,
The swelling of his wounds to mitigate,
And made him pray both early and eke late:
And ever as superfluous flesh did rot
Amendment ready still at hand did wayt,
To pluck it out with pincers fiery whot,
That soon in him was left no one corrupted jot.
And bitter Penance with an iron whip,
Was wont him once to disple every day:
And sharp Remorse his heart did prick and nip,
That drops of blood thence like a well did play;
And sad Repentance used to embay,
His body in salt water smarting sore,
The filthy blots of sin to wash away.
So in short space they did to health restore
The man that would not live, but erst lay at deaths door
which his torment often was so great,
That like a Lion he would cry and rore,
And rend his flesh, and his own synewes eat.
His own dear Vna hearing evermore
His ruefull shriekes and gronings, often tore
Her guiltless garments, and her golden hear,
For pity of his pain and anguish sore;
Yet all with patience wisely she did bear;
or well she wist, his crime could else be never clear,
Whom thus recouer'd by wise Patience,
And true Repentance they to Vna brought:
Who joyous of his cured conscience,
Him dearly kissed, and fairly eke besought
Himself to chearish, and consuming thought
To put away out of his careful breast.
By this Charissa, late in childbed brought,
Was woxen strong, and left her fruitful nest;
To her fair Vna brought this unacquainted guest.
He was a woman in her freshest age,
Of wondrous beauty, and of bounty rare,
With goodly grace and comely personage,
That was on earth not easy to compare;
Full of great love, but Cupids wanton snare
As hell she hated, chaste in work and will;
Her neck and breasts were ever open bare,
That ay thereof her babes might suck their fill;
The rest was all in yellow robes arrayed still.
A multitude of babes about her hong,
Playing their sports, that ioyd her to behold,
Whom still she fed, whiles they were weak and young,
But thrust them forth still, as they wexed old:
And on her head she wore attire of gold,
Adornd with gemmes and owches wondrous fair.
Whose passing price uneath was to be told;
And by her side there sat a gentle pair
Of turtle doves, she sitting in an yuorie chair.
The knight and Vna entering, fair her greet,
And bid her joy of that her happy brood;
Who them requites with court'sies seeming meet,
And entertaines with friendly cheerful mood.
Then Vna her besought, to be so good,
As in her virtuous rules to school her knight,
Now after all his torment well withstood,
In that sad house of Penance, where his spright
Had past the pains of hell, and long enduring night.
She was right joyous of her just request,
And taking by the hand that Faeries son,
Began him instruct in every good behest,
Of love, and righteousness, and well to done,
And wrath, and hatred warely to shonne,
That drew on men Gods hatred, and his wrath,
And many souls in dolours had fordonne:
In which when him she well instructed has,
From thence to heaven she teaches him the ready path
Wherein his weaker wandering steps to guide,
An ancient matrone she to her does call,
Whose sober looks her wisdom well descride:
Her name was Mercy, well known over all,
To be both gracious, and eke liberal:
To whom the careful charge of him she gave,
To lead aright, that he should never fall
In all his ways through this wide worlds wave,
That Mercy in the end his righteous soul might save.
The godly Matrone by the hand him bears
Forth from her presence, by a narrow way,
Scattred with bushy thorns, and ragged breares,
Which still before him she removed away,
That nothing might his ready passage stay:
And ever when his feet encombred were,
Organ to shrink, or from the right to stray,
She held him fast, and firmly did vpbeare,
As careful Nourse her child from falling often does rear.
Eftsoons unto an holy Hospital,
That was fore by the way, she did him bring,
In which seven Bead-men that had vowed all
Their life to service of high heavens king
Did spend their days in doing godly thing:
There gates to all were open evermore,
That by the weary way were traueiling,
And one sat waiting ever them before,
To call in-commers by, that needy were and pore.
The first of them that eldest was, and best,
Of all the house had charge and government,
As Guardian and Steward of the rest:
His office was to give entertainment
And lodging, unto all that came, and went:
Not unto such, as could him feast again,
And double quite, for that he on them spent,
But such, as want of harbor did constrain:
Those for Gods sake his dewty was to entertain.
The second was as Almner of the place,
His office was, the hungry for to feed,
And thristy give to drink, a work of grace:
He feared not once him self to be in need,
Ne cared to hoord for those, whom he did breed:
The grace of God he laid up still in store,
Which as a stock he left unto his seed;
He had enough, what need him care for more?
And had he less, yet some he would give to the pore.
The third had of their wardrobe custody,
In which were not rich tyres, nor garments gay,
The plumes of pride, and wings of vanity,
But clothes meet to keep keen could away,
And naked nature seemly to array;
With which bare wretched wights he daily clad,
The images of God in earthly clay;
And if that no spare cloths to give he had,
His own coat he would cut, and it distribute glad.
The fourth appointed by his office was,
Poor prisoners to relieve with gracious aid,
And captives to redeem with price of bras,
From Turks and Sarazins, which them had stayed;
And though they faulty were, yet well he wayd,
That God to us forgiueth every hour
Much more then that, why they in bands were laid,
And he that harrowd hell with heavy stowre,
The faulty souls from thence brought to his heavenly bower
The fifth had charge sick persons to attend,
And comfort those, in point of death which lay;
For them most needs comfort in the end,
When sin, and hell, and death do most dismay
The feeble soul departing hence away.
All is but lost, that living we bestow,
If not well ended at our dying day.
O man have mind of that last bitter throw;
For as the tree does fall, so lies it ever low.
The sixth had charge of them now being dead,
In seemly sort their corses to engraue,
And deck with dainty flowers their bridal bed,
That to their heavenly spouse both sweet and brave
They might appear, when he their souls shall save.
The wondrous workmanship of Gods own mould,
Whose face he made, all beasts to fear, and gave
All in his hand, even dead we honor should.
Ah dearest God me grant, I dead be not defould.
The seventh now after death and burial done,
Had charge the tender Orphans of the dead
And widows aid, least they should be undone:
In face of judgment he their right would plead,
Ne ought the power of mighty men did dread
In their defense, nor would for gold or fee
Be won their rightful causes down to tread:
And when they stood in most necessitee,
He did supply their want, and gave them ever free.
There when the Elfin knight arrived was,
The first and chiefest of the seven, whose care
Was guests to welcome, toward him did pas:
Where seeing Mercy, that his steps up bare,
And always led, to her with reverence rare
He humbly louted in meek lowliness,
And seemly welcome for her did prepare:
For of their order she was Patroness,
Albe Charissa were their chiefest founderesse.
There she awhile him stays, him self to rest,
That to the rest more able he might be:
During which time, in every good behest
And godly work of Alms and charitee
She him instructed with great industree;
Shortly therein so perfect he became,
That from the first unto the last degree,
His mortal life he learned had to frame
In holy righteousness, without rebuke or blame.
Thence forward by that painful way they pas,
Forth to an hill, that was both steep and hy;
On top whereof a sacred chapel was,
And eke a little Hermitage thereby,
Wherein an aged holy man did lie,
That day and night said his devotion,
Ne other worldly business did apply;
His name was heavenly Contemplation;
Of God and goodness was his meditation.
Great grace that old man to him given had;
For God he often saw from heavens hight,
All were his earthly eyes both blunt and bad,
And through great age had lost their kindly sight,
Yet wondrous quick and persant was his spright,
As Eagles eye, that can behold the Sun:
That hill they scale with all their power and might,
That his frail thighs nigh weary and fordonne
Began fail, but by her help the top at last he won.
There they do find that godly aged Sire,
With snowy locks adowne his shoulders shed,
As hoarie frost with spangles does attire
The mossy branches of an Oak half ded.
Each bone might through his body well be red,
And every sinew seen through his long fast:
For naught he cared his carcas long unfed;
His mind was full of spiritual repast,
And pyn'd his flesh, to keep his body low and chaste.
Who when these two approaching he aspide,
At their first presence grew agrieued sore,
That forced him lay his heavenly thoughts aside;
And had he not that Dame respected more,
Whom highly he did reverence and adore,
He would not once have moved for the knight.
They him saluted standing far before;
Who well them greeting, humbly did requight,
And asked, to what end they clomb that tedious height.
What end (quoth he) should cause us take such pain,
But that same end, which every living wight
Should make his mark, high heaven to attain?
Is not from hence the way, that leads right
To that most glorious house, that glistreth bright
With burning stars, and everliving fire,
Whereof the keys are to thy hand behight
By wise Fidelia? she does thee require,
To show it to this knight, according his desire.
Thrice happy man, said then the father grave,
Whose staggering steps thy steady hand does lead,
And shows the way, his sinful soul to save.
Who better can the way to heaven aread,
Then thou thy self, that was both borne and bred
In heavenly throne, where thousand Angels shine?
Thou do the prayers of the righteous sead
Present before the majesty divine,
And his auenging wrath to clemency incline.
Yet since thou bidst, thy pleasure shall be done.
Then come thou man of earth, and see the way,
That never yet was seen of Faeries son,
That never leads the traueiler astray,
But after labors long, and sad delay,
Bring them to joyous rest and endless blis.
But first thou must a season fast and pray,
Till from her bands the spright assoiled is,
And have her strength recur'd from frail infirmitis.
That done, he leads him to the highest Mount;
Such one, as that same mighty man of God,
That bloud-red billows like a walled front
On either side disparted with his rod,
Till that his army dry-foot through them yod,
Dwelt forty days upon; where writ in stone
With bloody letters by the hand of God,
The bitter doom of death and balefull moan
He did receive, whiles flashing fire about him shone.
Or like that sacred hill, whose head full hie,
Adornd with fruitful Olives all arownd,
Is, as it were for endless memory
Of that dear Lord, who often thereon was fownd,
For ever with a flowring girlond crowned:
Or like that pleasant Mount, that is for ay
Through famous Poets verse each where renownd,
On which the thrice three learned Ladies play
Their heavenly notes, and make full many a lovely lay.
From thence, far off he unto him did show
A little path, that was both steep and long,
Which to a goodly City led his view;
Whose walls and towers were builded high and strong
Of perle and precious stone, that earthly tongue
Cannot describe, nor wit of man can tell;
Too high a ditty for my simple song;
The City of the great king hight it well,
Wherein eternal peace and happiness does dwell.
As he thereon stood gazing, he might see
The blessed Angels to and fro descend
From highest heaven, in gladsome companee,
And with great joy into that City wend,
As commonly as friend does with his friend.
Whereathe wondered much, and began enquere,
What stately building durst so high extend
Her lofty towers unto the starry sphere,
And what unknown nation there empeopled were.
Fair knight (quoth he) Jerusalem that is,
The new Jerusalem, that God has built
For those to dwell in, that are chosen his,
His chosen people purged from sinful guilt,
With piteous blood, which cruelly was spilt
On cursed tree, of that unspotted lam,
That for the sins of all the world was kilt:
Now are they Saints all in that City sam,
More dear unto their God, then you^glings to their dam.
Till now, said then the knight, I weened well,
That great Cleopolis, where I have been,
In which that fairest Faerie Queen does dwell
The fairest City was, that might be seen;
And that bright tower all built of crystal cleene,
Panthea, seemd the brightest thing, that was:
But now by proof all otherwise I ween;
For this great City that does far surpas,
And this bright Angels tower quite dims that tower of glass.
Most true, then said the holy aged man;
Yet is Cleopolis for earthly fame,
The fairest piece, that eye beholden can:
And well beseemes all knights of noble name,
That covet in the immortal book of fame
To be eternized, that same to haunt,
And done their service to that sovereign Dame,
That glory does to them for guerdon grant:
For she is heavenly borne, and heaven may justly vaunt.
And thou fair ymp, sprung out from English race,
How ever now accounted Elsins son,
Well worthy do thy service for her grace,
To aid a virgin desolate foredonne.
But when thou famous victory have won,
And high emongst all knights have hong thy shield,
Thenceforth the suit of earthly conquest shonne,
And wash thy hands from guilt of bloody field:
For blood can naught but sin, and wars but sorrows yield
Then seek this path, that I to thee presage,
Which after all to heaven shall thee send;
Then peaceably to thy painful pilgrimage
To yonder same Jerusalem do bend,
Where is for thee ordaind a blessed end:
For thou emongst those Saints, whom thou do see,
Shall be a Saint, and thine own nations friend
And Patron: thou Saint George shall called be,
Saint George of merry England, the sign of victoree.
Unworthy wretch(quoth he) ofso great grace,
How dare I think such glory to attain?
These that have it attaind, were in like case
(Quoth he) as wretched, and lived in like pain.
But deeds of arms must I at last be feign,
And Ladies love to leave so dearly bought?
What need of arms, where peace does ay remain,
(Said he) and battles none are to be fought?
As for loose loves are vain, and vanish into naught.
O let me not (quoth he) then turn again
Back to the world, whose joys so fruitless are;
But let me here for aye in peace remain,
Or straight way on that last long voyage fare,
That nothing may my present hope empare.
That may not be (said he) ne may thou yet
Forgo that royal maids bequeathed care,
Who did her cause into thy hand commit,
Till from her cursed foe thou have her freely quit.
Then shall I soon, (quoth he) so God me grace,
Abet that virgins cause disconsolate,
And shortly back return unto this place,
To walk this way in Pilgrims poor estate.
But now aread, old father, why of late
Did thou behight me borne of English blood,
Whom all a Faeries son done then nominate?
That word shall I (said he) auouchen good,
Since to thee is unknown the cradle of thy brood.
For well I wot, thou springst from ancient race
Of Saxon kings, that have with mighty hand
And many bloody battles fought in place
High reard their royal throne in Britane land,
And vanquished them, unable to withstand:
From thence a Faerie thee vnweeting rest,
There as thou slepst in tender swaddling band,
And her base Elfin brood there for thee left.
Such men do Chaungelings call, so chaungd by Faeries theft.
Thence she thee brought into this Faerie land,
And in an heaped furrow did thee hyde,
Where thee a Ploughman all vnweeting fond,
As he his toylesome teme that way did guide,
And brought thee up in ploughmans state to bide,
Whereof Georgos he thee gave to name;
Till pricked with courage, and thy forces pride,
To Faery court thou came to seek for fame,
And prove thy puissaunt arms, as seems thee best became
O holy Sire (quoth he) how shall I quight
The many favors I with thee have found,
That have my name and nation red aright,
And taught the way that does to heaven bound?
This said, adowne he looked to the ground,
To have returned, but dazed were his eyne,
Through passing brightness, which did quite co^foun
His feeble sense, and too exceeding shine.
So dark are earthly things compard to things divine.
At last whenas himself he began to find,
To Vna back he cast him to retire;
Who him awaited still with pensive mind.
Great thanks and goodly meed to that good sire,
He thence departing gave for his pains hyre.
So came to Vna, who him ioyd to see,
And after little rest, began him desire,
Of her adventure mindful for to be.
So leave they take of Coelia, and her daughters three.
Cant. XI.
The knight with that old Dragon fights
two days incessantly:
The third him overthrows, and gayns
most glorious victory.
HIgh time now began it wex for Vna fair,
To think of those her captive Parents dear,
And their forwasted kingdom to repair:
Whereto whenas they now approached near,
With hearty words her knight she began to cheer,
And in her modest manner thus bespake;
Dear knight, as dear, as ever knight was dear,
That all these sorrows suffer for my sake,
High heaven behold the tedious toil, ye for me take,
Now are we come unto my native soil,
And to the place, where all our perils dwell;
Here haunts that feend, and does his daily spoil,
Therefore henceforth be at your keeping well,
And ever ready for your foeman fell.
The spark of noble courage now awake,
And strive your excellent self to excel;
That shall ye evermore renowned make,
Above all knights on earth, that batteill undertake.
And pointing forth, lo yonder is (said she)
The brazen tower in which my parents dear
For dread of that huge feend emprisond be
Whom I from far, see on the walls appear
Whose sight my feeble soul does greatly cheer:
And on the top of all I do espy
The watchman waiting tidings glad to hear,
That o my parents might I happily
Unto you bring, to ease you of your misery.
With that they heard a roaring hideous sound,
That all the air with terror filled wide,
And seemd uneath to shake the steadfast ground.
Eftsoons that dreadful Dragon they espide,
Where stretch he lay upon the sunny side,
Of a great hill, himself like a great hill.
But all so soon, as he from far descride
Those glistring arms, that heaven with light did fill,
He rousd himself full blithe, and hastened them until.
Then bad the knight this Lady yede aloof,
And to an hill her self with draw aside,
From whence she might behold that battailles proof
And eke be safe from danger far descryde:
She him obayd, and turned a little wide.
Now O thou sacred Muse, most learned Dame,
Fair ympe of Phoebus, and his aged bride,
The Nourse of time, and everlasting fame,
That warlike hands ennoblest with immortal name;
O gently come into my feeble breast,
Come gently, but not with that mighty rage,
Wherewith the martial troops thou do infest,
And hearts of great Heroes do enrage,
That naught their kindled courage may aswage,
Soon as thy dreadful trompe begins to sownd;
The God of war with his fires equipage
Thou do awake, sleep never he so sownd,
And feared nations do with horror stern astownd.
Fair Goddess lay that furious fit aside,
Till I of wars and bloody Mars do sing,
And Briton fields with Sarazin blood bedyde,
Twixt that great faery Queen and Paynim king,
That with their horror heaven and earth did ring,
A work of labor long, and endless praise:
But now a while let down that haughty string,
And to my tunes thy second tenor raise,
That I this man of God his godly arms may blaze.
By this the dreadful Beast drew nigh to hand,
Half flying, and half footing in his have,
That with his largeness measured much land,
And made wide shadow under his huge wast;
As mountain does the valley ouercast.
Approaching nigh, he reared high before
His body monstrous, horrible, and wast,
Which to increase his wondrous greatness more,
Was swollen with wrath, and poison, and with bloody gore.
And over, all with brazen scales was armd,
Like plated coat of steel, so couched near,
That naught mote perce, ne might his corse be harmd
With dint of sword, nor push of pointed spear;
Which as an Eagle, seeing pray appear,
His aerie plumes does rouse, full rudely dight,
So shaked he, that horror was to hear,
For as the clashing of an Armor bright,
Such noise his rouzed scales did send unto the knight.
His flaggy wings when forth he did display,
Were like two sails, in which the hollow wynd
Is gathered full, and works speedy way:
And eke the pens, that did his pineons bynd
Were like mayne-yards, with flying canuas lynd,
With which whenas him list the air to beat,
And there by force unwonted passage find,
The clouds before him fled for terror great,
And all the heavens stood still amazed with his threat.
His huge long tail wound up in hundred foldes,
Does ouerspred his long bras-scaly back,
Whose wreathed boughts when ever he vnfoldes,
And thick entangled knots adown does slack.
Bespotted all with shields of red and black,
It sweepeth all the land behind him far,
And of three furlongs does but little lack;
And at the point two stings in-fixed arre,
Both deadly sharp, that sharpest steel exceeden far.
But stings and sharpest steel did far exceed
The sharpness of his cruel rending claws;
Dead was it sure, as sure as death in deed,
What ever thing does touch his ravenous paws,
Or what within his reach he ever draws.
But his most hideous head my tongue to tell,
Does tremble: for his deep devouring jaws
Wide gaped, like the griesly mouth of hell,
Through which into his dark abisse all rauin fell.
And that more wondrous was, in either iaw
Three ranckes of iron teeth enraunged were,
In which yet trickling blood and gobbets raw
Of late devoured bodies did appear,
That sight thereof bred cold congealed fear:
Which to increase, and all atonce to kill,
A cloud of smoothering smoke and sulphur sear
Out of his stinking gorge forth steemed still,
That all the air about with smoke and stench did fill.
His blazing eyes, like two bright shining shields,
Did burn with wrath, and sparkled living fire;
As two broad Beacons, set in open fields,
Send forth their flames far off to every shyre,
And warning give, that enemies conspyre,
With fire and sword the region to invade;
So flamed his eyne with rage and rancorous ire:
But far within, as in a hollow glade,
Those glaring lamps were set, that made a dreadful shade.
So dreadfully he toward him did pas,
Forelifting up aloft his speckled breast,
And often bounding on the bruised gras,
As for great ioyance of his newcome guest.
Eftsoons he began advance his haughty crest,
As chauffed Bore his bristles does vpreare,
And shoke his scales to battle ready dressed;
That made the Redcrosse knight nigh quake for fear,
As bidding bold defiance to his foeman near.
The knight began fairly couch his steadie spear,
And fiercely ran at him with rigorous might:
The pointed steel arriving rudely theare,
His harder hide would neither perce, nor bight,
But glauncing by forth passed forward right;
Yet sore amoued with so puissant push,
The wrathful beast about him turned light,
And him so rudely passing by, did brush
With his long tail, that horse and man to ground did rush.
Both horse and man up lightly rose again,
And fresh encounter toward him addressed:
But th'idle stroke yet back recoyld in vain,
And found no place his deadly point to rest.
Exceeding; rage enflamed the furious beast,
To be avenged of so great despite;
For never felt his imperceable breast
So wondrous force, from hand of living wight;
Yet had he proved the power of many a puissant knight.
Then with his wauing wings displayed wide,
Himself up high he lifted from the ground,
And with strong flight did forcibly divide
The yielding air, which nigh too feeble found
Her flitting parts, and element unfound,
To bear so great a weight: he cutting way
With his broad sails, about him soared round:
At last low stouping with unwieldy sway,
Snatched up both horse and man, to bear them quite away.
Long he them bore above the subject plain,
So far as Ewghen bow a shaft may send,
Till struggling strong did him at last constrain,
To let them down before his flightes end:
As hagard hawk presuming to contend
With hardy foul, above his hable might,
His weary pounces all in vain does spend,
To trusse the pray too heavy for his flight;
Which coming down to ground, does free it self by fight.
He so disseized of his gryping gross,
The knight his thrillant spear again assayd
In his bras-plated body to embosse,
And three men's strength unto the stroke he laid;
Wherewith the stiff beam quaked, as affrayd,
And glauncing from his scaly neck, did glyde
Close under his left wing, then broad displayed.
The percing steel there wrought a woundfull wide,
That with the uncouth smart the Monster lowdly cryde.
He cryde, as raging seas are wont to rore,
When wintry storm his wrathful wreck does threat,
The rolling billows beat the ragged shore,
As they the earth would shoulder from her seat,
And greedy gulf does gape, as he would eat
His neighbor element in his revenge:
Then gin the blustering brethren boldly threat,
To move the world from off his steadfast henge,
And boystrous battle make, each other to avenge.
The steely head stuck fast still in his flesh,
Till with his cruel claws he snatched the wood,
And quite a sunder broke. Forth flowed fresh
A gushing river of black goarie blood,
That drowned all the land, whereon he stood;
The stream thereof would drive a water-mill.
Trebly augmented was his furious mood
With bitter sense of his deep rooted ill,
That flames of fire he threw forth from his large nosethrill.
His hideous tail then hurled he about,
And therewith all enwrapt the nimble thyes
Of his froth-fomy steed, whose courage stout
Striving to loose the knot, that fast him ties,
Himself in streighter bands too rash implies,
That to the ground he is perforce constraynd
To throw his rider: who can quickly rise
From off the earth, with durty blood distaynd,
For that reproachful fall right fowly he disdaynd.
And fiercely took his trench and blade in hand,
With which he stroke so furious and so fell,
That nothing seemd the puissance could withstand:
Upon his crest the hardened iron fell,
But his more hardened crest was armd so well,
That deeper dint therein it would not make;
Yet so extremely did the buffe him quell,
That from thenceforth he shund the like to take,
But when he saw them come, he did them still forsake.
The knight was wrath to see his stroke beguyld,
And smote again with more outrageous might;
But back again the sparckling steel recoyld,
And left not any mark, where it did light;
As if in Adamant rock it had been pight.
The beast impatient of his smarting wound,
And of so fierce and forcible despite,
Thought with his wings to stye above the ground;
But his late wounded wing unserviceable found.
Then full of grief and anguish vehement,
He lowdly brayd, that like was never heard,
And from his wide devouring oven sent
A flake of fire, that flashing in his beard,
Him all amazd, and almost made affeard:
The scorching flame sore swinged all his face,
And through his armor all his body seard,
That he could not endure so cruel case,
But thought his arms to leave, and helmet to unlace.
Not that great Champion of the antique world,
Whom famous Poets verse so much does daunt,
And has for twelve huge labors high extold,
So many furies and sharp fits did haunt,
When him the poisoned garment did enchaunt
With Centaures blood, and bloody verses charmed,
As did this knight twelve thousand dolours daunt,
Whom fyrie steel now burnt, that erst him armed,
That erst him goodly armed, now most of all him harmed.
Faint, weary, sore, emboyled, grieved, brent
With heat, toil, wounds, arms, smart, and inward fire
That never man such mischiefs did torment;
Death better were, death did he often desire,
But death will never come, when needs require.
Whom so dismayed when that his foe beheld,
He cast to suffer him no more respire,
But began his sturdie stern about to weld,
And him so strongly stroke, that to the ground him feld.
It fortuned (as fair it then befell)
Behind his back vnweeting, where he stood,
Of ancient time there was a springing well,
From which fast trickled forth a silver flood,
Full of great virtues, and for medicine good.
Whylome, before that cursed Dragon got
That happy land, and all with innocent blood
Defyld those sacred waves, it rightly hot
The well of life, ne yet his virtues had forgot.
For unto life the dead it could restore,
And guilt of sinful crimes clean wash away,
Those that with sickness were infected sore,
It could recure, and aged long decay
Renew, as it were borne that very day.
Both Silo this, and Jordan did excel,
And The English Bath, and eke the german Spau,
Ne can Cephise, nor Hebrus match this well:
Into the same the knight back overthrown, fell.
Now began the golden Phoebus for to steep
His fiery face in billows of the west,
And his faint steedes watered in Ocean deep,
Whiles from their iournall labors they did rest,
When that infernal Monster, having kest
His weary foe into that living well,
Can high advance his broad discolored breast,
Above his wonted pitch, with countenance fell,
And clapped his iron wings, as victor he did dwell.
Which when his penfiue Lady saw from far,
Great woe and sorrow did her soul assay,
As weening that the sad end of the war,
And began to highest God entirely pray,
That feared chance from her to turn away;
With folded hands and knees full lowly bent
All night she watched, ne once adowne would lay
Her dainty limbs in her sad dreriment,
But praying still did wake, and waking did lament.
The morrow next began early to appear,
That Titan rose to run his daily race;
But early ere the morrow next began rear
Out of the sea fair Titans deawy face,
Up rose the gentle virgin from her place,
And looked all about, if she might spy
Her loved knight to move his manly pace:
For she had great doubt of his safety,
Since late she saw him fall before his enemy.
At last she saw, where he vpstarted brave
Out of the well, wherein he drenched lay;
As Eagle fresh out of the Ocean wave,
Where he has left his plumes all hoary gray,
And decked himself with feathers youthly gay,
Like Eyas hawk up mounts unto the skies,
His newly budded pineons to assay,
And marueiles at himself, still as he flies:
So new this newborn knight to battle new did rise.
Whom when the damned feend so fresh did spy.
No wonder if he wondered at the sight,
And doubted, whether his late enemy
It were, or other new supplied knight.
He now to prove his late renewed might,
High brandishing his bright deaw-burning blade,
Upon his crested scalpe so sore did smite,
That to the scull a yawning wound it made:
The deadly dint his dulled senses all dismayed.
I wot not, whether the revenging steel
Were hardened with that holy water dew,
Wherein he fell, or sharper edge did feel,
Or his baptized hands now greater grew;
Or other secret virtue did ensew;
Else never could the force of fleshly arm,
Ne molten metal in his blood embrew:
For till that stownd could never wight him harm,
By subtilty, nor slight, nor might, nor mighty charm.
The cruel wound enraged him so sore,
That loud he yielded for exceeding pain;
As hundred ramping Lions seemed to rore,
Whom ravenous hunger did thereto constrain:
Then began he toss aloft his stretched train,
And therewith scourge the buxome air so sore,
That to his force to yeelden it was feign;
Ne ought his sturdie strokes might stand before,
That high trees overthrew, and rocks in pieces tore.
The same aduauncing high above his head,
With sharp intended sting so rude him smot,
That to the earth him drove, as stricken dead,
Ne living wight would have him life behot:
The mortal sting his angry needle shot
Quite through his shield, and in his shoulder seasd,
Where fast it stuck, ne would there out be got:
The grief thereof him wondrous sore diseasd,
Ne might his ranckling pain with patience be appeasd.
But yet more mindful of his honor dear,
Then of the grievous smart, which him did wring,
From loathed soil he can him lightly rear,
And strove to loose the far infixed string:
Which when in vain he tryde with struggeling,
Inflamed with wrath, his raging blade he heft,
And struck so strongly, that the knotty sting
Of his huge tail he quite a sunder cleft,
Five joints thereof he hewd, and but the stump him left.
Heart cannot think, what outrage, and what cries,
With foul enfouldred smoke and flashing fire,
The hell-bred beast threw forth unto the skies,
That all was covered with darkness dire:
Then fraught with rancour, and engorged ire,
He cast at once him to avenge for all,
And gathering up himself out of the mire,
With his uneven wings did fiercely fall,
Upon his sunne-bright shield, and gript it fast withal.
Much was the man encombred with his hold,
In fear to lose his weapon in his paw,
Ne wist yet, how his talants to unfold;
For harder was from Cerberus greedy iaw
To pluck a bone, then from his cruel claw
To reaue by strength, the griped gage away:
Thrice he assayd it from his foot to draw,
And thrice in vain to draw it did assay,
It booted naught to think, to rob him of his pray.
Tho when he saw no power might prevail,
His trusty sword he called to his last aid,
Wherewith he fiercely did his foe assail,
And double blows about him stoutly laid,
That glauncing fire out of the iron played;
As sparckles from the Anduile use to fly,
When heavy hammers on the wedge are swaid;
Therewith at last he forced him to vnty
One of his grasping feet, him to defend thereby.
The other foot, fast fixed on his shield
Whenas no strength, nor stroks mote him constrain
To loose, ne yet the warlike pledge to yield,
He smot thereat with all his might and maine,
That naught so wondrous puissance might sustain;
Upon the joint the lucky steel did light,
And made such way, that hewd it quite in twain;
The paw yet missed not his minisht might,
But hong still on the shield, as it at first was pight.
For grief thereof, and devilish despite,
From his infernal fournace forth he threw
Huge flames, that dimmed all the heavens light,
Enrold in duskish smoke and brimstone blew;
As burning Aetna from his boiling stew
Does belch out flames, and rocks in pieces broke,
And ragged ribs of mountains molten new,
Enwrapt in coleblacke clouds and filthy smoke,
That all the land with stench, and heaven with horror choke.
The heat whereof, and harmefull pestilence
So sore him noyd, that forced him to retire
A little backward for his best defense,
To save his body from the scorching fire,
Which he from hellish entrails did expire.
It chaunst (eternal God that chance did guide)
As he recoyled backward, in the mire
His nigh forwearied feeble feet did slide,
And down he fell, with dread of shame sore terrifide.
There grew a goodly tree him fair beside,
Laden with fruit and apples rosy red,
As they in pure vermilion had been did,
Whereof great virtues over all were red:
For happy life to all, which thereon fed,
And life eke everlasting did befall:
Great God it planted in that blessed sted
With his almighty hand, and did it call
The tree of life, the crime of our first fathers fall.
In all the world like was not to be found,
Save in that soil, where all good things did grow,
And freely sprung out of the fruitful ground,
As incorrupted Nature did them sow,
Till that dread Dragon all did overthrow.
Another like fair tree eke grew thereby,
Whereof who so did eat, eftsoons did know
Both good and ill: O mornefull memory:
That tree through one man's fault has done us all to die.
From that first tree forth flowd, as from a well,
A trickling stream of Balm, most sovereign
And dainty dear, which on the ground still fell,
And ouerflowed all the fertile plain,
As it had deawed been with timely rain:
Life and long health that gracious ointment gave,
And deadly wounds could heal and rear again
The senseless corse appointed for the grave.
Into that same he fell: which did from death him save.
For nigh thereto the ever damned beast
Durst not approach, for he was deadly made,
And all that life preserved, did detest:
Yet he it often aduentur'd to invade.
By this the drouping daylight began to fade,
And yield his room to sad succeeding night,
Who with her sable mantle began to shade
The face of earth, and ways of living wight,
And high her burning torch set up in heaven bright.
When gentle Vna, saw the second fall
Of her dear knight, who weary of long fight,
And faint through loss of blond, moved not at all,
But lay as in a dream of deep delight,
Besmeard with precious Balm, whose virtuous might
Did heal his wounds, and scorching heat alay,
Again she stricken was with sore affright,
And for his safety began devoutly pray;
And watch the noyous night, and wait for joyous day.
The joyous day began early to appear,
And fair Aurora from her deawy bed
Of aged Tithone began her self to rear,
With rosy cheeks, for shame as blushing red;
Her golden locks for haste were loosely shed
About her ears, when Vna her did mark
Clymbe to her charet, all with flowers spread;
From heaven high to chase the chearelesse dark,
With merry note her loud salutes the mounting lark.
Then freshly up arose the doughtie knight,
All healed of his hurts and wounds wide,
And did himself to battle ready dight;
Whose early foe awaiting him beside
To have deuourd, so soon as day he spyde,
When now he saw himself so freshly rear,
As if late fight had naught him damnifyde,
He woxe dismayed, and began his fate to fear;
Nathlesse with wonted rage he him advanced near.
And in his first encounter, gaping wide,
He thought attonce him to have swallowd quight,
And rusht upon him with outrageous pride;
Who him r'encountring fierce, as hawk in flight,
Perforce rebutted back. The weapon bright
Taking advantage of his open iaw,
Ran through his mouth with so importune might,
That deep emperst his darksome hollow maw,
And back retyrd, his life blood forth with all did draw.
So down he fell, and forth his life did breath,
That vanished into smoke and clouds swift;
So down he fell, that the earth him underneath
Did groan, as feeble so great load to lift;
So down he fell, as an huge rockie clift,
Whose false foundation waves have washed away,
With dreadful poyse is from the mayneland rift,
And rolling down, great Neptune does dismay;
So down he fell, and like an heaped mountain lay.
The knight himself even trembled at his fall,
So huge and horrible a mass it seemed;
And his dear Lady, that beheld it all,
Durst not approach for dread, which she misdeem'd,
But yet at last, when as the direful feend
She saw not stir, off-shaking vain affright,
She nigher drew, and saw that joyous end:
Then God she praysd, and thankt her faithful knight,
That had atchieu'd so great a conquest by his might.
Cant. XII.
Fair Vna to the Redcrosse knight
betrouthed is with joy:
Though false Duessa it to bar
her false sleights do employ.
BEhold I see the haven nigh at hand,
To which I mean my weary course to bend;
Vere the maine shete, and bear up with the land,
The which before is fairly to be kend,
And seems safe from storms, that may offend;
There this fair virgin weary of her way
Must landed be, now at her iourneyes end:
There eke my feeble bark a while may stay,
Till merry wind and weather call her thence away.
Scarsely had Phoebus in the glooming East
Yet harnessed his firie-footed teeme,
Ne reard above the earth his flaming creast,
When the last deadly smoke aloft did steeme,
That sign of last outbreathed life did seem,
Unto the watchman on the castle wall;
Who thereby dead that balefull Beast did deem,
And to his Lord and Lady loud began call,
To tell, how he had seen the Dragons fatal fall,
Vprose with hasty joy, and feeble speed
That aged Sire, the Lord of all that land,
And looked forth, to weet, if true indeed
Those tidings were, as he did understand,
Which whenas true by trial he out found,
He bad to open wide his brazen gate,
Which long time had been shut, and out of hond
Proclaimed joy and peace through all his state;
For dead now was their foe, which them forrayed late.
Then began triumphant Trompets sound on hie,
That sent to heaven the ecchoed report
Of their new joy, and happy victory
Against him, that had them long oppressed with tort,
And fast imprisoned in sieged fort.
Then all the people, as in solemn feast,
To him assembled with one full consort,
Rejoicing at the fall of that great beast,
From whose eternal bondage now they were releast.
Forth came that ancient Lord and aged Queen,
Arayd in antique robes down to the ground,
And sad habiliments right well beseene;
A noble crew about them waited round
Of sage and sober Peers, all gravely gownd;
Whom far before did march a goodly band
Of tall young men, all hable arms to sownd,
But now they laurel branches bore in hand;
Glad sign of victory and peace in all their land.
Unto that doughtie Conqueror they came,
And him before themselves prostrating low,
Their Lord and Patron loud did him proclaim,
And at his feet their laurel boughs did throw.
Soon after them all dancing on a row
The comely virgins came, with girlands dight,
As fresh as flowers in meadow green do grow,
When morning deaw upon their leaves does light:
And in their hands sweet Timbrels all vpheld on hight.
And them before, the fry of children young
Their wanton sports and childish mirth did play,
And to the Maidens sounding tymbrels sung
In well attuned notes, a joyous lay,
And made delightful music all the way,
Until they came, where that fair virgin stood;
As fair Diana in fresh summers day,
Beholds her Nymphs, enraung'd in shadie wood,
Some wrestle, some do run, some bathe in crystal flood.
So she beheld those maidens meriment
With, cheerful view; who when to her they came,
Themselves to ground with gracious humblesse bent,
And her adored by honorable name,
Lifting to heaven her everlasting fame:
Then on her head they set a girland green,
And crowned her twixt earnest and twixt game;
Who in her selfe-resemblance well beseene,
Did seem such, as she was, a goodly maiden Queen.
And after, all the rascal many ran,
Heaped together in rude rablement,
To see the face of that victorious man:
Whom all admired, as from heaven sent,
And gazd upon with gaping wonderment.
But when they came, where that dead Dragon lay,
Stretched on the ground in monstrons large extent,
The sight with idle fear did them dismay,
Ne durst approach him nigh, to touch, or once assay.
Some feared, and fled; some feared and well it faynd;
One that would wiser seem, then all the rest,
Warnd him not touch, for yet perhaps remaynd
Some lingering life within his hollow breast,
Or in his womb might lurk some hidden nest
Of many Dragonets, his fruitful seed;
Another said, that in his eyes did rest
Yet sparckling fire, and bad thereof take heed;
Another said, he saw him move his eyes indeed.
One mother, when as her foolehardie child
Did come too near, and with his talants play,
Half dead through fear, her little babe reuyld,
And to her gossips began in counsel say;
How can I tell, but that his talents may
Yet scratch my son, or rend his tender hand?
So diversely themselves in vain they fray;
Whiles some more bold, to measure him nigh stand,
To prove how many acres he did spread of land.
Thus flocked all the folk him round about,
The whiles that hoarie king, with all his train,
Being arrived, where that champion stout
After his foes defeasance did remain,
Him goodly greetes, and fair does entertain,
With princely gifts of yuorie and gold,
And thousand thanks him yields for all his pain.
Then when his daughter dear he does behold,
Her dearly does embrace, and kisseth manifold.
And after to his Palace he them brings,
With shaumes, and trompets, and with Clarions sweet;
And all the way the joyous people sings,
And with their garments strowes the paued street:
Whence mounting up, they find purueyance meet
Of all, that royal Princes court became,
And all the floor was underneath their feet
Bespred with costly scarlot of great name,
On which they lowly sit, and fitting purpose frame.
What needs me tell their feast and goodly guize,
In which was nothing riotous nor vain?
What needs of dainty dishes to deuize,
Of comely services, or courtly train?
My narrow leaves cannot in them contain
The large discourse of royal Princes state.
Yet was their manner then but bare and plain:
For th'antique world excess and pride did hate;
Such proud luxurious pomp is swollen up but late.
Then when with meats and drinks of every kind
Their fervent appetites they quenched had,
That ancient Lord began fit occasion find,
Of strange adventures, and of perils sad,
Which in his travel him befallen had,
For to demand of his renowned guest:
Who then with vtt'rance grave, and countenance sad,
From point to point, as is before expressed,
Discourst his voyage long, according his request.
Great pleasures mixed with pitiful regard,
That godly King and Queen did passionate,
Whiles they his pitiful adventures heard,
That often they did lament his lucklesse state,
And often blame the too importune fate,
That heapd on him so many wrathful wreakes:
For never gentle knight, as he of late,
So tossed was in fortunes cruel freakes;
And all the while salt tears bedeawd the hearers cheaks.
Then said the royal Pere in sober wise;
Dear Son, great been the evils, which ye bore
From first to last in your late enterprise,
That I note, whether praise, or pity more:
For never living man, I ween, so sore
In sea of deadly dangers was distressed;
But since now safe ye seized have the shore,
And well arrived are, (high God be blessed)
Let us deuize of ease and everlasting rest.
Ah dearest Lord, said then that doughty knight,
Of ease or rest I may not yet deuize;
For by the faith, which I to arms have plight,
I bounden am straight after this emprize,
As that your daughter can ye well aduize,
Back to return to that great Faerie Queen,
And her to serve six years in warlike wize,
Against that proud Pynim king, that works her teene:
Therefore I ought crave pardon, till I there have been.
Unhappy falls that hard necessity,
(Quoth he) the troubler of my happy peace,
And vowed foe of my felicity;
Ne I against the same can justly preace:
But since that band ye cannot now release,
Nor done undo; (for vows may not be vain)
Soon as the term of those six years shall cease,
Ye then shall hither back return again,
The marriage to accomplish vowed betwixt you twain.
Which for my part I covet to perform,
In sort as through the world I did proclaim,
That who so killed that monster most deforme,
And him in hardy battle overcame,
Should have mine only daughter to his Dame,
And of my kingdom heir apparaunt be:
Therefore since now to thee perteines the same,
By dew desert of noble cheualree,
Both daughter and eke kingdom. lo I yield to thee.
Then forth he called that his daughter fair,
The fairest Vn' his only daughter dear,
His only daughter, and his only heir;
Who forth proceeding with sad sober cheer,
As bright as does the morning star appear
Out of the East, with flaming locks bedight,
To tell the dawning day is dawning near,
And to the world does bring long wished light;
So fair and fresh that Lady showed her self in sight.
So fair and fresh, as freshest flower in May;
For she had laid her mournful stole aside,
And widow-like sad wimple thrown away,
Wherewith her heaunnly beauty she did hide,
Whiles on her weary journey she did ride;
And on her now a garment she did wear,
All lilly white, withoutten spot, or pride,
That seemd like silk and silver wouen near,
But neither silk nor silver therein did appear.
The blazing brightness of her beauties beam,
And glorious light of her sunshyny face
To tell, were as to strive against the stream.
My ragged rimes are all too rude and bace,
Her heavenly lineaments for to enchace.
Ne wonder; for her own dear loved knight,
All were she daily with himself in place,
Did wonder much at her celestial sight:
Often had he seen her fair, but never so fair dight.
So fairly dight, when she in presence came,
She to her Sire made humble reverence,
And bowed low, that her right well became,
And added grace unto her excellence:
Who with great wisdom, and grave eloquence
Thus began to say. But ear he thus had said,
With flying speed, and seeming great pretense,
Came running in, much like a man dismayed,
A Messenger with letters, which his message said.
All in the open hall amazed stood,
At suddeinnesse of that unwary sight,
And wondered at his breathless hasty mood.
But he for naught would stay his passage right,
Till fast before the king he did alight;
Where falling flat, great humblesse he did make,
And kissed the ground, whereon his foot was pight;
Then to his hands that writ he did betake,
Which he disclosing, red thus, as the paper spoke.
To thee, most mighty king of Eden fair,
Her greeting sends in these sad lines addressed,
The woeful daughter, and forsaken heir
Of that great Emperor of all the West;
And bids thee be aduized for the best,
Ere thou thy daughter linck in holy band
Of wedlock to that new unknown guest:
For he already plighted his right hand
Unto another love, and to another land.
To me sad maid, or rather widow sad,
He was affiaunced long time before,
And sacred pledges he both gave, and had,
False erraunt knight, infamous, and forswore:
Witness the burning Altars, which he swore,
And guilty heavens of his bold perjury,
Which though he has polluted often and yore,
Yet I to them for judgment just do fly,
And them conjure t'auenge this shameful injury.
Therefore since mine he is, or free or bond,
Or false or true, or living or else dead,
Withhold, O sovereign Prince, your hasty hond
From knitting league with him, I you aread;
Ne ween my right with strength adowne to tread,
Through weakness of my widowhed, or woe:
For truth is strong, his rightful cause to plead,
And shall find friends, if need requires so,
So bids thee well to fare, Thy neither friend, nor foe, Fidessa.
When he these bitter biting words had red,
The tidings strange did him abashed make,
That still he sat long time astonished
As in great muse, ne word to creature spoke.
At last his solemn silence thus he brake,
With doubtful eyes fast fixed on his guest;
Redoubted knight, that for mine only sake
Thy life and honor late aduenturest,
Let naught be hid from me, that ought to be expressed.
What mean these bloody vows, and idle threats,
Thrown out from womanish impatient mind?
What heavens? what altars? what enraged heates
Here heaped up with terms of love unkind,
My conscience clear with guilty bands would bind?
High God be witness, that I guiltless ame.
But if your self, Sir knight, ye faulty find,
Or wrapped be in loves of former Dame,
With crime do not it cover, but disclose the same.
To whom the Redcrosse knight this answer sent,
My Lord, my King, be naught hereat dismayed,
Till well ye wot by grave intendiment,
What woman, and wherefore does me upbraid
With breach of love, and loyalty betrayed.
It was in my mishaps, as hitherward
I lately traueild, that unawares I strayd
Out of my way, through perils strange and hard;
That day should fail me, ere I had them all declard.
There did I find, or rather I was found
Of this false woman, that Fidessa hight,
Fidessa hight the falsest Dame on ground,
Most false Duessa, royal richly dight.
That easy was to inuegle weaker sight:
Who by her wicked arts, and wily skill,
Too false and strong for earthly skill or might,
Vmwares me wrought'vnto her wicked will,
And to my foe betrayed, when least I feared ill.
Then stepped forth the goodly royal Maid,
And on the ground her self prostrating low,
With sober countenance thus to him said;
O pardon me, my sovereign Lord, to show
The secret treasons, which of late I know
To have been wroght by that false sorceresse,
She only she it is, that erst did throw
This gentle knight into so great distress,
That death him did awaite in daily wretchedness.
And now it seems, that she suborned has
This crafty messenger with letters vain,
To work new woe and improuided scath,
By breaking of the band betwixt us twain;
Wherein she used has the practicke pain
Of this false footman, clokt with simpleness,
Whom if ye please for to discover plain,
Ye shall him Archimago find, I guess,
The falsest man alive; woe tries shall find no less.
The king was greatly moved at her speech,
And all with suddein indignation freight,
Bad on that Messenger rude hands to reach.
Eftsoons the Card, which on his state did wait,
Attacht that faitor false, and bound him strait:
Who seeming sorely chauffed at his band,
As chained Bear, whom cruel dogs do bait,
With idle force did feign them to withstand,
And often semblaunce made to escape out of their hand.
But they him laid full low in dungeon deep,
And bound him hand and foot with iron chains,
And with continual watch did warely keep;
Who then would think, that by his subtle trains
He could escape foul death or deadly pains?
Thus when that Princes wrath was pacifide
He began renew the late forbidden banes,
And to the knight his daughter dear he tide,
With sacred rites and vows for ever to abide.
His own two hands the holy knots did knit,
That none but death for ever can divide;
His own two hands, for such a turn most fit,
The housling fire did kindle and provide,
And holy water thereon sprinkled wide;
At which the bushy Teade a groom did light,
And sacred lamp in secret chamber hide,
Where it should not be quenched day nor night,
For fear of evil fates, but burnen ever bright.
Then began they sprinckle all the posts with wine,
And made great feast to solemnize that day;
They all perfumde with frankencense divine,
And precious odours fetched from far away,
That all the house did sweat with great array:
And all the while sweet Music did apply
Her curious skill, the warbling notes to play,
To drive away the dull Melancholy;
The whiles one sung a song of love and iollity.
During the which there was an heavenly noise
Heard sound through all the Palace pleasantly,
Like as it had been many an Angels voice,
Singing before the eternal majesty,
In their trinall triplicities on hye;
Yet wist no creature, whence that heavenly sweet
Proceeded, yet eachone felt secretly
Himself thereby reft of his senses meet,
And ravished with rare impression in his sprite.
Great joy was made that day of young and old,
And solemn feast proclaimd throughout the land,
That their exceeding merth may not be told:
Suffice it hear by signs to understand
The usual joys at knitting of loves band.
Thrice happy man the knight himself did hold,
Possessed of his Ladies heart and hand,
And ever, when his eye did her behold,
Her heart did seem to melt in pleasures manifold.
Her joyous presence and sweet company
In full content he there did long enjoy,
Ne wicked envy, ne vile gealosy
His dear delights were able to annoy:
Yet swimming in that sea of blisfull joy,
He naught forgot, how he whilome had sworn,
In case he could that monstrous beast destroy,
Unto his Farie Queen back to return:
The which he shortly did, and Vna left to mourn.
Now strike your sails ye jolly Mariners,
For we be come unto a quiet rode,
Where we must land some of our passengers,
And light this weary vessel of her lode.
Here she a while may make her safe abode,
Till she repaired have her tackles spent,
And wants supplide. And then again abroad
On the long voyage whereto she is bent:
Well may she speed and fairly finish her intent.
FINIS LIB. I.

THE SECOND BOOK OF THE FAERIE QVEENE. Containing, THE LEGEND OF SIR GVYON, OR
Of Temperaunce.
RIght well I wot most mighty Sovereign,
That all this famous antique history,
Of some th'aboundance of an idle brain
Will judged be, and painted forgery,
Rather then matter of just memory,
Since none, that breaths living air, does know,
Where is that happy land of Faery,
Which I so much do vaunt, yet no where show,
But vouch antiquities, which no body can know.
But let that man with better sense aduize,
That of the world least part to us is red:
And daily how through hardy enterprise,
Many great Regions are discovered,
Which to late age were never mentioned.
Who ever heard of th'Indian Peru?
Or who in venturous vessel measured
The Amazons huge river now found true?
Or fruitfullest Virginia who did ever view?
Yet all these were, when no man did them know;
Yet have from wisest ages hidden been:
And later times things more unknown shall show.
Why then should witless man so much misweene
That nothing is, but that which he has seen?
What if within the Moons fair shining sphere?
What if in every other star unseen
Of other worlds he happily should hear?
He wonder would much more: yet such to some appear.
Of Faerie land yet if he more inquire,
By certain signs here set in sundry place
He may it find; ne let him then admire,
But yield his sense to be too blunt and bace,
That note without an hound fine footing trace.
And thou, O fairest Princess under sky,
In this fair mirrhour may behold thy face,
And thine own realms in land of Faery,
And in this antique Image thy great auncestry.
The which O pardon me thus to enfold
In covert vele, and wrap in shadows light,
That feeble eyes your glory may behold,
Which else could not endure those beams bright,
But would be dazzled with exceeding light.
O pardon, and vonchsafe with patient ear
The brave adventures of this Faery knight
The good Sir Guyon graciously to hear,
In whom great rule of Temp'raunce goodly does appear.
Cant. I.
Guyon by Archimage abusd,
The Redcrosse knight awaytes,
Finds Mordant and Amauia slain
With pleasures poisoned baytes.
THat cunning Architect of cancred guile,
Whom Princes late displeasure left in bands,
For falsed letters and suborned wile,
Soon as the Redcrosse knight he understands,
To been departed out of Eden lands,
To serve again his sovereign Elfin Queen,
His arts he moves, and out of caytiues hands
Himself he frees by secret means unseen;
His shackles empty left, him self escaped cleene.
And forth he fares full of malicious mind,
To worken mischief and auenging woe,
Where ever he that godly knight may find,
His only heart sore, and his only foe,
Since Vna now he algates must forgo,
Whom his victorious hands did erst restore
To natives crown and kingdom late ygoe:
Where she enioyes sure peace for evermore,
As weather-beaten ship arrived on happy shore.
Him therefore now the object of his spite
And deadly food he makes: him to offend
By forged treason, or by open fight
He seeks, of all his drift the aimed end:
Thereto his subtle engines he does bend
His practick wit, and his fair filed tongue,
With thousand other sleights: for well he kend,
His credit now in doubtful ballaunce hong;
For hardly could be hurt, who was already stong.
Still as he went, he crafty stales did lay.
With cunning trains him to entrap unawares,
And privy spials plast in all his way,
To weete what course he takes, and how he fares;
To ketch him at a vantage in his snares.
By trial of his former harms and cares,
But now so wise and wary was the knight
That he descride, and shonned still his slight:
The fish that once was caught, new bait will hardly bite.
Nath'lesse th'Enchaunter would not spare his pain,
In hope to win occasion to his will;
Which when he long awaited had in vain,
He chaungd his mind from one to other ill:
For to all good he enemy was still.
Upon the way him fortuned to meet,
Fair marching underneath a shady hill,
A goodly knight, all armd in harness meet,
That from his head no place appeared to his feet.
His carriage was full comely and upright,
His countenance demure and temperate,
But yet so stern and terrible in sight,
That cheard his friends, and did his foes amate:
He was an Elsin borne of noble state,
And mickle worship in his native land;
Well could he tourney and in lists debate,
And knighthood took of good Sir Huons hand,
When with king Oberon he came to Faerie land.
Him als accompanyd upon the way
A comely Palmer, clad in black attire,
Of ripest years, and hairs all hoarie gray,
That with a staff his feeble steps did stire,
Least his long way his aged limbs should tire:
And if by looks one may the mind aread,
He seemd to be a sage and sober sire,
And ever with slow pace the knight did lead,
Who taught his trampling steed with equal steps to tread.
Such whenas Archimago them did view,
He weened well to work some uncouth wile,
Estsoones vntwisting his deceiptfull clew,
He began to weaue a web of wicked guile,
And with a fair countenance and flattring style,
To them approaching, thus the knight bespake:
Fair son of Mars, that seek with warlike spoil.
And great atchieu'ments great your self to make,
Vouchsafe to stay your steed for humble misers sake.
He stayed his steed for humble misers sake,
And bad tell on the tenor of his plaint;
Who feigning then in every limb to quake,
Through inward fear, and seeming pale and faint
With piteous moan his percing speech began paint;
Dear Lady how shall I declare thy case,
Whom late I left in langourous constraint?
Would God thy self now present were in place,
To tell this ruefull tale; thy sight could win thee grace.
Or rather would, O would it so had chaunst,
That you, most noble Sir, had present been,
When that lewd ribauld with vile lust aduaunst
Laid first his filthy hands on virgin cleene,
To spoil her dainty corse so fair and sheene,
As on the earth, great mother of us all,
With living eye more fair was never seen,
Of chastity and honor virginal:
Witness ye heavens, whom she in vain to help did call.
How may it be, (said then the knight half wroth,)
That knight should knighthood ever so have shent?
None but that saw (quoth he) would ween for troth,
How shamefully that Maid he did torment.
Her looser golden locks he rudely rent,
And drew her on the ground, and his sharp sword,
Against her snowy breast be fiercely bent,
And threatened death with many a bloody word;
Tongue hates to tell the rest, that eye to see abhord.
Therewith amoued from his sober mood,
And lives he yet (said he) that wrought this act,
And done the heavens afford him vital food?
He lives, (quoth he) and boasts of the fact,
Ne yet has any knight his courage cracked.
Where may that treachour then (said he) be found,
Or by what means may I his footing tract?
That shall I show (said he) as sure, as hound
The stricke^ Dear does challenge by the bleeding wound.
He staid not longer talk, but with fierce ire
And zealous have away is quickly gone
To seek that knight, where him that crafty Squire
Supposd to be. They do arrive anon,
Where sat a gentle Lady all alone,
With garments rent, and hair discheueled,
Wringing her hands, and making piteous moan;
Her swollen eyes were much disfigured,
And her fair face with tears was fowly blubbered.
The knight approaching nigh, thus to her said,
Fair Lady, through foul sorrow ill bedight,
Great pity is to see you thus dismayed,
And mar the blossom of your beauty bright:
For thy appease your grief and heavy plight,
And tell the cause of your conceived pain.
For if he live, that has you done despite;
He shall you do due recompense again,
Or else his wrong with greater puissance maintain.
Which when she heard, as in despightfull wise,
She wilfully her sorrow did augment,
And offered hope of comfort did despise:
Her golden locks most cruelly she rent,
And scratcht her face with ghastly dreriment,
Ne would she speak, ne see, ne yet be seen,
But hid her visage, and her head down bent,
Either for grievous shame, or for great teene,
As if her heart with sorrow had transfixed been.
Till her that Squire bespake, Madame my liefe,
For Gods dear love be not so wilful bent,
But do vouchsafe now to receive relief,
The which good fortune does to you present.
For what boots it to weep and to wayment,
When ill is chaunst, but does the ill increase,
And the weak mind with double woe torment?
When she her Squire heard speak, she began appease
Her voluntary pain, and feel some secret ease.
Eftsoone she said, Ah gentle trusty Squire,
What comfort can I woeful wretch conceive,
Or why should ever I henceforth desire,
To see fair heavens face, and life not leave,
Since that false Traitor did my honor reaue?
False traitor certes (said the Faerie knight)
I read the man, that ever would deceive
A gentle Lady, or her wrong through might:
Death were too little pain for such a foul despite.
But now, fair Lady, comfort to you make,
And read, who has ye wrought this shameful plight.
That short revenge the man may overtake,
Where so he be, and soon upon him light.
Certes (said she) I wot not how he hight,
But under him a gray steed did he wield,
Whose sides with dapled circles weren dight;
Upright he rode, and in his silver shield
He bore a bloody Cross, that quartred all the field.
Now by my head (said Guyon) much I muse,
How that same knight should do so foul amiss,
Or ever gentle Damzell so abuse:
For may I boldly say, he surely is
A right good knight, and true of word ywis:
I present was, and can it witness well,
When arms he swore, and straight did enterpris
Th'aduenture of the Errant damozell,
In which he has great glory won, as I hear tell.
Nathlesse he shortly shall again be tryde,
And fairly quite him of th'imputed blame,
Else be ye sure he dearly shall abide,
Or make you good amendment for the same:
All wrongs have mends, but no amends of shame.
Now therefore Lady, rise out of your pain,
And see the saluing of your blotted name.
Full loath she seemd thereto, but yet did feign;
For she was inly glad her purpose so to gain.
Her purpose was not such, as she did feign,
Ne yet her person such, as it was seen,
But under simple show and semblant plain
Lurckt false Duessa secretly unseen,
As a chaste Virgin, that had wronged been:
So had false Archimago her disguisd,
To cloak her guile with sorrow and sad teene;
And eke himself had craftily deuisd
To be her Squire, and do her service well aguisd.
Her late forlorn and naked he had found,
Where she did wander in waste wilderness,
Lurking in rocks and caves far under ground,
And with green mode cou'ring her nakedness,
To hide her shame and loathly filthiness;
Since her Prince Arthur of proud ornaments
And borrowed beauty spoyld. Her nathelesse
Th'enchaunter finding fit for his intents,
Did thus reuest, and decked with due habiliments.
For all he did, was to deceive good knights,
And draw them from pursuit of praise and fame,
To slug in sloth and sensual delights,
And end their days with irrenowmed shame.
And now exceeding grief him overcame,
To see the Redcrosse thus advanced hye;
Therefore this crafty engine he did frame,
Against his praise to stir up enmitye
Ofsuch, as virtues like mote unto him allye.
So now he Guyon guides an uncouth way
Through woods and mountains, till they came at last
Into a pleasant dale, that lowly lay
Betwixt two hills, whose high heads ouerplast,
The valley did with cool shade ouercast;
Through midst thereof a little river rold,
By which there sat a knight with helm vnlast,
Himself refreshing with the liquid cold,
After his travel long, and labors manifold.
Lo yonder he, cryde Archimage alowd,
That wrought the shameful fast, which I did show;
And now he does himself in secret shroud,
To fly the vengeance for his outrage dew;
But vain: for ye shall dearly do him rue,
So God ye speed, and send you good success;
Which we far off will here abide to view.
So they him left, inflamed with wrathfulnesse,
That straight against that knight his spear he did address.
Who seeing him from far so fierce to prick,
His warlike arms about him began embrace,
And in the rest his ready spear did stick;
Tho when as still he saw him toward pace,
He began rencounter him in equal race.
They been ymet, both ready to affrap,
When suddenly that warrriour began abace
His threatened spear, as if some new mishap
Had him betidde, or hidden danger did entrap.
And cryde, Mercy Sir knight, and mercy Lord,
For mine offense and heedlesse hardiment,
That had almost committed crime abhord,
And with reproachful shame mine honor shent,
Whiles cursed steel against that badge I bent,
The sacred badge of my Redeemers death,
Which on your shield is set for ornament:
But his fierce foe his steed could stay uneath,
Who pricked with courage kene, did cruel battle breath.
But when he heard him speak, straight way he knew
His error, and himself inclyning said;
Ah dear Sir Guyon, well becomes you,
But me behooves rather to upbraid,
Whose hasty hand so far from reason strayd,
That almost it did heinous violence
On that fair image of that heavenly Maid,
That decks and arms your shield with fair defense:
Your court'sie takes on you another due offense.
So been they both atone, and done vpreare
Their beuers bright, each other for to greet;
Goodly comportance each to other bear,
And entertain themselves with court'sies meet.
Then said the Redcrosse knight, Now mote I weet,
Sir Guyon, why with so fierce saliaunce,
And fell intent ye did at erst me meet;
For since I know your goodly governance,
Great cause, I ween, you guided, or some uncouth chance.
Certes (said he) well mote I shame to tell
The fond encheason, that me hither led.
A false infamous faitour late befell
Me for to meet, that seemed ill bested,
And playnd of grievous outrage, which he red
A knight had wrought against a Lady gent;
Which to avenge, he to this place me led,
Where you he made the mark of his intent,
And now is fled; foul shame him follow, where he went.
So can he turn his earnest unto game,
Through goodly handing and wise temperance.
By this his aged guide in presence came;
Who soon as on that knight his eye did glance,
Eft soones of him had perfect cognizance,
Since him in Faerie court he late auizd;
And said, fair son, God give you happy chance,
And that dear Cross upon your shield deuizd,
Wherewith above all knights ye goodly seem aguizd.
Joy may you have, and everlasting fame,
Of late most hard atchieu'ment by you done,
For which enrolled is your glorious name
In heavenly Registers above the Sun,
Where you a Saint with Saints your seat have won:
But wretched we, where ye have left your mark,
Must now anew begin, like race to run;
God guide thee, Guyon, well to end thy warke,
And to the wished haven bring thy weary bark.
Palmer, (him answered the Redcrosse knight)
His be the praise, that this atchieu'ment wrought,
Who made my hand the organ of his might;
More then goodwill to me attribute naught:
For all I did, I did but as I ought.
But you, fair Sir, whose pageant next ensewes,
Well mote ye thee, as well can wish your thought,
That home ye may report these happy news;
For well ye worthy been for worth and gentle thewes.
So courteous conge both did give and take,
With right hands plighted, pledges of good will.
Then Guyon forward began his voyage make,
With his black Palmer, that him guided still.
Still he him guided over dale and hill,
And with his steedie staff did point his way:
His race with reason, and with words his will,
From foul intemperance he often did stay,
And suffered not in wrath his hasty steps to stray.
In this fair wize they traueild long yfere,
Through many hard assayes, which did betide;
Of which he honor still away did bear,
And spread his glory through all countries wide.
At last as chaunst them by a forest side
To pass, for succor from the scorching ray,
They heard a ruefull voice, that dearnly cride
With percing shriekes, and many a doleful lay;
Which to attend, a while their forward steps they stay.
But if that careless heavens (quoth she) despise
The doom of just revenge, and take delight
To see sad pageants of men's miseries,
As bound by them to live in lives despite,
Yet can they not warn death from wretched wight.
Come then, come soon, come sweetest death to me,
And take away this long lent loathed light:
Sharp be thy wounds, but sweet the medicines be,
That long captiued souls from weary thraldom free.
But thou, sweet Babe, whom frowning froward fate
Has made sad witness of thy fathers fall,
Since heaven thee deignes to hold in living state,
Long may thou live, and better thrive withal,
Then to thy lucklesse parents did befall:
Live thou, and to thy mother dead attest,
That clear she did from blemish criminal;
Thy little hands embrewd in bleeding breast
Lo I for pledges leave. So give me leave to rest.
With that a deadly shrieke she forth did throw,
That through the wood reecchoed again,
And after gave a groan so deep and low,
That seemd her tender heart was rent in twain,
Or thrild with point of thorough piercing pain;
As gentle Hynd, whose sides with cruel steel
Through launched, forth her bleeding life does rain,
Whiles the sad pang approaching she does feel,
Brayes out her latest breath, and up her eyes does seele.
Which when that warrior heard, dismounting straict
From his tall steed, he rusht into the thick,
And soon arrived, where that sad pourtraict
Of death and labor lay, half dead, half quick,
In whose white alabaster breast did stick
A cruel knife, that made a griesly wound,
From which forth gusht a streme of gorebloud thick,
That all her goodly garments staind around,
And into a deep sanguine did the grassie ground.
Pitiful spectacle of deadly smart,
Beside a bubbling fountain low she lay,
Which she increased with her bleeding heart,
And the clean waves with purple gold did ray;
Als in her lap a lovely babe did play
His cruel sport, in stead of sorrow dew;
For in her streaming blood he did embay
His little hands, and tender joints embrew;
Pitiful spectacle, as ever eye did view.
Besides them both, upon the soiled gras
The dead corse of an armed knight was spread,
Whose armor all with blood besprinckled was;
His ruddie lips did smile, and rosy red
Did paint his cheerful cheeks, yet being ded,
Seemd to have been a goodly personage,
Now in his freshest flower of lusty head,
Fit to inflame fair Lady with loves rage,
But that fires fate did crop the blossom of his age.
Whom when the good Sir Guyon did behold,
His heart began wexe as stark, as marble stone,
And his fresh blood did frieze with fearful cold,
That all his senses seemd bereft atone,
At last his mighty ghost began deep to groan,
As Lion grudging in his great disdain,
Mournes inwardly, and makes to himself moan;
Till ruth and frail affection did constrain,
His stout courage to stoop, and show his inward pain.
Out of her gored wound the cruel steel
He lightly snatched, and did the floudgate stop
With his fair garment: then began softly feel
Her feeble pulse, to prove if any drop
Of living blood yet in her veins did hop;
Which when he felt to move, he hoped fair
To call back life to her forsaken shop;
So well he did her deadly wounds repair,
That at the last she began to breath out living air.
Which he perceiving greatly began rejoice,
And goodly counsel, that for wounded heart
Is meetest medicine, tempred with sweet voice;
Ay me, dear Lady, which the image art
Of ruefull pity, and impatient smart,
What direful chance, armd with revenging fate,
Or cursed hand has played this cruel part,
Thus foul to hasten your untimely date;
Speak, O dear Lady speak: help never comes too late.
Therewith her dim eie-lids she up began rear,
On which the drery death did sit, as sad
As lump of lead, and made dark clouds appear;
But when as him all in bright armor clad
Before her standing she espied had,
As one out of a deadly dream affright,
She weakly started, yet she nothing drad:
Straight down again her self in great despite,
She groueling threw to ground, as hating life and light.
The gentle knight her soon with careful pain
Vplifted light, and softly did uphold:
Thrice he her reard, and thrice she sunk again,
Till he his arms about her sides began fold,
And to her said; Yet if the stony cold
Have not all seized on your frozen heart,
Let one word fall that may your grief unfold,
And tell the secret of your mortal smart;
He often finds present help, who does his grief impart.
Then casting up a deadly look, full low,
She sight from bottom of her wounded breast,
And after, many bitter throbs did throw
With lips full pale and foltring tongue oppressed,
These words she breathed forth from riuen chest;
Leave, ah leave off, what ever wight thou be,
To let a weary wretch from her dew rest,
And trouble dying souls tranquilitee.
Take not away now got, which none would give to me.
Ah far be it (said he) Dear dame fro me,
To hinder soul from her desired rest,
Or hold sad life in long captiuitee:
For all I seek, is but to have redrest
The bitter pangs, that does your heart infest.
Tell then, o Lady tell, what fatal priefe
Has with so huge misfortune you oppressed?
That I may cast to compass your relief,
Or die with you in sorrow, and partake your grief.
With feeble hands then stretched forth on hye,
As heaven accusing guilty of her death,
And with dry drops congealed in her eye,
In these sad words she spent her utmost breath:
Hear then, o man, the sorrows that uneath
My tongue can tell, so far all sense they pas:
Lo this dead corpse, that lies here underneath,
The gentlest knight, that ever on green gras
Gay steed with spurs did prick, the good Sir Mortdant was.
Was, (ay the while, that he is not so now)
My Lord my love; my dear Lord, my dear love,
So long as heavens just with equal brow,
Vouchsafed to behold us from above,
One day when him high courage did emmoue,
As wont ye knights to seek adventures wild,
He pricked forth, his puissant force to prove,
Me then he left enwombed of this child,
This lucklesse child, whom thus ye see with blood defild.
Him fortuned (hard fortune ye may guess)
To come, where vile Acrasia does won,
Acrasia a false enchaunteresse,
That many errant knights has foul fordonne:
Within a wandering Island, that does run
And stray in perilous gulf, her dwelling is,
Fair Sir, if ever there ye travel, shonne
The cursed land where many wend amiss,
And know it by the name; it hight the Bower of blis.
Her bliss is all in pleasure and delight,
Wherewith she makes her lovers drunken mad,
And then with words and weeds of wondrous might,
On them she works her will to uses bad:
My lifest Lord she thus beguiled had;
For he was flesh: (all flesh does frailty breed.)
Whom when I heard to been so ill bestad,
Weak wretch I wrapped my self in Palmers weed,
And cast to seek him forth through danger and great dreed.
Now had fair Cynthia by even tournes
Full measured three quarters of her year,
And thrice three times had filled her crooked horns,
When as my womb her burdein would forbear,
And bad me call Lucina to me near.
Lucina came: a manchild forth I brought:
The woods, the Nymphs, my bowres, my midwiues wear,
Hard help at need. So dear thee babe I bought,
Yet naught too dear I deemd, while so my dear I sought.
Him so I sought, and so at last I found,
Where him that witch had thralled to her will,
In chains of lust and lewd desires ybound,
And so transformed from his former skill,
That me he knew not, neither his own ill;
Till through wise handling and fair governance,
I him recured to a better will,
Purged from drugs of foul intemperance:
Then means I began devise for his deliverance.
Which when the vile Enchaunteresse perceived,
How that my Lord from her I would repriue,
With cup thus charmd, him parting she deceived;
Sad verse, give death to him that death does give,
And loss of love, to her that loves to live,
So soon as Bacchus with the Nymphe does lincke,
So parted we and on our journey drive,
Till coming to this well, he stoupt to drink:
The charm fulfild, dead suddenly he down did sincke.
Which when I wretch, Not one word more she said
But breaking off, the end for want of breath,
And slyding soft, as down to sleep her laid,
And ended all her woe in quiet death.
That seeing good Sir Guyon, could uneath
From tears abstain, for grief his heart did grate,
And from so heavy sight his head did wreath,
Accusing fortune, and too cruel fate,
Which plunged had fair Lady in so wretched state.
Then turning to his Palmer said, Old sire
Behold the image of mortality,
And feeble nature clothed with fleshly tire,
When raging passion with fierce tyranny
Robs reason of her due regalitie,
And makes it servant to her basest part:
The strong it weakens with infirmity,
And with bold fury arms the weakest heart;
The strong through pleasure soonest falls, the weak through smart.
But temperance (said he) with golden squire
Betwixt them both can measure out a mean,
Neither to melt in pleasures whot desire,
Nor fry in hartlesse grief and doleful teene.
Thrice happy man, who fares them both atweene:
But since this wretched woman overcome
Of anguish, rather then of crime has been,
Reserve her cause to her eternal doom,
And in the mean vouchsafe her honorable toombe.
Palmer (quoth he) death is an evil doom
To good and bad, the common Inn of rest;
But after death the trial is to come,
When best shall be to them, that lived best:
But both alike, when death has both suppressed,
Religious reverence does burial teene,
Which who so wants, wants so much of his rest:
For all so great shame after death I ween,
As self to dyen bad, unburied bad to been.
So both agree their bodies to engraue;
The great earthes womb they open to the sky,
And with sad Cypress seemly it embraue,
Then covering with a clod their closed eye,
They lay therein those corses tenderly,
And bid them sleep in everlasting peace.
But ere they did their utmost obsequy,
Sir Guyon more affection to increace,
Bynempt a sacred vow, which none should aye releace.
The dead knights sword out of his sheath he drew,
With which he cut a lock of all their hear,
Which meddling with their blood and earth, he threw
Into the grave, and began devoutly swear;
Such and such evil Godon Guyon rear,
And worse and worse young Orphane be thy pain,
If I or thou dew vengeance do forbear,
Till guilty blood her guerdon do obtain:
So shedding many tears, they closd the earth again.
Cant. II.
Babes bloody hands may not be clensd,
the face of golden Mean.
Her sisters two Extremities:
strive her to banish clean.
THus when Sir Guyon with his faithful guide
Had with due rites and dolorous lament
The end of their sad Tragedy vptyde,
The little babe up in his arms he hent;
Who with sweet pleasance and bold blandishment
Began smyle on them, that rather ought to weep,
As careless of his woe, or innocent
Of that was done, that ruth emperced deep
In that knights heart, and words with bitter tears did steep.
Ah lucklesse babe, borne under cruel star,
And in dead parents balefull ashes bred,
Full little weenest thou, what sorrows are
Left thee for portion of thy liuelihed,
Poor Orphane in the wide world scattered,
As budding branch rent from the native tree,
And thrown forth, till it be withered:
Such is the state of men: thus enter we
Into this life with woe, and end with miseree.
Then soft himself inclyning on his knee
Down to that well, did in the water ween
(So love does loath disdainful nicitee)
His guilty hands from bloody gore to cleene.
He washed them often and often, yet naught they been
For all his washing cleaner. Still he strove,
Yet still the little hands were bloody seen;
The which him into great amaz'ment drove,
And into diverse doubt his wavering wonder cloue.
He wist not whether blot of foul offense
Might not be purgd with water nor with bath;
Or that high God, in lieu of innocence,
Imprinted had that token of his wrath,
To show how sore bloudguiltinesse he hat'th;
Or that the charm and venim, which they druncke,
Their blood with secret filth infected has,
Being diffused through the senseless truncke,
That through the great contagion direful deadly stunck.
Whom thus at gaze, the Palmer began to board
With goodly reason, and thus fair bespake;
Ye been right hard amated, gracious Lord,
And of your ignorance great marvel make,
Whiles cause not well conceived ye mistake.
But know, that secret virtues are infusd
In every fountain, and in every lake,
Which who has skill them rightly to have chusd,
To proof of passing wonders has full often vsd.
Of those some were so from their sourse indewd
By great Dame Nature, from whose fruitful pap
Their welheads spring, and are with moisture deawd;
Which feeds each living plant with liquid sap,
And filles with flowers fair Floraes painted lap:
But other some by gift of later grace,
Or by good prayers, or by other hap,
Had virtue pourd into their waters bace,
And thenceforth were renowmd, and sought from place to place.
Such is this well, wrought by occasion strange,
Which to her Nymph befell. Upon a day,
As she the woods with bow and shafts did raunge,
The hartlesse Hind and Robucke to dismay,
Dan Faunus chaunst to meet her by the way,
And kindling fire at her fair burning eye,
Inflamed was to follow beauties chase,
And chaced her, that fast from him did fly;
As Hind from her, so she fled from her enemy.
At last when failing breath began to faint,
And saw no means to escape, of shame affrayd,
She set her down to weep for sore constraint,
And to Diana calling loud for aid,
Her dear besought, to let her dye a maid.
The goddess heard, and suddeine where she sat,
Welling out streams of tears, and quite dismayed
With stony fear of that rude rustic mate,
Transformd her to a stone from steadfast virgins state.
Lo now she is that stone, from those two heads,
As from two weeping eyes, fresh streams do flow,
Yet cold through fear, and old conceived dreads;
And yet the stone her semblance se^mes to show,
Shapt like a maid, that such ye may her know;
And yet her virtues in her water bide:
For it is chaste and pure, as purest snow,
Ne lets her waves with any filth he did,
But ever like her self unstained has been tryde.
From thence it comes, that this babes bloody hand
May not be clensd with water of this well:
Ne certes Sir strive you it to withstand,
But let them still be bloody, as befell,
That they his mothers innocence may tell,
As she bequeathd in her last testament;
That as a sacred Symbol it may dwell
In her sons flesh, to mind reuengement,
And be for all chaste Dames an endless moniment.
He hearkened to his reason, and the child
Vptaking, to the Palmer gave to bear;
But his sad fathers arms with blond defilde,
An heavy load himself did lightly rear,
And turning to that place, in which whyleare
He left his lofty steed with golden sell,
And goodly gorgeous barbes, him found not theare.
By other accident that erst befell,
He is conuaide, but how or where, here fits not tell.
Which when Sir Guyon saw, all were he wroth,
Yet algates mote he soft himself appease,
And fairly fare on foot, how ever loath;
His double burden did him sore disease.
So long they traueiled with little ease,
Till that at last they to a Castle came,
Built on a rock adjoining to the seas,
It was an ancient work of antique fame,
And wondrous strong by nature, and by skillful frame.
Therein three sisters dwelt of sundry sort,
The children of one sire by mothers three;
Who dying whylome did divide this fort
To them by equal shares in equal fee:
But strifull mind, and diverse qualitee
Drew them in parts, and each made others foe:
Still did they strive, and daily disagree;
The eldest did against the youngest go,
And both against the midst meant to worken woe.
Where when the knight arrived, he was right well
Received, as knight of so much worth became,
Of second sister, who did far excel
The other two; Medina was her name,
A sober sad, and comely courteous Dame;
Who rich arayd, and yet in modest guize,
In goodly garments, that her well became,
Fair marching forth in honorable wize,
Him at the threshold met, and well did enterprise.
She led him up into a goodly bower,
And comely courted with meet modesty,
Ne in her speech, ne in her hauiour,
Was lightness seen, or looser vanity,
But gracious womanhood, and gravity,
Above the reason of her youthly years:
Her golden locks she roundly did vptye
In breaded tramels, that no looser hears
Did out of order stray about her dainty ears.
Whilst she her self thus busily did frame,
Seemly to entertain her new-come guest,
News hereof to her other sisters came,
Who all this while were at their wanton rest,
Accourting each her friend with lavish fest:
They were two knights of perelesse puissance,
And famous far abroad for warlike gest,
Which to these Ladies love did countenance,
And to his mistress each himself strove to advance.
He that made love unto the eldest Dame,
Was hight Sir Huddibras, an hardy man;
Yet not so good of deeds, as great of name,
Which he by many rash adventures wan,
Since errant arms to sew he first began;
More huge in strength, then wise in works he was,
And reason with foole-hardize over ran;
Stern melancholy did his courage pas,
And was for terror more, all armd in shyning bras.
But he that loved the youngest, was Sans-loy,
He that fair Vna late foul outraged,
The most unruly, and the boldest boy,
That ever warlike weapons menaged,
And to all lawless lust encouraged,
Through strong opinion of his matchless might:
Ne ought he cared, whom he endamaged
By tortious wrong, or whom bereaved of right.
He now this Ladies champion chose for love to fight.
These two gay knights, vowed to so diverse loves,
Each other does envy with deadly hate,
And daily war against his foeman moves,
In hope to win more favor with his mate,
And the others pleasing service to abate,
To magnify his own. But when they heard,
How in that place strange knight arrived late,
Both knights and Ladies forth right angry fared,
And fiercely unto battle stern themselves prepared.
But ere they could proceed unto the place,
Where he abode, themselves at discord fell,
And cruel combat joined in middle space:
With horrible assault, and fury fell,
They heapt huge strokes, the scorned life to quell,
That all on uproar from her settled seat,
The house was raysd, and all that in did dwell;
Seemd that loud thunder with amazement great
Did rend the rattling skies with flames of fouldring heat.
The noise thereof calth forth that stranger knight,
To weet, what dreadful thing was there in hand;
Where when as two brave knights in bloody fight
With deadly rancour he enraunged fond,
His sunbroad shield about his wrest he bond,
And shyning blade vnsheathd, with which he ran
Unto that stead, their strife to understand;
And at his first arrival, them began
With goodly means to pacify, well as he can.
But they him spying, both with greedy forse
Attonce upon him ran, and him beset
With strokes of mortal steel without remorse,
And on his shield like iron sledges bet:
As when a Bear and Tygre being met
In cruel fight on lybicke Ocean wide,
Espy a traueiler with feet surbet,
Whom they in equal pray hope to divide,
They stint their strife, and him assail on every side.
But he, not like a weary traueilere,
Their sharp assault right bloody did rebut,
And suffered not their blows to byte him nere,
But with redoubled buffes them back did put:
Whose grieved minds, which choler did englut,
Against themselves turning their wrathful spite,
Began with new rage their shields to hew and cut;
But still when Guyon came to part their fight,
With heavy load on him they freshly began to smight.
As a tallship tossed in troublous seas,
Whom raging winds threatening to make the pray
Of the rough rocks, do diversely disease,
Meets two contrary billows by the way,
That her on either side do sore assay,
And boast to swallow her in greedy grave;
She scorning both their spights, does make wide way,
And with her breast breaking the fomy wave,
Does ride on both their backs, and fair her self does save.
So boldly he him bears, and rusheth forth
Between them both, by conduct of his blade
Wondrous great prowess and heroic worth
He showed that day, and rare ensample made,
When two so mighty warriors he dismade:
Attonce he wards and strikes, he takes and pays,
Now forced to yield, now forcing to invade,
Before, behind, and round about him lays:
So double was his pains, so double be his praise.
Strange sort of fight, three valiant knights to see
Three combats join in one, and to darraine
A triple war with triple enmitee,
All for their Ladies froward love to gain,
Which gotten was but hate. So love does rain
In stoutest minds, and makes monstrous war;
He makes war, he makes peace again,
And yet his peace is but continual jar:
O miserable men, that to him subject arre.
Whilst thus they mingled were in furious arms,
The fair Medina with her tresses torn,
And naked breast, in pity of their harms,
Emongst them ran, and falling them beforne,
Besought them by the womb, which them had borne,
And by the loves, which were to them most dear,
And by the knighthood, which they sure had sworn,
Their deadly cruel discord to forbear,
And to her just conditions of fair peace to hear.
But her two other sisters standing by,
Her loud gainsaid, and both their champion bad
Pursew the end of their strong enmity,
As ever of their loves they would be glad.
Yet she with pitthy words and counsel sad,
Still strove their stubborn rages to revoke,
That at the last suppressing fury mad,
They began abstain from dint of direful stroke,
And hearken to the sober speeches, which she spoke.
Ah puissaunt Lords, what cursed evil Spright,
Or fell Erinnys in your noble hearts,
Her hellish brond has kindled with despite,
And stird you up to work your wilful smarts?
Is this the joy of arms? be these the parts
Of glorious knighthood, after blood to thrust,
And not regard dew right and just deserts?
Vain is the vaunt, and victory unjust,
That more to mighty hands, the^ rightful cause does trust.
And were their rightful cause of difference,
Yet were not better, fair it to accord,
Then with blood guiltnesse to heap offense,
And mortal vengeance join to crime abhord?
O fly from wrath, fly, O my liefest Lord:
Sad be the sights, and bitter fruits of war,
And thousand furies wait on wrathful sword;
Ne ought the praise of prowess more does mar,
Then foul revenging rage, and base contentious jar.
But lovely concord, and most sacred peace
Does nourish virtue, and fast friendship breeds;
Weak she makes strong, and strong thing does increace,
Till it the pitch of highest praise exceeds:
Brave be her wars, and honorable deeds,
By which she triumphs over ire and pride,
And winnes an Olive girlond for her meeds:
Be therefore, O my dear Lords, pacifide,
And this misseeming discord meekely lay aside.
Her gracious words their rancour did appall,
And suncke so deep into their boiling breasts,
That down they let their cruel weapons fall,
And lowly did abase their lofty crests
To her fair presence, and discrete behests.
Then she began a treaty to procure,
And stablish terms betwixt both their requests,
That as a law for ever should endure;
Which to observe in word of knights they did assure.
Which to confirm, and fast to bind their league,
After their weary sweat and bloody toil,
She them besought, during their quiet treague,
Into her lodging to repair a while,
To rest themselves, and grace to reconcile.
They soon consent: so forth with her they fare,
Where they are well received, and made to spoil
Themselves of soiled arms, and to prepare
Their minds to pleasure, and their mouths to dainty fare.
And those two froward sisters, their fair loves
Came with them eke, all were they wondrous loath,
And fained cheer, as for the time behoues,
But could not color yet so well the troth,
But that their natures bad appeard in both:
For both did at their second sister grutch,
And inly grieve, as does an hidden moth
The inner garment fret, not th'vtter touch;
One thought their cheer too little, the other thought too mutch.
Elissa (so the eldest hight) did deem
Such entertainment base, ne ought would eat,
Ne ought would speak, but evermore did seem
As discontent for want of merth or meat;
No solace could her Paramour entreat
Her once to show, ne court, nor dalliance,
But with bent lowering brows, as she would threat,
She scould, and frownd with froward countenance,
Unworthy of fair Ladies comely governance.
But young Perissa was of other mind,
Full of disport, still laughing, loosely light,
And quite contrary to her sisters kind;
No measure in her mood, no rule of right,
But poured out in pleasure and delight;
In wine and meats she flowd above the bancke,
And in excess exceeded her own might;
In sumptuous tire she ioyd her self to prancke,
But of her love too lavish (little have she thancke.)
First by her side did sit the bold Sans-loy,
Fit mate for such a mincing mineon,
Who in her looseness took exceeding joy;
Might not be found a franker franion,
Of her lewd parts to make companion;
But Huddibras, more like a Malecontent,
Did see and grieve at his bold fashion;
Hardly could he endure his hardiment,
Yet still he sat, and inly did him self torment.
Betwixt them both the fair Medina sat
With sober grace, and goodly carriage:
With equal measure she did moderate
The strong extremities of their outrage;
That forward pair she ever would assuage,
When they would strive dew reason to exceed;
But that same froward twain would accourage,
And of her plenty add unto their need:
So kept she them in order, and her self in heed.
Thus fairly she attempered her feast,
And pleased them all with meet satietie,
At last when lust of meat and drink was ceast,
She Guyon dear besought of courtesy.
To tell from whence he came through ieopardie,
And whither now on new adventure bound.
Who with bold grace, and comely gravity,
Drawing to him the eyes of all around,
From lofty siege began these words aloud to sound.
This thy demand, o Lady, does revive
Fresh memory in me of that great Queen,
Great and most glorious virgin Queen alive,
That with her sovereign power, and scepter shene
All Faery land does peaceable sustene.
In widest Ocean she her throne does rear,
That over all the earth it may be seen;
As morning Sun her beams dispredden clear,
And in her face fair peace, and mercy does appear.
In her the richesse of all heavenly grace,
In chief degree are heaped up on hye:
And all that else this worlds enclosure bace,
Has great or glorious in mortal eye.
Adornes the person of her Majesty;
That men beholding so great excellence,
And rare perfection in mortality,
Do her adore with sacred reverence,
As th'Idole of her makers great magnificence.
To her I homage and my service owe,
In number of the noblest knights on ground,
Among whom on me she deigned to bestow
Order of Maydenhead, the most renownd,
That may this day in all the world be found,
An yearly solemn feast she wontes to make
The day that first does lead the year around;
To which all knights of worth and courage bold
Resort, to hear of strange adventures to be told.
There this old Palmer showed himself that day,
And to that mighty Princess did complain
Of grievous mischiefs, which a wicked Fay
Had wrought, and many whelmd in deadly pain,
Whereof he craved redress. My Sovereign,
Whose glory is in gracious deeds, and joys
Throughout the world her mercy to maintain,
Eftsoons deuisd redress for such annoyes;
Me all unfit for so great purpose she employes.
Now has fair Phoebe with her silver face
Thrice seen the shadows of the nether world,
Since last I left that honorable place,
In which her royal presence is introld;
Ne ever shall I rest in house nor hold,
Till I that false Acrasia have won;
Of whose foul deeds, too hideous to be told
I witness am, and this their wretched son,
Whose woeful parents she has wickedly fordonne.
Tell on, fair Sir, said she, that doleful tale,
From which sad ruth does seem you to restrain,
That we may pity such unhappy bale,
And learn from pleasures poison to abstain:
Ill by ensample good does often gain.
Then forward he his purpose began pursew,
And told the story of the mortal pain,
Which Mordant and Amauia did rue;
As with lamenting eyes him self did lately view.
Night was far spent, and now in Ocean deep
Orion, flying fast from hissing snake,
His flaming head did hasten for to steep,
When of his pitteous tale he end did make;
Whilst with delight of that he wisely spoke,
Those guestes beguiled, did beguile their eyes
Of kindly sleep, that did them overtake.
At last when they had marked the changed skies,
They wist their hour was spent; the^ each to rest him hyes.
Cant. III.
Vain Braggadocchio getting Guyons
horse is made the scorn
Of knighthood true, and is of fair
Belphoebe foul forlorn.
Soon as the morrow fair with purple beams
Dispersed the shadows of the mistie night,
And Titan playing on the eastern streams,
Began clear the deawy air with springing light,
Sir Guyon mindful of his vow yplight,
Vprose from drowsy couch, and him addressed
Unto the journey which he had behight:
His puissaunt arms about his noble breast,
And many-folded shield he bound about his wrest.
Then taking Conge of that virgin pure,
The bloudy-handed babe unto her truth
Did earnestly commit, and her conjure,
In virtuous lore to train his tender youth,
And all that gentle noriture ensu'th:
And that so soon as ryper years he raught,
He might for memory of that days ruth,
Be called Ruddymane, and thereby taught,
T'auenge his Parents death on them, that had it wrought.
So forth he fared, as now befell, on foot,
Since his good steed is lately from him gone;
Patience perforce; helpelesse what may it boot
To fret for anger, or for grief to moan?
His Palmer now shall foot no more alone:
So fortune wrought, as under green woods side
He lately heard that dying Lady groan,
He left his steed without, and spear beside,
And rushed in on foot to aid her, ere she did.
The whiles a losell wandering by the way,
One that to bounty never cast his mind,
Ne thought of honor ever did assay
His baser breast, but in his kestrell kind
A pleasing vain of glory vain did find,
To which his flowing tongue, and troublous spright
Gave him great aid, and made him more inclind:
He that brave steed there finding ready dight,
Purloynd both steed and spear, and ran away full light.
Now began his heart all swell in iollitie,
And of him self great hope and help conceived,
That puffed up with smoke of vanity,
And with selfe-loued personage deceived,
He began to hope, of men to be received
For such, as he him thought, or feign would be:
But for in court gay portaunce he perceived,
And gallant show to be in greatest gree,
Eftsoons to court he cast t'auaunce his first degree.
And by the way he chanced to espy
One sitting idle on a sunny bancke,
To whom auaunting in great bravery,
As Peacocke, that his painted plumes does prancke,
He smote his courser in the trembling flancke,
And to him threatened his hart-thrilling spear:
The seely man seeing him ride so rank,
And aim at him, fell flat to ground for fear,
And crying Mercy loud, his pitious hands began rear.
Thereat the Scarcrow wexed wondrous proud,
Through fortune of his first adventure fair,
And with big thundering voice reuyld him loud;
Vile Caytiue, vassal of dread and despair,
Unworthy of the commune breathed air,
Why live thou, dead dog, a longer day,
And do not unto death thy self prepaire.
Dye, or thy self my captive yield for ay;
Great favor I thee grant, for answer thus to stay.
Hold, o dear Lord, hold your dead-doing hand,
Then loud he cryde, I am your humble thrall.
Ah wretch (quoth he) thy destinies withstand
My wrathful will, and do for mercy call.
I give thee life: therefore prostrated fall,
And kiss my stirrup; that thy homage be.
The Miser threw him self, as an Offall,
Straight at his foot in base humilitee,
And cleeped him his liege, to hold of him in fee.
So happy peace they made and fair accord:
Eftsoons this liege-man began to wexe more bold,
And when he felt the folly of his Lord,
In his own kind he began him self unfold:
For he was wily witted, and grown old
In cunning sleights and practick knavery.
For that day forth he cast for to uphold
His idle humor with fine flattery,
And blow the bellows to his swelling vanity.
Trompart fit man for Braggadochio,
To serve at court in view of vaunting eye;
Vainglorious man, when fluttring wind does blow
In his light wings, is lifted up to sky:
The scorn of knighthood and true cheualrye,
To think without desert of gentle deed,
And noble worth to be advanced hye:
Such praise is shame; but honor virtues meed
Does bear the fairest flower in honorable seed.
So forth they pas, a well consorted pair,
Till that at length with Archimage they meet:
Who seeing one that shone in armor fair,
On goodly courser thundering with his feet,
Eftsoons supposed him a person meet,
Of his revenge to make the instrument:
For since the Redcrosse knight he erst did weet,
To been with Guyon knit in one consent,
The ill, which erst to him, he now to Guyon meant.
And coming close to Trompart began inquere
Of him, what mighty warrior that mote be,
That rode in golden sell with single spear,
But wanted sword to wreake his enmitee.
He is a great aduenturer, (said he)
That has his sword through hard assay forgone,
And now has vowed, till he avenged be,
Of that despite, never to wearen none;
That spear is him enough to done a thousand groan.
Th'enchaunter greatly ioyed in the vaunt,
And weened well ere long his will to win,
And both his foen with equal foil to daunt.
Tho to him louting lowly, did begin
To plain of wrongs, which had committed bin
By Guyon, and by that false Redcrosse knight,
Which two through treason and deceiptfull gin,
Had slain Sir Mordant, and his Lady bright:
That mote him honor win, to wreake so foul despite.
Therewith all suddeinly he seemd enraged,
And threatened death with dreadful countenance,
As if their lives had in his hand been gaged;
And with stiff force shaking his mortal lance,
To let him weet his doughtie valiaunce,
Thus said; Old man, great sure shall be thy meed,
If where those knights for fear of dew vengeance
Do lurk, thou certainly to me areed,
That I may wreake on them their heinous hateful deed.
Certes, my Lord, (said he) that shall I soon,
And give you eke good help to their decay,
But mote I wisely you advise to done;
Give no ods to your foes, but do puruay
Your self of sword before that bloody day:
For they be two the prowest knights on ground,
And often approved in many hard assay,
And eke of surest steel, that may be found,
Do arm your self against that day, them to confound.
Dotard (said he) let be thy deep advise;
Seems that through many years thy wits thee fail,
And that weak eld has left thee nothing wise,
Else never should thy judgment be so frail,
To measure manhood by the sword or maile.
Is not enough four quarters of a man,
Withouten sword or shield, an host to quail?
Thou little wotest, what this right hand can:
Speak they, which have beheld the battles, which it wan.
The man was much abashed at his boast;
Yet well he wist, that who so would contend
With either of those knights on even coast,
Should need of all his arms, him to defend;
Yet feared least his boldness should offend,
When Braggadocchio said, Once I did swear,
When with one sword seven knights I brought to end,
Thence forth in battle never sword to bear,
But it were that, which noblest knight on earth does wear.
Perdie Sir knight, said then th'enchaunter bliue,
That shall I shortly purchase to your hond:
For now the best and noblest knight alive
Prince Arthur is, that wonnes in Faerie land;
He has a sword, that flames like burning brond.
The same by my advise I undertake
Shall by to morrow by thy side be fond.
At which bold word that boaster began to quake,
And wondered in his mind, what mote that monster make.
He stayed not for more bidding, but away
Was suddein vanished out of his sight:
The Northern wind his wings did broad display
At his command, and reared him up light
From off the earth to take his aerie flight.
They look about, but no where could epsy
Tract of his foot: then dead through great affright
They both nigh were, and each bad other fly:
Both fled attonce, ne ever back returned eye.
Till that they come unto a forest green,
In which they shroud themselves from causeless fear;
Yet fear them follows still, where so they been,
Each trembling leaf, and whistling wind they hear,
As ghastly bug their hair on end does rear:
Yet both do strive their fearfulness to feign.
At last they heard a horn, that shrilled clear
Throughout the wood, that ecchoed again,
And made the forest ring, as it would riue in twain.
Eft through the thick they heard one rudely rush;
With noise whereof he from his lofty steed
Down fell to ground, and crept into a bush,
To hide his coward head from dying dreed.
But Trompart stoutly stayed to taken heed,
Of what might hap. Eftsoone there stepped forth
A goodly Lady clad in hunters weed,
That seemd to be a woman of great worth,
And by her stately portance, borne of heavenly birth.
Her face so fair as flesh it seemed not,
But heavenly pourtraict of bright Angels hew,
Clear as the sky, withouten blame or blot,
Through goodly mixture of complexions dew;
And in her cheeks the vermeill red did show
Like roses in a bed of lillies shed,
The which ambrosiall odours from them threw,
And gazers sense with double pleasure fed,
Hable to heal the sick, and to revive the ded.
In her fair eyes two living lamps did flame,
Kindled above at th'heauenly makers light,
And darted fyrie beams out of the same,
So passing persant, and so wondrous bright,
That quite bereaved the rash beholders sight:
In them the blinded god his lustful fire
To kindle often assayd, but had no might;
For with dredd Majesty, and awful ire,
She broke his wanton darts, and quenched base desire.
Her iuorie forhead, full of bounty brave,
Like a broad table did it self dispred,
For Love his lofty triumphs to engraue,
And write the battles of his great godhed:
All good and honor might therein be red:
For there their dwelling was. And when she spoke,
Sweet words, like dropping honny she did shed,
And twixt the perles and rubins softly brake
A silver sound, that heavenly music seemd to make.
Upon her eyelids many Graces sat,
Under the shadow of her even brows,
Working belgards, and amorous retrate,
And every one her with a grace endowes:
And every one with meekness to her bows.
So glorious mirrhour of celestial grace,
And sovereign moniment of mortal vows,
How shall frail pen descriue her heavenly face,
For fear through want of skill her beauty to disgrace?
So fair, and thousand thousand times more fair
She seemd, when she presented was to sight,
And was yclad, for heat of scorching air,
All in a silken Camus lylly whight,
Purfled upon with many a folded plight,
Which all above besprinckled was throughout,
With golden aygulets, that glistred bright,
Like twinkling stars, and all the skirt about
Was hemd with golden fringe
Below her ham her weed did somewhat train,
And her straight legs most bravely were embayld
In gilden buskins of costly Cordwaine,
All bard with golden bendes, which were entayld
With curious antickes, and full fair aumayld:
Before they fastened were under her knee
In a rich Jewel, and therein entrayld
The ends of all their knots, that none might see,
How they within their fouldings close enwrapped be.
Like two fair marble pillours they were seen,
Which do the temple of the Gods support,
Whom all the people deck with girlands green,
And honor in their festival resort;
Those same with stately grace, and princely port
She taught to tread, when she her self would grace,
But with the wooddie Nymphs when she did play,
Or when the flying Libbard she did chase,
She could them nimbly move, and after fly apace.
And in her hand a sharp bore-speare she held,
And at her back a bow and quiver gay,
Stuffed with steele-headed darts, wherewith she queld
The saluage beasts in her victorious play,
Knit with a golden bauldricke, which forelay
Athwart her snowy breast, and did divide
Her dainty paps; which like young fruit in May
Now little began to swell, and being tide,
Through her thin weed their places only signifide.
Her yellow locks crisped, like golden wyre,
About her shoulders weren loosely shed,
And when the wind emongst them did inspyre,
They waued like a penon wide dispred,
And low behind her back were scattered:
And whether art it were, or heedlesse hap,
As through the flouring forest rash she fled,
In her rude hairs sweet flowers themselves did lap,
And flourishing fresh leaves and blossoms did enwrap.
Such as Diana by the sandy shore
Of swift Eurotas, or on Cynthus green,
Where all the Nymphs have her unawares forlore,
Wandreth alone with bow and arrows keen,
To seek her game: Or as that famous Queen
Of Amazons, whom Pyrrhus did destroy,
The day that first of Priame she was seen,
Did show her self in great triumphant joy,
To succor the weak state of sad afflicted Troy.
Such when as hartlesse Trompart her did view,
He was dismayed in his coward mind,
And doubted, whether he himself should show,
Or fly away, or bide alone behind:
Both fear and hope he in her face did find,
When she at last him spying thus bespake;
Hayle Groom; did not thou see a bleeding Hind,
Whose right haunch erst my steadfast arrow struck?
If thou did, tell me, that I may her overtake.
Wherewith reviu'd, this answer forth he threw;
O Goddess, (for such I thee take to be)
For neither does thy face terrestrial show,
Nor voice sound mortal; I auow to thee,
Such wounded beast, as that, I did not see,
Since erst into this forest wild I came.
But mote thy goodlyhed forgive it me,
To weet, which of the Gods I shall thee name,
That unto thee due worship I may rightly frame.
To whom she thus; but ere her words ensewed,
Unto the bush her eye did suddein glaunce,
In which vain Braggadocchio was mewed,
And saw it stir: she left her percing lance,
And toward began a deadly shaft advance,
In mind to mark the beast. At which sad stowre,
Trompart forth stepped, to stay the mortal chance,
Out crying, o what ever heavenly power,
Or earthly wight thou be, withhold this deadly hour.
O stay thy hand for yonder is no game
For thy fierce arrows, them to exercize,
But lo my Lord, my liege, whose warlike name,
Is far renowmd through many bold emprize;
And now in shade he shrouded yonder lies.
She staid: with that he crauld out of his nest,
Forth creeping on his caitiue hands and thies,
And standing stoutly up, his lofty crest
Did fiercely shake, and rowze, as coming late from rest.
As fearful foul, that long in secret cave
For dread of soaring hawk her self has hid,
Not caring how, her silly life to save,
She her gay painted plumes disorderid,
Seeing at last her self from danger rid,
Peepes forth, and soon renewes her native pride;
She gins her feathers foul disfigured
Proudly to prune, and set on every side,
So shakes off shame, ne thinks how erst she did her hide.
So when her goodly visage he beheld,
He began himself to vaunt: but when he vewed
Those deadly tools, which in her hand she held,
Soon into other fits he was transmewed,
Till she to him her gracious speech renewed;
All hail, Sir knight, and well may thee befall,
As all the like, which honor have pursewed
Through deeds of arms and prowess martial;
All virtue merits praise, but such the most of all.
To whom he thus; o fairest under sky,
True be thy words, and worthy of thy praise,
That warlike feats do highest glorify.
Therein have I spent all my youthly days,
And many battles fought, and many fraies
Throughout the world, where so they might be found,
Endeavoring my dreadded name to raise
Above the Moon, that fame may it resound
In her eternal trompe, with laurel girland cround.
But what art thou, o Lady, which do raunge
In this wild forest, where no pleasure is,
And do not it for joyous court exchange,
Emongst thine equal peers, where happy blis
And all delight does reign, much more then this?
There thou may love, and dearly loved be,
And swim in pleasure, which thou here do mis;
There may thou best be seen, and best may see:
The wood is fit for beasts, the court is fit for thee.
Who so in pomp of proud estate (quoth she)
Does swim, and bathes himself in courtly blis,
Does waste his days in dark obscuritee,
And in oblivion ever buried is:
Where ease abounds, yt's eath to do amiss;
But who his limbs with labors, and his mind
Behaues with cares, cannot so easy mis.
Abroad in arms, at home in studious kind
Who seeks with painful toil, shall honor soonest find.
In woods, in waves, in wars she wonts to dwell,
And will be found with peril and with pain;
Ne can the man, that moulds in idle cell,
Unto her happy mansion attain:
Before her gate high God did Sweat ordain,
And wakefull watches ever to abide:
But easy is the way, and passage plain
To pleasures palace; it may soon be spide,
And day and night her doors to all stand open wide.
In Princes court, The rest she would have said,
But that the foolish man, filled with delight
Of her sweet words, that all his sense dismayed,
And with her wondrous beauty ravished quight,
Began burn in filthy lust, and leaping light,
Thought in his bastard arms her to embrace.
With that she swaruing back, her Iauelin bright
Against him bent, and fiercely did menace:
So turned her about, and fled away apace.
Which when the Peasant saw, amazd he stood,
And greiued at her flight; yet durst he not
Pursew her steps, through wild unknown wood;
Besides he feared her wrath, and threatened shot
Whiles in the bush he lay, not yet forgot:
Ne cared he greatly for her presence vain,
But turning said to Trompart, What foul blot
Is this to knight, that Lady should again
Depart to woods untouched, and leave so proud disdain?
Perdie (said Trompart) let her pass at will,
Least by her presence danger mote befall.
For who can tell (and sure I fear it ill)
But that she is some power celestial?
For whiles she spoke, her great words did a pall
My feeble courage, and my heart oppress,
That yet I quake and tremble over all.
And I (said Braggadocchio) thought no less,
When first I heard her horn sound with such ghastlinesse.
For from my mothers womb this grace I have
Me given by eternal destiny,
That earthly thing may not my courage brave
Dismay with fear, or cause on foot to fly,
But either hellish feends, or powers on hie:
Which was the cause, when erst that home I heard,
Weening it had been thunder in the sky,
I hid my self from it, as one affeard;
But when I other knew, my self I boldly reard.
But now for fear of worse, that may betide,
Let us soon hence depart. They soon agree;
So to his steed he got, and began to ride,
As one unfit therefore, that all might see
He had not trained been in cheualree.
Which well that valiant courser did discern;
For he despysd to tread in dew degree,
But chaufd and fom'd, with courage fierce and stern,
And to be easd of that base burden still did erne.
Cant. IIII.
Guyon does Furor bind in chains,
and stops Occasion:
Delivers Phedon, and therefore
by strife is rayld upon.
IN brave pursuit of honorable deed,
There is I know not what great difference
Between the vulgar and the noble seed,
Which unto things of valorous pretense
Seems to be borne by native influence;
As feats of arms, and love to entertain,
But chiefly skill to ride, seems a science
Proper to gentle blood; some others feign
To menage steeds, as did this vaunter; but in vain.
But he the rightful owner of that steed,
Who well could menage and subdew his pride,
The whiles on foot was forced for to yeed,
With that black Palmer, his most trusty guide;
Who suffered not his wandering feet to slide.
But when strong passion, or weak fleshlinesse
Would from the right way seek to draw him wide,
He would through temperance and steadfastness,
Teach him the weak to stre^gthen, and the strong suppress.
It fortuned forth faring on his way,
He saw from far, or seemed for to see
Some troublous uproar or contentious fray,
Whereto he drew in haste it to agree.
A mad man, or that feigned mad to be,
Drew by the hair along upon the ground,
A handsome stripling with great crueltee,
Whom sore he bett, and gored with many a wound,
That cheeks with tears, and sides with blood did all abound.
And him behind, a wicked Hag did stalk,
In ragged robes, and filthy disaray,
Her other leg was lame, that she no'te walk.
But on a staff her feeble steps did stay;
Her locks, that loathly were and hoarie gray,
Grew all before, and loosely hong vnrold,
But all behind was bald, and worn away,
That none thereof could ever taken hold,
And eke her face ill favored, full of wrinckles old.
And ever as she went, her tongue did walk
In foul reproach, and terms of vile despite,
Provoking him by her outrageous talk,
To heap more vengeance on that wretched wight;
Sometimes she raught him stones, wherewith to smite,
Sometimes her staff, though it her one leg were,
Withouten which she could not go upright;
Ne any evil means she did forbear,
That might him move to wrath, and indignation rear.
The noble Guyon moved with great remorse,
Approaching, first the Hag did thrust away,
And after adding more impetuous forse,
His mighty hands did on the madman lay,
And plucked him back; who all on fire straight way,
Against him turning all his fell intent,
With beastly brutish rage began him assay,
And smot, and bit, and kicked, and scratcht, and rent,
And did he wist not what in his auengement.
And sure he was a man of mickle might,
Had he had governance, it well to guide:
But when the frantic fit inflamd his spright,
His force was vain, and struck more often wide,
Then at the aimed mark, which he had eide:
And often himself he chaunst to hurt unawares,
Whilst reason blent through passion, naught descride,
But as a blindfold Bull at randon fares,
And where he hits, naught knows, and whom he hurts, naught cares.
His rude assault and rugged handeling
Strange seemed to the knight, that aye with foe
In fair defense and goodly menaging
Of arms was wont to fight, yet nathemoe
Was he abashed now not fighting so,
But more enfierced through his currish play,
Him sternely grypt, and haling to and fro,
To overthrow him strongly did assay,
But overthrew himself unawares, and lower lay.
And being down the villein sore did beat,
And bruze with clownish fistes his manly face:
And eke the Hag with many a bitter threat,
Still called upon to kill him in the place.
With whose reproach and odious menace
The knight emboyling in his haughty heart,
Knit all his forces, and began soon unbrace
His grasping hold: so lightly did vpstart,
And drew his deadly weapon, to maintain his part.
Which when the Palmer saw, he loudly cryde,
Not so, o Guyon, never think that so
That Monster can be maistred or destroyed:
He is no, ah, he is not such a foe,
As steel can wound, or strength can ouerthroe.
That same is Furor, cursed cruel wight,
That unto knighthood works much shame and woe;
And that same Hag, his aged mother, hight
Occasion, the root of all wrath and despite.
With her, who so will raging Furor tame,
Must first begin, and well her amenage:
First her restrain from her reproachful blame,
And evil means, with which she does enrage
Her frantic son, and kindles his courage,
Then when she is withdrawn, or strong withstood,
It Is eath his idle fury to assuage,
And calm the tempest of his passion wood;
The banks are overflowed, when stopped is the flood.
Therewith Sir Guyon left his first emprise,
And turning to that woman, fast her hent
By the hoare locks, that hong before her eyes,
And to the ground her threw: yet n'ould she stent
Her bitter railing and foul reuilement,
But still prouokt her son to wreake her wrong;
But nathelesse he did her still torment,
And catching hold of her ungracious tongue,
Thereon an iron lock, did fasten firm and strong.
Then when as use of speech was from her reft,
With her two crooked hands she signs did make,
And beckned him, the last help she had left:
But he that last left help away did take,
And both her hands fast bound unto a stake,
That she note stir. Then began her son to fly
Full fast away, and did her quite forsake;
But Guyon after him in haste did hie,
And soon him ouertooke in sad perplexity.
In his strong arms he stiffely him embraste,
Who him gainstriuing, naught at all preuaild:
For all his power was utterly defaste,
And furious fits at erst quite weren quaild:
Often he re'nforst, and often his forces fayld,
Yet yield he would not, nor his rancour slack.
Then him to ground he cast, and rudely hayld,
And both his hands fast bound behind his back,
And both his feet in fetters to an iron rack.
With hundred iron chains he did him bind,
And hundred knots that did him sore constrain:
Yet his great iron teeth he still did grind,
And grimly gnash, threatening revenge in vain:
His burning eyes, whom bloody strakes did stain,
Stared full wide, and threw forth sparks of fire,
And more for rank despite, then for great pain,
Shakt his long locks, colored like copper-wire,
And bit his tawny beard to show his raging ire.
Thus when as Guyon Furor had captived,
Turning about he saw that wretched Squire,
Whom that mad man of life nigh late deprived,
Lying on ground, all soild with blood and mire:
Whom when as he perceived to respire,
He began to comfort, and his wounds to dress.
Being at last recured, he began inquire,
What hard mishap him brought to such distress,
And made that caitiues thral, the thral of wretchedness.
With heart then throbbing, and with watery eyes,
Fair Sir (quoth he) what man can shun the hap,
That hidden lies unawares him to surpryse
Misfortune waits advantage to entrap
The man most wary in her whelming lap.
So me weak wretch, of many weakest one,
Vnweeting, and unware of such mishap,
She brought to mischief through occasion,
Where this same wicked villein did me light upon.
It was a faithless Squire, that was the sourse
Of all my sorrow, and of these sad tears,
With whom from tender dug of commune nourse,
Attonce I was vpbrought, and eft when years
More ripe us reason lent to chose our Pears,
Our selves in league of vowed love we knit:
In which we long time without gealous fears,
Or faulty thoughts continewd, as was fit;
And for my part I vow, dissembled not a whit.
Is was my fortune commune to that age,
To love a Lady fair of great degree,
The which was borne of noble parentage,
And set in highest seat of dignitee,
Yet seemd no less to love, then loved to be:
Long I her served, and found her faithful still,
Ne ever thing could cause us disagree:
Love that two hearts makes one; makes eke one will:
Each strove to please, and others pleasure to fulfill.
My friend, hight Philemon, I did partake,
Of all my love and all my priuitie;
Who greatly joyous seemed for my sake,
And gracious to that Lady, as to me,
Ne ever wight, that mote so welcome be,
As he to her, withouten blot or blame,
Ne ever thing, that she could think or see,
But unto him she would impart the same:
O wretched man, that would abuse so gentle Dame.
At last such grace I found, and means I wrought,
That I that Lady to my spouse had won;
Accord of friends, consent of parents sought,
Affiance made, my happiness begone,
There wanted naught but few rites to be done,
Which marriage make; that day too far did seem:
Most joyous man, on whom the shining Sun,
Did show his face, my self I did esteem,
And that my falser friend did no less joyous deem.
But ere that wished day his beam disclosd,
He either envying my toward good,
Or of himself to treason ill disposd
One day unto me came in friendly mood,
And told for secret how he understood
That Lady whom I had to me assynd,
Had both distaind her honorable blood,
And eke the faith, which she to me did bynd;
And therefore wished me stay, till I more truth should find.
The gnawing anguish and sharp gelosy,
Which his sad speech infixed in my breast,
Ranckled so sore, and festred inwardly,
That my engreeued mind could find no rest,
Till that the truth thereof I did outwrest,
And him besought by that same sacred band
Betwixt us both, to counsel me the best.
He then with solemn oath and plighted hand
Assured, ere long the truth to let me understand.
Ere long with like again he boorded me,
Saying, he now had boulted all the flower,
And that it was a groom of base degree,
Which of my love was partner Paramoure:
Who used in a darkesome inner bower
Her often to meet: which better to approve,
He promised to bring me at that hour,
When I should see, that would me nearer move,
And drive me to withdraw my blind abused love.
This graceless man for furtherance of his guile,
Did court the handmayd of my Lady dear,
Who glad t'embosome his affection vile,
Did all she might, more pleasing to appear.
One day to work her to his will more near,
He wooed her thus: Pryene (so she hight)
What great despite does fortune to thee bear,
Thus lowly to abase thy beauty bright,
That it should not deface all others lesser light?
But if she had her least help to thee lent,
T'adorne thy form according thy desert,
Their blazing pride thou would soon have blent,
And staynd their praises with thy least good part;
Ne should fair Claribell with all her art,
Though she thy Lady be, approach thee near:
For proof thereof, this evening, as thou art,
Array thy self in her most gorgeous gear,
That I may more delight in thy embracement dear.
The Maide^ proud through praise, and mad through love
Him hearkened to, and soon her self arayd,
The whiles to me the treachour did remove
His crafty engine, and as he had said,
Me leading, in a secret corner laid,
The sad spectatour of my Tragedy;
Where left, he went, and his own false part played,
Disguised like that groom of base degree,
Whom he had feignd th'abuser of my love to be.
Eftsoons he came unto the appointed place,
And with him brought Priene, rich arayd,
In Claribellaes clothes. Her proper face
I not descerned in that darkesome shade,
But weend it was my love, with whom he played.
Ah God, what horror and tormenting grief
My heart, my hands, mine eyes, and all assayd?
Me liefer were ten thousand deaths priefe,
Then wound of gealous worm, and shame of such repriefe.
I home returning, fraught with foul despite,
And chawing vengeance all the way I went,
Soon as my loathed love appeard in sight,
With wrathful hand I slew her innocent;
That after soon I dearly did lament:
For when the cause of that outrageous deed
Demanded, I made plain and evident,
Her faulty Handmayd, which that bale did breed,
Confessed, how Philemon her wrought to change her weed.
Which when I heard, with horrible affright
And hellish fury all enragd, I sought
Upon my self that vengeable despite
To punish: yet it better first I thought,
To wreake my wrath on him, that first it wrought.
To Philemon, false faytour Philemon
I cast to pay, that I so dearly bought;
Of deadly drugs I gave him drink anon,
And washed away his guilt with guilty potion.
Thus heaping crime on crime, and grief on grief,
To loss of love adjoining loss of friend,
I meant to purge both with a third mischief,
And in my woes beginner it to end:
That was Pryene; she did first offend,
She last should smart: with which cruel intent,
When I at her my murdrous blade did bend,
She fled away with ghastly dreriment,
And I pursewing my fell purpose, after went.
Fear gave her wings, and rage enforst my flight;
Through woods and plains so long I did her chase,
Till this mad man, whom your victorious might
Has now fast bound, me met in middle space,
As I her, so he me pursewd apace,
And shortly ouertooke: I breathing ire,
Sore chauffed at my stay in such a case,
And with my heat kindled his cruel fire;
Which kindled once, his mother did more rage inspyre.
Betwixt them both, they have me done to dye,
Through wounds, and strokes, and stubborn handeling,
That death were better, then such agony,
As grief and fury unto me did bring;
Of which in me yet sticks the mortal sting,
That during life will never be appeasd.
When he thus ended had his sorrowing,
Said Guyon, Squire, sore have ye been diseasd;
But all your hurts may soon through te^perance be easd.
Then began the Palmer thus, most wretched man,
That to affections does the bridle lend;
In their beginning they are weak and wan,
But soon through suff'rance grow to fearful end;
Whiles they are weak betimes with them contend:
For when they once to perfect strength do grow,
Strong wars they make, and cruel battry bend
Against fort of Reason, it to overthrow:
Wrath, gelosie, grief, love this Squire have laid thus low.
Wrath, gealosie, grief, love do thus expel:
Wrath is a fire, and gealosie a weed,
Grief is a flood, and love a monster fell;
The fire of sparks, the weed of little seed,
The flood of drops, the Monster filth did breed:
But sparks, seed, drops, and filth do thus delay;
The sparks soon quench, the springing seed outweed
The drops dry up, and filth wipe clean away:
So shall wrath, gealosie, grief, love dye and decay.
Unlucky Squire (said Guyon) since thou have
Fallen unto mischief through intemperaunce,
Henceforth take heed of that thou now have past,
And guide thy ways with wary governance,
Least worse betide thee by some later chance.
But read how art thou named and of what kin.
Phedon I hight (quoth he) and do advance
Mine auncestry from famous Coradin,
Who first to raise our house to honor did begin.
Thus as he spoke, lo far away they spyde
A varlet running toward hastily,
Whose flying feet so fast their way applyde,
That round about a cloud of dust did fly,
Which mingled all with sweat, did dim his eye.
He soon approached, panting, breathless, whot,
And all so soyld, that none could him descry;
His countenance was bold, and bashed not
For Guyons looks, but scornful eyglaunce at him shot.
Behind his back he bore a brazen shield,
On which was drawn fair, in colors fit,
A flaming fire in midst of bloody field,
And round about the wreath this word was writ,
Burnt I do burn. Right well beseemed it,
To be the shield of some redoubted knight;
And in his hand two darts exceeding flit,
And deadly sharp he held, whose heads were dight
In poison and in blood, of malice and despite.
When he in presence came, to Guyon first
He boldly spoke, Sir knight, if knight thou be,
Abandon this fore stalled place at erst,
For fear of further harm, I counsel thee,
Or bide the chance at thine own ieoperdie.
The knight at his great boldness wondered,
And though he scornd his idle vanity,
Yet mildly him to purpose answered;
For not to grow of naught he it coniectured.
Varlet, this place most dew to me I deem,
Yielded by him, that held it forcibly.
But whence should come that harm, which thou do seem
To threat to him, that minds his chance t'abye?
Perdy (said he) here comes, and is hard by
A knight of wondrous power, and great assay,
That never yet encountered enemy,
But did him deadly daunt, or foul dismay;
Ne thou for better hope, if thou his presence stay.
How hight he then (said Guyon) and from whence?
Pyrrhochles is his name, renowned far
For his bold feats and hardy confidence,
Full often approved in many a cruel war,
The brother of Cymochles, both which arre
The sons of old Acrates and Despite,
Acrates son of Phlegeton and Jar;
But Phlegeton is son of Herebus and Night;
But Herebus son of Aeternitie is hight.
So from immortal race he does proceed,
That mortal hands may not withstand his might,
Drad for his derring do, and bloody deed;
For all in blood and spoil is his delight.
His am I Atin, his in wrong and right,
That matter make for him to work upon,
And stir him up to strife and cruel fight.
Fly therefore, fly this fearful stead anon,
Least thy foolhardize work thy sad confusion.
His be that care, whom most it does concern,
(Said he) but whither with such hasty flight
Art thou now bound? for well mote I discern
Great cause, that carries thee so swift and light.
My Lord (quoth he) me sent, and straight behight
To seek Occasion; where so she be:
For he is all disposd to bloody fight,
And breathes out wrath and heinous cruelty;
Hard is his hap, that first falls in his ieopardie.
Madman (said then the Palmer) that does seek
Occasion to wrath, and cause of strife;
She comes unsought, and shonned follows eke.
Happy, who can abstain, when Rancour rife
Kindles Revenge, and threats his rusty knife;
Woe never wants, where every cause is caught,
And rash Occasion makes unquiet life.
Then lo, where bound she fits, who^ thou have sought,
(Said Guyon,) let that message to thy Lord be brought.
That when the varlet heard and saw, straight way
He wexed wondrous wroth, and said, Vile knight,
That knights and knighthood do with shame vpbray,
And shewst th'enfa^ple of thy childish migbt,
With silly weak old woman thus to fight.
Great glory and gay spoil sure have thou got,
And stoutly proved thy puissaunce here in sight;
That shall Pyrrhochles well requite, I wot,
And with thy blood abolish so reproachful blot.
With that one of his thrillant darts he threw,
Headed with ire and vengeable despite;
The quiuering steel his aimed end well knew,
And to his breast it self intended right:
But he was wary, and ere it empight
In the meant mark, aduaunst his shield atweene,
On which it seizing, no way enter might,
But back rebounding, left the forckhead keen;
Eftsoons he fled away, and might no where be seen.
Cant. V.
Pyrrhochles does with Guyon fight,
And Furors chain vnbinds
Of whom sore hurt, for his revenge
Attin Gymochles finds.
WHo ever does to temperaunce apply
His steadfast life, and all his actions frame,
Trust me, shall find no greater enemy,
Then stubborn perturbation, to the same;
To which right well the wise do give that name,
For it the goodly peace of stayed minds
Does overthrow, and troublous war proclaim:
His own woes author, who so bound it finds,
As did Pyrrhochles, and it wilfully vnbindes.
After that varlets flight, it was not long,
Ere on the plain fast pricking Guyon spide
One in bright arms embatteiled full strong,
That as the Sunny beams do glaunce and glide
Upon the trembling wave, so shined bright,
And round about him threw forth sparkling fire,
That seemd him to inflame on every side:
His steed was bloody red, and fomedire,
When with the maistring spur he did him roughly stire.
Approaching nigh, he never stayed to greet,
Ne chaffar words, proud courage to provoke,
But pricked so flers, that underneath his feet
The smouldring dust did round about him smoke,
Both horse and man nigh able for to choke;
And fairly couching his steele-headed spear,
Him first saluted with a sturdy stroke;
It booted naught Sir Guyon coming near
To think, such hideous puissaunce on foot to bear.
But lightly shunned it, and passing by,
With his bright blade did smite at him so fell,
That the sharp steel arriving forcibly
On his braod shield, bit not, but glauncing fell
On his horse neck before the quilted sell
And from the head the body sundred quight.
So him dismounted low, he did compel
On foot with him to matchen equal fight;
The truncked beast fast bleeding, did him fowly dight.
Sore bruzed with the fall, he slow vprose,
And all enraged, thus him loudly shent;
Disleall knight, whose coward courage chose
To wreake it self on beast all innocent,
And shund the mark, at which it should be meant,
Thereby thine arms seem strong, but ma^hood frail;
So have thou often with guile thine honor blent;
But little may such guile thee now avail,
If wonted force and fortune do not much me fail.
With that he drew his flaming sword, and struck
At him so fiercely, that the upper marge
Of his seuenfolded shield away it took,
And glauncing on his helmet, made a large
And open gash therein: were not his targe,
That broke the violence of his intent,
The weary soul from thence it would discharge;
Nathelesse so sore a buff to him it lent,
That made him reele, and to his breast his beuer bent.
Exceeding wroth was Guyon at that blow,
And much ashamd, that stroke of living arm
Should him dismay, and make him stoup so low,
Though otherwise it did him little harm:
Tho hurling high his iron braced arm,
He smote so manly on his shoulder plate,
That all his left side it did quite disarme;
Yet there the steel stayed not, but inly bate
Deep in his flesh, and opened wide a red floodgate.
Deadly dismayed, with horror of that dint
Pyrrhochles was, and grieved eke entyre;
Yet nathemore did it his fury stint,
But added flame unto his former fire,
That welnigh molt his heart in raging ire,
Ne thenceforth his approved skill, to ward,
Or strike, or hurl, round in warelike gyre,
Remembered he, ne cared for his saufgard,
But rudely raged, and like a cruel Tygre fared,
He hewd, and lasht, and foynd, and thundered blows,
And every way did seek into his life,
Ne plate, ne male could ward so mighty throws,
But yielded passage to his cruel knife.
But Guyon, in the heat of all his strife,
Was wary wise, and closely did awayt
Advantage, whilst his foe did rage most rife;
Sometimes a thwart, sometimes he struck him strayt,
And falsed often his blows, t'illude him with such bayt.
Like as a Lion, whose imperial power
A proud rebellious Unicorn defies,
T'auoide the rash assault and wrathful stowre
Of his fires foe, him to a tree applies,
And when him running in full course he spies,
He slips aside; the whiles that furious beast
His precious horn, sought of his enemies
Strikes in the stock, ne thence can be relast,
But to the mighty victour yields a bounteous feast.
With such fair slight him Guyon often faild,
Till at the last all breathless, weary, faint
Him spying, with fresh onset he assaild,
And kindling new his courage seeming queint,
Struck him so hugely, that through great constraint
He made him stoup perforce unto his knee,
And do unwilling worship to the Saint,
That on his shield depainted he did see;
Such homage till that instant never learned he.
Whom Guyon seeing stoup, pursewed fast
The present offer of fair victory,
And soon his dreadful blade about he cast,
Wherewith he smote his haughty crest so hye,
That straight on ground made him full low to lie;
Then on his breast his victour foot he thrust,
With that he cryde, Mercy, do me not dye,
Ne deem thy force by fortunes doom unjust,
That has (maugre her spite) thus low me laid in dust.
Eftsoons his cruel hand Sir Guyon stayed,
Tempring the passion with aduizement slow,
And maistring might on enemy dismayed:
For th'equall dye of war he well did know;
Then to him said, Live and allegaunce owe,
To him that gives thee life and liberty,
And henceforth by this days ensample trow,
That hasty wroth, and heedlesse hazardrie
Do breed repentance late, and lasting infamy.
So up he let him rise, who with grim look
And count'naunce stern vpstanding, began to grind
His grated teeth for great disdeigne, and shook
His sandy locks, long hanging down behind,
Knotted in blood and dust, for grief of mind,
That he in ods of arms was conquered;
Yet in himself some comfort he did find,
That him so noble knight had maistered,
Whose bounty more then might, yet both he wondered.
Which Guyon marking said, Be naught agrieu'd,
Sir knight, that thus ye now subdewed arre:
Was never man, who most conquestes atchieu'd
But sometimes had the worse, and lost by war,
Yet shortly gaynd, that loss exceeded far:
Loss is no shame, nor to be less then foe,
But to be lesser, then himself, does mar
Both loosers lot, and victours praise also.
Vain others overthrows, who self does overthrow.
Fly, O Pyrrhochles, fly the dreadful war,
That in thy self thy lesser parts do move,
Outrageous anger, and woe-working jar,
Direful impatience, and heart murdring love;
Those, those thy foes, those warriors far remove,
Which thee to endless bale captiued lead.
But since in might thou did my mercy prove,
Of courtesy to me the cause a read,
That thee against me drew with so impetuous dread.
Dreadlesse (said he) that shall I soon declare:
It was complaind, that thou had done great tort
Unto an aged woman, poor and bare,
And thralled her in chains with strong effort,
Void of all succor and needful comfort:
That ill beseemes thee, such as I thee see,
To work such shame. Therefore I thee exhort,
To change thy will, and set Occasion free,
And to her captive son yield his first libertee.
Thereat Sir Guyon smilde, And is that all
(Said he) that thee so sore displeased has?
Great mercy sure, for to enlarge a thrall,
Whose freedom shall thee turn to greatest scath.
Nath'lesse now quench thy whot emboyling wrath:
Lo there they be; to thee I yield them free.
Thereat he wondrous glad, out of the path
Did lightly leap, where he them bound did see,
And began to break the bands of their captiuitee.
Soon as Occasion felt her self vntyde,
Before her son could well assoyled be,
She to her use returned, and straight defyde
Both Guyon and Pyrrhochles: the one (said he)
Because he won; the other because he
Was won: So matter did she make of naught,
To stir up strife, and do them disagree:
But soon as Furor was enlargd, she sought
To kindle his quenched fire, and thousand causes wrought.
It was not long, ere she inflamed him so,
That he would algates with Pyrrhochles fight,
And his redeemer chalengd for his foe,
Because he had not well mainteind his right,
But yielded had to that same stranger knight:
Now began Pyrrhochles wex as wood, as he,
And him affronted with impatient might:
So both together fires engrasped be,
Whiles Guyon standing by, their uncouth strife does see.
Him all that while Occasion did provoke
Against Pyrrhochles, and new matter framed
Upon the old, him stirring to be wroke
Of his late wrongs, in which she often him blamed
For suffering such abuse, as knighthood shamed,
And him dishabled quite. But he was wise
Ne would with vain occasions be inflamed;
Yet others she more urgent did devise:
Yet nothing could him to impatience entise.
Their fell contention still increased more,
And more thereby increased Furors might,
That he his foe has hurt, and wounded sore,
And him in blood and dirt deformed quight.
His mother eke, more to augment his spite,
Now brought to him a flaming fire brond,
Which she in Stygian lake, ay burning bright
Had kindled: that she gave into his hond,
That armd with fire, more hardly he mote him withsto^d.
Tho began that villein wex so fires and strong,
That nothing might sustain his furious forse;
He cast him down to ground, and all along
Drew him through dirt and mire without remorse,
And fowly battered his comely corse,
That Guyon much disdeignd so loathly sight.
At last he was compeld to cry perforse,
Help, o Sir Guyon, help most noble knight,
To rid a wretched man from hands of hellish wight.
The knight was greatly moved at his plaint,
And began him dight to succor his distress,
Till that the Palmer, by his grave restraint,
Him stayed from yielding pitiful redress;
And said, Dear son, thy causeless ruth repress,
Ne let thy stout heart melt in pity vain:
He that his sorrow sought through wilfulness,
And his foe fettred would release again.
Deserves to taste his follies fruit, repented pain.
Guyon obayd; So him away he drew
From needless trouble of renewing fight
Already fought, his voyage to pursew.
But rash Pyrrhochles varlet, Atin hight,
When late he saw his Lord in heavy plight,
Under Sir Guyons puissaunt stroke to fall,
Him deeming dead, as then he seemd in sight,
Fled fast away, to tell his funeral
Unto his brother, whom Cymochles men did call.
He was a man of rare redoubted might,
Famous throughout the world for warlike praise,
And glorious spoils, purchased in perilous fight:
Full many doughtie knights he in his days
Had done to death, subdewde in equal frayes,
Whose carkases, for terror of his name,
Of fowls and beasts he made the piteous prays,
And hong their conquered arms for more defame
On gallow trees, in honor of his dearest Dame.
His dearest Dame is that Enchaunteresse,
The vile Acrasia, that with vain delights,
And idle pleasures in his Bower of Bliss,
Does charm her lovers, and the feeble sprightes
Can call out of the bodies of frail wightes:
Whom then she does transform to monstrous hewes,
And horribly misshapes with ugly sightes,
Captived eternally in iron mewes,
And darksom dens, where Titan his face never shows.
There Atin found Cymochles soiourning,
To serve his Lemans love: for he by kind,
Was given all to lust and loose living,
When ever his fires hands he free mote find:
And now he has pourd out his idle mind
In dainty delices, and lavish joys,
Having his warlike weapons cast behind,
And flows in pleasures, and vain pleasing toys,
Mingled emongst loose Ladies and lascivious boys.
And over him, art striving to compaire
With nature, did an Arber green dispred,
Framed of wanton Yuie, flouring fair,
Through which the fragrant Eglantine did spread
His pricking arms, entrayld with roses red,
Which dainty odours round about them threw,
And all within with flowers was garnished,
That when myld Zephyrus emongst them blew,
Did breath out bounteous smells, and painted colors show.
And fast beside, there trickled softly down
A gentle stream, whose murmuring wave did play
Emongst the pumy stones, and made a sown,
To lull him soft a sleep, that by it lay;
The weary Traueiler, wandering that way,
Therein did often quench his thristy heat,
And then by it his weary limbs display,
Whiles creeping slomber made him to forget
His former pain, and wypt away his toylsom sweat.
And on the other side a pleasant grove
Was shot up high, full of the stately tree,
That dedicated is to Olympicke Jove,
And to his son Alcides, whenas he
Gaynd in Nemea goodly victoree;
Therein the merry birds of every sort
Chaunted alowd their cheerful harmony:
And made emongst them selves a sweet consort,
That quickened the dull spright with musical comfort.
There he him found all carelessly displayed,
In secret shadow from the sunny ray,
On a sweet bed of lillies softly laid,
Amidst a flock of Damzels fresh and gay,
That round about him dissolute did play
Their wanton follies, and light meriment;
Every of which did loosely disaray
Her upper parts of meet habiliments,
And showed them naked, decked with many ornaments.
And every of them strove, with most delights,
Him to aggrate, and greatest pleasures show;
Some framd fair looks, glancing like evening lights
Others sweet words, dropping like honny dew;
Some bathed kisses, and did soft embrew
The sugared licour through his melting lips:
One boastes her beauty, and does yield to view
Her dainty limbs above her tender hips;
Another her out boastes, and all for trial strips.
He, like an Adder, lurking in the weeds,
His wandering thought in deep desire does steep,
And his frail eye with spoil of beauty feeds;
Sometimes he falsely faines himself to sleep,
Whiles through their lids his wanton eyes do peep,
To steal a snatch of amorous conceit,
Whereby close fire into his heart does creep:
So, he them deceiues, deceived in his deceit,
Made drunk with drugs of dear voluptuous receipt.
Atin arriving there, when him he spide,
Thus in still waves of deep delight to wade,
Fiercely approaching, to him lowdly cride,
Cymochles; oh no, but Cymochles shade,
In which that manly person late did fade,
What is become of great Acrates son?
Or where has he hong up his mortal blade,
That has so many haughty conquests won?
Is all his force forlorn, and all his glory done?
Then pricking him with his sharpe-pointed dart,
He said; up, up, thou womanish weak knight,
That here in Ladies lap entombed art,
Unmindful of thy praise and prowest might,
And weetlesse eke of lately wrought despite,
Whiles sad Pyrrhochles lies on senseless ground,
And groneth out his utmost grudging spright,
Through many a stroke, and many a streaming wound,
Calling thy help in vain, that here in joys art dround.
Suddeinly out of his delightful dream
The man awoke, and would have questiond more;
But he would not endure that woeful theme
For to dilate at large, but urged sore
With percing words, and pitiful implore,
Him hasty to arise. As one affright
With hellish feends, or Furies mad uproar,
He then vprose, inflamed with fell despite,
And called for his arms; for he would algates fight.
They been ybrought; he quickly does him dight,
And lightly mounted, passes on his way,
Ne Ladies loves, ne sweet entreaties might
Appease his heat, or hasty passage stay;
For he has vowed, to been aueng'd that day,
(That day it self him seemed all too long:)
On him, that did Pyrrhochles dear dismay:
So proudly pricketh on his courser strong,
And Atin aie him pricks with spurs of shame and wrong.
Cant. VI.
Guyon is of immodest Merth,
led into loose desire,
Fights with Cymochles, whiles his brother burns infurious fire.
A Harder lesson, to learn Continence
In joyous pleasure, then in grievous pain:
For sweetness does allure the weaker sense
So strongly, that vneathes it can refrain
From that, which feeble nature couets feign;
But grief and wrath, that be her enemies,
And foes of life, she better can restrain;
Yet virtue vauntes in both their victories,
And Guyon in them all shows goodly maisteries.
Whom bold Cymochles traveling to find,
With cruel purpose bent to wreake on him
The wrath, which Atin kindled in his mind,
Came to a river, by whose utmost brim
Waiting to pass, he saw whereas did swim
A long the shore, as swift as glaunce of eye,
A little Gondelay, bedecked trim
With boughs and arbours wouen cunningly,
That like a little forest seemed outwardly.
And therein sat a Lady fresh and fair,
Making sweet solace to her self alone;
Sometimes she sung, as loud as lark in air,
Sometimes she laughed, that nigh her breath was gone,
Yet was there not with her else any one,
That might to her move cause of meriment:
Matter of merth enough, though there were none
She could devise, and thousand ways invent,
To feed her foolish humor, and vain iolliment.
Which when far off Cymochles heard, and saw,
He loudly called to such, as were a board,
The little bark unto the shore to draw,
And him to ferrie over that deep ford:
The merry mariner unto his word
Soon hearkened, and her painted bote streightway
Turned to the shore, where that same warlike Lord
She in received; but Atin by no way
She would admit, albe the knight her much did pray.
Eftsoons her shallow ship away did slide,
More swift, then swallow sheres the liquid sky,
Withouten oar or Pilot it to guide,
Or winged canuas with the wind to fly,
Only she turned a pin, and by and by
It cut away upon the yielding wave,
Ne cared she her course for to apply:
For it was taught the way, which she would have,
And both from rocks and flats it self could wisely save.
And all the way, the wanton Damzell found
New merth, her passenger to entertain:
For she in pleasant purpose did abound,
And greatly ioyed merry tales to feign,
Of which a storehouse did with her remain,
Yet seemed, nothing well they her became;
For all her words she drowned with laughter vain,
And wanted grace in vtt'ring of the same,
That turned all her pleasance to a scoffing game.
And other whiles vain toys she would deuize,
As her fantastic wit did most delight,
Sometimes her head she fondly would aguize
With gaudie girlonds, or fresh flowrets dight
About her neck, or rings of rushes plight;
Sometimes to do him laugh, she would assay
To laugh at shaking of the leaves light,
Or to behold the water work, and play
About her little frigot, therein making way.
Her light behavior, and loose dalliaunce
Gave wondrous great contentment to the knight,
That of his way he had no souenaunce,
Nor care of vowed revenge, and cruel fight,
But to weak wench did yield his martial might.
So easy was to quench his flamed mind
With one sweet drop of sensual delight,
So easy is, to appease the stormy wind
Of malice in the calm of pleasant womankind.
Diverse discourses in their way they spent,
Among which Cymochles of her questioned,
Both what she was, and what that usage meant,
Which in her cot she daily practiced.
Vain man (said she) that would be reckoned
A stranger in thy home, and ignorant
Of Phaedria (for so my name is red)
Of Phaedria, thine own fellow servant;
For thou to serve Acrasia thy self do vaunt.
In this wide Inland sea, that hight by name
The Idle lake, my wandering ship I row,
That knows her port, and thither sails by aim,
Ne care, ne fear I, how the wind do blow,
Or whether swift I wend, or whether slow:
Both slow and swift a like do serve my turn,
Ne swelling Neptune, ne loud thundering Jove
Can change my cheer, or make me ever mourn;
My little boat can safely pass this perilous bourne.
Whiles thus she talked, and whiles thus she toyd,
They were far past the passage, which he spoke,
And come unto an Island, waste and void,
That floted in the midst of that great lake,
There her small Gondelay her port did make,
And that gay pair issuing on the shore
Disburdued her. Their way they forward take
Into the land, that lay them fair before,
Whose pleasaunce she him showed, and plentiful great store.
It was a chosen plot of fertile land,
Emongst wide waves set, like a little nest,
As if it had by Natures cunning hand,
Been choisely picked out from all the rest,
And laid forth for ensample of the best:
No dainty flower or herb, that grows on ground,
No arboret with painted blossoms dressed,
And smelling sweet, but there it might be found
To bud out fair, and her sweet smells throw all around.
No tree, whose branches did not bravely spring;
No branch, whereon a fine bird did not sit:
No bird, but did her shrill notes sweetly sing;
No song but did contain a lovely dit:
Trees, branches, birds, and songs were framed fit,
For to allure frail mind to careless ease.
Careless the man soon woxe, and his weak wit
Was overcome of thing, that did him please;
So pleased, did his wrathful purpose fair appease.
Thus when she had his eyes and senses fed
With false delights, and filled with pleasures vain,
Into a shadie dale she soft him led,
And laid him down upon a grassie plain;
And her sweet self without dread, or disdain,
She set beside, laying his head disarmed
In her loose lap, it softly to sustain,
Where soon he slumbred, fearing not be harmed,
The whiles with a loud lay she thus him sweetly charmed.
Behold, o man, that toilesome pains do take
The flowers, the fields, and all that pleasant grows,
How they themselves do thine ensample make,
Whiles nothing envious nature them forth throws
Out of her fruitful lap; how, no man knows,
They spring, they bud, they blossom fresh and fair,
And deck the world with their rich pompous shows;
Yet no man for them takes pains or care,
Yet no man to them can his careful pains compare.
The lilly, Lady of the flowring field,
The Flowre-deluce, her lovely Paramoure,
Bid thee to them thy fruitless labors yield,
And soon leave off this toylesome weary stoure;
Lo lo how brave she decks her bounteous boure,
With silken curtens and gold couerlets,
Therein to shroud her sumptuous Belamoure,
Yet neither spinnes nor cards, ne cares nor frets,
But to her mother Nature all her care she lets.
Why then do thou, o man, that of them all
Art Lord, and eke of nature Sovereign,
Wilfully make thy self a wretched thrall,
And wast thy joyous hours in needless pain,
Seeking for danger and adventures vain?
What boots it all to have, and nothing use?
Who shall him rue, that swimming in the maine,
Will die for thirst, and water does refuse?
Refuse such fruitless toil, and present pleasures choose.
By this she had him lulled fast a sleep,
That of no worldly thing he care did take;
Then she with liquors strong his eyes did steep,
That nothing should him hastily awake:
So she him left, and did her self betake
Unto her boat again, with which she cleft
The slothful wave of that great griesly lake;
Soon she that Island far behind her left,
And now is come to that same place, where first she weft.
By this time was the worthy Guyon brought
Unto the other side of that wide strond,
Where she was rowing, and for passage sought:
Him needed not long call, she soon to hond
Her ferry brought, where him she byding fond,
With his sad guide; himself she took a board,
But the Black Palmer suffered still to stond,
Ne would for price, or prayers once afford,
To ferry that old man over the perlous foord.
Guyon was loath to leave his guide behind,
Yet being entered, might not back retire;
For the flit bark, obaying to her mind,
Forth launched quickly, as she did desire,
Ne gave him leave to bid that aged fire
Adieu, but nimbly ran her wonted course
Through the dull billows thick as troubled mire,
Whom neither wind out of their seat could forse,
Nor timely tides did drive out of their sluggish sourse.
And by the way, as was her wonted guize,
Her merry fit she freshly began to rear,
And did of joy and iollitie deuize,
Her self to cherish, and her guest to cheer:
The knight was courteous, and did not forbear
Her honest merth and pleasaunce to partake;
But when he saw her toy, and gibe, and gear,
And pass the bonds of modest merimake,
Her dalliance he despisd, and follies did forsake.
Yet she still followed her former style,
And said, and did all that mote him delight,
Till they arrived in that pleasant I Will,
Where sleeping late she left her other knight.
But when as Guyon that land had sight,
He wist himself amiss, and angry said;
Ah Dame, perdie ye have not done me right,
Thus to mislead me, whiles I you obaid:
Me little needed from my right way to have straid.
Fair Sir (quoth she) be not displeasd at all;
Who fares on sea, may not command his way,
Ne wind and weather at his pleasure call:
The sea is wide, and easy for to stray;
The wind unstable, and does never stay.
But here a while ye may in safety rest,
Till season serve new passage to assay;
Better safe port, then be in seas distressed.
Therewith she laughed, and did her earnest end in jest.
But he half discontent, mote nathelesse
Himself appease, and issewd forth on shore:
The joys whereof, and happy fruitfulness,
Such as he saw she began him lay before,
And all though pleasant, yet she made much more:
The fields did laugh, the flowers did freshly spring,
The trees did bud, and early blossoms bore,
And all the quire of birds did sweetly sing,
And told that gardins pleasures in their caroling.
And she more sweet, then any bird on bough,
Would oftentimes emongst them bear a part,
And strive to pass (as she could well enough)
Their native music by her skillful art:
So did she all, that might his constant heart
Withdraw from thought of warlike enterprise,
And drown in dissolute delights apart,
Where noise of arms, or view of martial guize
Might not revive desire of knightly exercize.
But he was wife, and wary of her will,
And ever held his hand upon his heart:
Yet would not seem so rude, and thewed ill,
As to despise so courteous seeming part,
That gentle Lady did to him impart,
But fairly tempring fond desire subdewd,
And ever her desired to depart.
She list not hear, but her disports poursewd,
And ever bad him stay, till time the tide renewd.
And now by this, Cymochles hour was spent,
That he awoke out of his idle dreme,
And shaking off his drowzie dreriment,
Began him auize, how ill did him beseem,
In slothful sleep his molten heart to steme,
And quench the brond of his conceived ire.
Tho up he started, stird with shame extreme,
Ne stayed for his Damzell to inquire,
But marched to the strond, their passage to require.
And in the way he with Sir Guyon met,
Accompanyde with Phaedria the fair,
Eftsoons he began to rage, and inly fret,
Crying, Let be that Lady debonaire,
Thou recreant knight, and soon thy self prepaire
To battle, if thou mean her love to gain:
Lo, lo already, how the fowls in air
Do flock, awaiting shortly to obtain
Thy carcass for their pray, the guerdon of thy pain.
And therewithal he fiercely at him flew,
And with importance outrage him assayld;
Who soon prepared to field, his sword forth drew,
And him with equal value counteruayld:
Their mighty strokes their haberieons dismayld,
And naked made each others manly spalles;
The mortal steel despiteously entayld
Deep in their flesh, quite through the iron walls,
That a large purple streme a down their giambeux falls.
Cymochles, that had never met before,
So puissant foe, with envious despite
His proud presumed force increased more,
Disdeigning to be held so long in fight;
Sir Guyon grudging not so much his might,
As those vnknightly raylings, which he spoke,
With wrathful fire his courage kindled bright,
Thereof devising shortly to be wroke,
And doubling all his powers, redoubled every stroke.
Both of them high attonce their hands enhaunst,
And both attonce their huge, blows down did sway;
Cymochles sword on Guyons shield yglaunst,
And thereof nigh one quarter sheard away;
But Guyons angry blade so fierce did play
On the others helmet, which as Titan shone,
That quite it cloue his plumed crest in tway,
And bared all his head unto the bone;
Wherewith astonished, still he stood, as senseless stone.
Still as he stood, fair Phaedria, that beheld
That deadly danger, soon atweene them ran;
And at their feet her self most humbly feld,
Crying with pitteous voice, and countenance wan;
Ah well away, most noble Lords, how can
Your cruel eyes endure so pitteous sight,
To shed your lives on ground? woe worth the man,
That first did teach the oursed steel to bight
In his own flesh, and make way to the living spright.
If ever love of Lady did empierce
Your iron breasts, or pity could find place,
Withhold your bloody hands from battle fierce,
And since for me ye fight, to me this grace
Both yield, to stay your deadly strife a space.
They stayed a while: and forth she began proceed:
Most wretched woman, and of wicked race,
That am the author of this heinous deed,
And cause of death between two doughtie knights do breed.
But if for me ye fight, or me will serve,
Not this rude kind of battle, nor these arms
Are meet, the which do men in bale to sterue,
And doleful sorrow heap with deadly harms:
Such cruel game my scarmoges disarmes:
Another war, and other weapons I
Do love, where love does give his sweet alarmes,
Without bloodshed, and where the enemy
Does yield unto his foe a pleasant victory.
Debatefull strife, and cruel enmity
The famous name of knighthood fowly shent;
But lovely peace, and gentle amity,
And in Amors the passing hours to spend,
The mighty martial hands do most commend;
Of love they ever greater glory bore,
Then of their arms: Mars is Cupidoes friend,
And is for Venus loves renowned more,
Then all his wars and spoils, the which he did of yore.
Therewith she sweetly smyld. They though full bent,
To prove extremities of bloody fight,
Yet at her speech their rages began relent,
And calm the sea of their tempestuous spite,
Such power have pleasing words: such is the might
Of courteous clemency in gentle heart.
Now after all was ceast, the Faery knight
Besought that Damzell suffer him depart,
And yield him ready passage to that other part.
She no less glad, then he desirous was
Of his departure thence; for of her joy
And vain delight she saw he light did pas,
A foe of folly and immodest toy,
Still solemn sad, or still disdainful coy,
Delighting all in arms and cruel war,
That her sweet peace and pleasures did annoy,
Troubled with terror and unquiet jar,
That she well pleased was thence to amoue him far.
Tho him she brought abord, and her swift bote
Forthwith directed to that further strand;
The which on the dull waves did lightly flote
And soon arrived on the shallow sand,
Where gladsome Guyon salied forth to land,
And to that Damzell thanks gave for reward.
Upon that shore he spied Atin stand,
Thereby his master left, when late he fared
In Phadrias flit bark over that perlous shard.
Well could he him remember, since of late
He with Pyrrhochles sharp debatement made;
Straight began he him revile, and bitter rate,
As shepherds curre, that in dark euenings shade
Has tracted forth some saluage beasts trade;
Vile Miscreant (said he) whither do thou fly
The shame and death, which will thee soon invade?
What coward hand shall do thee next to die,
That art thus foully fled from famous enemy?
With that he stiffely shook his steelehead dart:
But sober Guyon, hearing him so rail,
Though somewhat moved in his mighty heart,
Yet with strong reason maistred passion frail,
And passed fairly forth. He turning tail,
Back to the strond retyrd, and there still stayed,
Awaiting passage, which him late did fail;
The whiles Cymochles with that wanton maid
The hasty heat of his auowd revenge delayed.
Whylest there the varlet stood, he saw from far
An armed knight, that toward him fast ran,
He ran on foot, as if in lucklesse war
His forlorn steed from him the victourwan;
He seemed breathless, hartlesse, faint, and wan,
And all his armor sprinkled was with blood,
And soyld with durtie gore, that no man can
Discern the hew thereof. He never stood,
But bent his hasty course toward the idle flood.
The varlet saw, when to the flood he came,
How without stop or stay he fiercely lept,
And deep him self beduked in the same,
That in the lake his lofty crest was steept,
Ne of his safety seemed care he kept,
But with his raging arms he rudely flasht,
The waves about, and all his armor swept,
That all the blood and filth away was washed,
Yet still he bet the water, and the billows dashed.
Atin drew nigh, to weet what it mote be;
For much he wondered at that uncouth sight;
Whom should he, but his own dear Lord, there see,
His own dear Lord Pyrrhochles, in sad plight,
Ready to drown himself for fell despite.
Harrow now out, and well away, he cryde,
What dismal day has lent this cursed light,
To see my Lord so deadly damnifyde
Pyrrhochles, o Pyrrhochles, what is thee betyde?
I burn, I burn, I burn, then loud he cryde,
O how I burn with implacable fire,
Yet naught can quench mine inly flaming side,
Nor sea of licour cold, nor lake of mire,
Nothing but death can do me to respire.
Ah be it (said he) from Pyrrhochles far
After pursewing death once to require,
Or think, that ought those puissant hands may mar:
Death is for wretches borne under unhappy star.
Perdie, then is it fit for me (said he)
That am, I ween, most wretched man alive,
But in flames, yet no flames can I see,
And dying daily, daily yet revive:
O Atin, help to me last death to give.
The varlet at his plaint was grieved so sore,
That his deep wounded heart in two did riue,
And his own health remembering now no more,
Did follow that ensample, which he blamed before.
Into the lake he lept, his Lord to aid,
(So Love the dread of danger does despise)
And of him catching hold him strongly stayed
From drowning. But more happy he, then wise
Of that seas nature did him not auise.
The waves thereof so slow and sluggish were,
Engrost with mud, which did them foul agrise,
That every weighty thing they did vpbeare,
Ne ought mote ever sink down to the bottom there.
Whiles thus they strugled in that idle wave,
And strove in vain, the one himself to drown,
The other both from drowning for to save,
Lo, to that shore one in an ancient gown,
Whose hoarie locks great gravity did crown,
Holding in hand a goodly arming sword,
By fortune came, led with the troublous sown:
Where drenched deep he found in that dull ford
The careful servant, striving with his raging Lord.
Him Atin spying, knew right well of yore,
And loudly called, Help help, o Archimage;
To save my Lord, in wretched plight forlore;
Help with thy hand, or with thy counsel sage:
Weak hands, but counsel is most strong in age.
Him when the old man saw, he wondered sore,
To see Pyrrhochles there so rudely rage:
Yet since help, he saw, he needed more
Then pity, he in have approached to the shore.
And called, Pyrrhochles, what is this, I see?
What hellish fury has at erst thee hent?
Furious ever I thee knew to be,
Yet never in this strange astonishment.
These flames, these flames (he cryde) do metorment.
What flames (quoth he) when I thee present see,
In danger rather to be drent, then brent?
Harrow, the flames, which me consume (said he)
Ne can be quenched, within my secret bowels be.
That cursed man, that cruel feend of hell,
Furor, oh Furor has me thus bedight:
His deadly wounds within my livers swell,
And his whot fire burns in mine entrails bright,
Kindled through his infernal brond of spite,
Since late with him I batteil vain would boste;
That now I ween Jove's dreaded thunder light
Does scorch not half so sore, nor damned ghost
In flaming Phlegeton does not so felly roste.
Which when as Archimago heard, his grief
He knew right well, and him attonce disarmd:
Then searched his secret wounds, and made a priefe
Of every place, that was with brusing harmd,
Or with the hidden fire too inly warmd.
Which done, he balmes and herbs thereto applyde,
And euemore with mighty spells them charmd,
That in short space he has them qualifyde,
And him restored to health, that would have algates did.
Cant. VII.
Guyon finds Mamon in a delue,
Sunning his threasure hoar:
Is by him tempted, and led down,
To see his secret store.
AS Pilot well expert in perilous wave,
That to a steadfast star his course has bent,
When foggy mistes, or cloudy tempests have
The faithful light of that fair lamp yblent,
And covered heaven with hideous dreriment,
Upon his card and compass firmes his eye,
The masters of his long experiment,
And to them does the steady helm apply,
Bidding his winged vessel fairly forward fly.
So Guyon having lost his trusty guide,
Late left beyond that Idle lake, proceeds
Yet on his way, of none accompanide;
And evermore himself with comfort feeds,
Of his own virtues, and prayse-worthy deeds.
So long he yode, yet no adventure found,
Which fame of her shrill trompet worthy reeds:
For still he traueild through wide wastfull ground,
That naught but desert wilderness showed all around.
At last he came unto a gloomy glade,
Covered with boughs and shrubs from heavens light,
Whereas he sitting found in secret shade
An uncouth, saluage, and vnciulle wight,
Of griesly hew, and foul ill favored sight;
His face with smoke was tand, and eyes were bleard,
His head and beard with sout were ill bedight,
His cole-blacke hands did seem to have been seard
In smithes fire-spitting forge, and nails like claws appeard.
His iron coat all ouergrowne with rust,
Was underneath enueloped with gold,
Whose glistring gloss darkened with filthy dust,
Well it appeared, to have been of old
A work of rich entayle, and curious mould,
Wouen with antickes and wild Imagery:
And in his lap a mass of coin he told,
And turned vpsidowne, to feed his eye
A covetous desire with his huge threasury.
And round about him lay on every side
Great heaps of gold, that never could be spent:
Of which some were rude owre, not purifide
Of Mulcibers devouring element;
Some others were new driven, and distent
Into great Ingoes, and to wedges square;
Some in round plates withouten moniment;
But most were stamped, and in their metal bare
The antique shapes of kings and kesars strange and rare.
Soon as he Guyon saw, in great affright
And have he rose, for to remove aside
Those precious hills from strangers envious sight,
And down them poured through an hole full wide,
Into the hollow earth, them there to hide.
But Guyon lightly to him leaping, stayed
His hand, that trembled, as one terrifyde;
And though him self were at the sight dismayed,
Yet him perforce restraynd, and to him doubtful said.
What art thou man, (if man at all thou art)
That here in desert have thine habitaunce,
And these rich heaps of wealth do hide apart
From the worlds eye, and from her right vsaunce?
Thereat with staring eyes fixed askaunce,
In great disdain, he answered; Hardy Elfe,
That dare view my direful, countenance,
I read thee rash, and heedlesse of thy self,
To trouble my still seat, and heaps of precious pelf.
God of the world and worldlings I me call,
Great Mammon, greatest god below the sky,
That of my plenty pour out unto all,
And unto none my graces do envy:
Riches, renown, and principality,
Honor, estate, and all this worlds good,
For which men swinck and sweat incessantly,
Fro me do flow into an ample flood,
And in the hollow earth have their eternal brood.
Wherefore if me thou deigne to serve and sew,
At thy command lo all these mountains be;
Or if to thy great mind, or greedy view
All these may not suffice, there shall to thee
Ten times so much be numbered francke and free.
Mammon (said he) thy godheades vaunt is vain,
And idle offers of thy golden fee;
To them, that covet such eye-glutting gain,
Proffer thy gifts, and fitter servant entertain.
Me ill besits, that in der-doing arms,
And honors suit my vowed days do spend,
Unto thy bounteous baytes, and pleasing charms,
With which weak men thou witchest, to attend:
Regard of worldly mucke does fowly blend,
And low abase the high heroicke spright,
That joys for crowns and kingdoms to contend;
Fair shields, gay steedes, bright arms be my delight:
Those be the riches fit for an aduent'rous knight.
Vain glorious Elfe (said he) do not thou weet,
That money can thy wantes at will supply?
Sheilds, steeds, and arms, and all things for thee meet
It can puruay in twinkling of an eye;
And crowns and kingdoms to thee multiply.
Do not I kings create, throw the crown
Sometimes to him, that low in dust does ly?
And him that raignd, into his rowme thrust down,
And whom I lust, do heap with glory and renown?
All otherwise (said he) I riches read,
And deem them root of all disquietnesse;
First got with guile, and then preserved with dread,
And after spent with pride and lavishness,
Leaving behind them grief and heaviness.
Infinite mischiefs of them do arize,
Strife; and debate, bloodshed, and bitterness,
Outrageous wrong, and hellish couetize,
That noble heart as great dishonor does despize.
Ne thine be kingdoms, ne the scepters thine;
But realms and rulers thou do both confound,
And loyal truth to treason do incline;
Witness the guiltless blood pourd often on ground,
The crowned often slain, the slayer cround,
The sacred Diadem in pieces rent,
And purple robe gored with many a wound;
Castles surprizd, great cities sacked and brent:
So make thou kings, and gaynest wrongful government.
Long were to tell the troublous storms, that toss
The private state, and make the life unsweet:
Who swelling sails in Caspian sea does cross,
And in frail wood on Adrian gulf does fleet,
Does not, I ween, so many evils meet.
Then Mammon wexing wroth, And why then, said,
Are mortal men so fond and indiscreet,
So evil thing to seek unto their aid,
And having not complain, and having it vpbraid?
Indeed (quoth he) through foul intemperaunce,
Frail men are often captived to couetise:
But would they think, with how small allowaunce
Untroubled Nature does her self suffice,
Such superfluities they would despise,
Which with sad cares empeach our native joys:
At the well head the purest streams arise:
But mucky filth his braunching arms annoyes,
And with uncomely weeds the gentle wave accloyes.
The antique world, in his first flowring youth,
Found no defect in his Creatours grace,
But with gladthankes, and unreproved truth,
Tne gifts of sovereign bounty did embrace:
Like Angels life was then men's happy case;
But later ages pride, like corn-fed steed,
Abusd her plenty, and fat swollen encreace
To all licentious lust, and began exceed
The measure of her mean, and natural first need.
Then began a cursed hand the quiet womb
Of his great Gandmother with steel to wound,
And the hid treasures in her sacred tomb,
With Sacrilege to dig. Therein he found
Fountains of gold and silver to abound,
Of which the matter of his huge desire
And pompous pride eftsoons he did compound;
Then avarice began through his veins inspire
His greedy flames, and kindled life-deuouring fire.
Son (said he then) let be thy bitter scorn,
And leave the rudeness of antique age
To them, that lived therein in state forlorn;
Thou that do live in later times, must wage
Thy works for wealth, and life for gold engage.
If then thee list my offered grace to use,
Take what thou please of all this surplusage;
If thee list not, leave have thou to refuse:
But thing refused, do not afterward accuse.
Me list not (said the Elfin knight) receive
Thing offered, till I know it well be got,
Ne wot I, but thou did these goods bereave
From rightful owner by unrighteous lot,
Or that blood guiltnesse or guile them blot.
Perdy (quoth he) yet never eye did view,
Ne tongue did tell, ne hand these handled not,
But safe I have them kept in secret mew,
From heavens sight, and power of all which the^ pursew.
What secret place (quoth he) can safely hold
So huge a mass, and hide from heavens eye?
Or where have thou thy won, that so much gold
Thou can preserve from wrong and robbery?
Come thou (quoth he) and see. So by and by
Through that thick covert he him led, and found
A darkesome way, which no man could descry,
That deep descended through the hollow ground,
And was with dread and horror compassed around.
At length they came into a larger space,
That stretched it self into an ample plain,
Through which a beaten broad high way did trace,
That straight did lead to Plutoes griefly rain:
By that ways side, there fate infernal Pain,
And fast beside him sat tumultuous Strife:
The one in hand an iron whip did strain,
The other brandished a bloody knife,
And both did gnash their teeth, and both did threaten life.
On the other side in one consort there sat,
Cruel Revenge, and rancorous Despite,
Disloyal Treason, and hart-burning Hate,
But gnawing Gealosie out of their sight
Sitting alone, his bitter lips did bight,
And trembling Fear still to and fro did fly,
And found no place, where safe he shroud him might,
Lamenting Sorrow did in darkness lie.
And Shame his ugly face did hide from living eye.
And over them sad horror with grim hew,
Did always sore, beating his iron wings;
And after him Owls and Night-rauens flew,
The hateful messengers of heavy things,
Of death and dolor telling sad tidings;
Whiles sad Celeno, sitting on a clift,
A song of bale and bitter sorrow sings,
That heart of flint a sunder could have rift:
Which having ended, after him she flies swift.
All these before the gates of Pluto lay,
By whom they passing, spoke unto them naught.
But th'Elfin knight with wonder all the way
Did feed his eyes, and filled his inner thought.
At last him to a little door he brought,
That to the gate of Hell, which gaped wide,
Was next adjoining, ne them parted ought:
Betwixt them both was but a little stride,
That did the house of Richesse from hell-mouth divide.
Before the door sat selfe-consuming Care,
Day and night keeping wary watch and ward,
For fear least Force or Fraud should unaware
Break in, and spoil the treasure there in guard:
Ne would he suffer Sleep once thither-ward
Approach, albe his drowsy den were next;
For next to death is Sleep to be compard:
Therefore his house is unto his annexed;
Here Sleep, there Richesse, and Hel-gate the^ both betwext.
So soon as Mammon there arrived, the door
To him did open, and affoorded way;
Him followed eke Sir Guyon evermore,
Ne darkness him, ne danger might dismay.
Soon as he entered was, the door straight way
Did shut, and from behind it forth there lept
An ugly feend, more foul then dismal day,
The which with monstrous stalk behind him stepped,
And ever as he went, dew watch upon him kept.
Well hoped he, ere long that hardy guest,
If ever covetous hand, or lustful eye,
Or lips he laid on thing, that likt him best,
Or ever sleep his eye-strings did untie,
Should be his pray. And therefore still on hye
He over him did hold his cruel claws,
Threatening with greedy gripe to do him dye
And rend in pieces with his ravenous paws,
If ever he transgrest the fatal Stygian laws.
That houses form within was rude and strong,
Like an huge cave, hewne out of rocky clift,
From whose rough vaut the ragged breaches hong,
Embost with massy gold of glorious gift,
And with rich metal loaded every rift,
That heavy ruin they did seem to threat;
And over them Arachne high did lift
Her cunning web, and spread her subtle net,
Enwrapped in foul smoke and clouds more black then Iet.
Both roof, and floor, and walls were all of gold,
But ouergrowne with dust and old decay,
And hid in darkness, that none could behold
The hew thereof: for view of cheerful day
Did never in that house it self display,
But a faint shadow of uncertain light;
Such as a lamp, whose life does fade away:
Or as the Moon clothed with clowdy night,
Does show to him, that walks in fear and sad affright.
In all that rowme was nothing to be seen,
But huge great iron chests and coffers strong,
All bard with double bends, that none could ween
Them to efforce by violence or wrong;
On every side they placed were along.
But all the ground with sculs was scattered,
And dead men's bones, which round about were flong,
Whose lives, it seemed, whilome there were shed,
And their vile carcases now left unburied.
They forward pass, ne Guyon yet spoke word,
Till that they came unto an iron door,
Which to them opened of his own accord,
And showed of richesse such exceeding store,
As eye of man did never see before;
Ne ever could within one place be found,
Though all the wealth, which is, or was of yore,
Could gathered be through all the world around,
And that above were added to that under ground.
The charge thereof unto a covetous Spright
Commanded was, who thereby did attend,
And warily awaited day and night,
From other covetous feends it to defend,
Who it to rob and ransacke did intend.
Then Mammon turning to that warrior, said;
Lo here the worlds blis, lo here the end,
To which all men do aim, rich to be made:
Such grace now to be happy, is before thee laid.
Certes (said he) I n'ill thine offered grace,
Ne to be made so happy do intend:
Another blis before mine eyes I place,
Another happiness, another end.
To them, that list, these base regardes I lend:
But I in arms, and in atchieuements brave,
Do rather choose my flitting hours to spend,
And to be Lord of those, that riches have,
Then them to have my self, and be their servile sclaue.
Thereat the feend his gnashing teeth did grate,
And grieved, so long to lack his greedy pray;
For well he weened, that so glorious bayte
Would tempt his guest, to take thereof assay:
Had he so done, he had him snatched away,
More light then Culuer in the Faulcons fist.
Eternal God thee save from such decay.
But whenas Mammon saw his purpose mist,
Him to entrap unawares another way he wist.
Thence forward he him led, and shortly brought
Unto another rowme, whose door forthright,
To him did open, as it had been taught:
Therein an hundred raunges weren pight,
And hundred fornaces all burning bright;
By every furnace many feends did bide,
Deformed creatures, horrible in sight,
And every feend his busy pains applide,
To melt the golden metal, ready to be tried.
One with great bellows gathered filling air,
And with forced wind the fuel did inflame;
Another did the dying bronds repair
With iron toungs, and sprinkled often the same
With liquid waves, fires Vulcans rage to tame,
Who maistring them, renewd his former heat;
Some scumd the dross, that from the metal came;
Some stird the molten owre with ladles great;
And every one did swincke, and every one did sweat.
But when as earthly wight they present saw,
Glistring in arms and battailous array,
From their whot work they did themselves withdraw
To wonder at the sight: for till that day,
They never creature saw, that came that way.
Their staring eyes sparckling with fervent fire,
And ugly shapes did nigh the man dismay,
That were it not for shame, he would retire,
Till that him thus bespake their sovereign Lord and sire.
Behold, thou Faeries son, with mortal eye,
That living eye before did never see:
The thing, that thou did crave so earnestly,
To weet, whence all the wealth late showed by me,
Proceeded, lo now is reueald to thee.
Here is the fountain of the worlds good:
Now therefore, if thou will enriched be,
Auise thee well, and change thy wilful mood,
Least thou perhaps hereafter wish, and be withstood.
Suffice it then, thou Money God (quoth he)
That all thine idle offers I refuse.
All that I need I have; what needs me
To covet more, then I have cause to use?
With such vain shows thy worldlings vile abuse:
But give me leave to follow mine emprise.
Mammon was much displeasd, yet no'te he choose,
But bear the rigor of his bold mespise,
And thence him forward led, him further to entise.
He brought him through a darksome narrow strait,
To a broad gate, all built of beaten gold:
The gate was open, but therein did wait
A sturdy villein, striding stiff and bold,
As the highest God defy he would;
In his right hand an iron club he held,
But he himself was all of golden mould,
Yet had both life and sense, and well could weld
That cursed weapon, when his cruel foes he queld.
Disdain he called was, and did disdain
To be so called, and who so did him call:
Stern was to look, and full of stomach vain,
His portaunce terrible, and stature tall,
Far passing th'hight of men terrestrial;
Like an huge Giant of the Titans race,
That made him scorn all creatures great and small,
And with his pride all others power deface:
More fit amongst black fiendes, then men to have his place.
Soon as those glitterand arms he did espy,
That with their brightness made that darkness light,
His harmefull club he began to hurtle hye,
And threaten batteill to the Faery knight;
Who likewise began himself to batteill dight,
Till Mammon did his hasty hand withhold,
And counseld him abstain from perilous fight:
For nothing might abash the villein bold,
Ne mortal steel emperce his miscreated mould.
So having him with reason pacifide,
And the fires Carle commanding to forbear,
He brought him in. The rowme was large and wide,
As it some Gyeld or solemn Temple wear:
Many great golden pillours did vpbeare
The massy roof, and riches huge sustain,
And every pillour decked was full dear
With crowns and Diademes, and titles vain,
Which mortal Princes wore, whiles they on earth did rain.
A route of people there assembled were,
Of every sort and nation under sky,
Which with great uproar preaced to draw nere
To th'vpper part, where was advanced hye
A stately siege of sovereign majesty;
And thereon sat a woman gorgeous gay,
And richly clad in robes of royaltye,
That never earthly Prince in such a ray
His glory did enhaunce, and pompous pride display.
Her face right wondrous fair did seem to be,
That her broad beauties beam great brightness threw
Through the dim shade, that all men might it see:
Yet was not that same her own native hew,
But wrought by art and counterfetted show,
Thereby more lovers unto her to call;
Nath'lesse most heavenly fair in deed and view
She by creation was, till she did fall;
The^ceforth she sought for helps, to cloak her crime withal.
There, as in glistring glory she did sit,
She held a great gold chain ylincked well,
Whose upper end to highest heaven was knit,
And lower part did reach to lowest Hell;
And all that preace did round about her swell,
To catchen hold of that long chain, thereby
To clime aloft, and others to excel:
That was Ambition, rash desire to sty,
And every lincke thereof a step of dignity.
Some thought to raise themselves to high degree,
By riches and unrighteous reward,
Some by close shouldrihg, some by flatteree;
Others through friends, others for base regard;
And all by wrong ways for themselves prepared.
Those that were up themselves, kept others low,
Those that were low themselves, held others hard,
Ne suffered them to rise or greater grow,
But every one did strive his fellow down to throw.
Which when as Guyon saw, he began inquire,
What meant that preace about that Ladies throne,
And what she was that did so high aspire.
Him Mammon answered; That goodly one,
Whom all that folk with such contention,
Do flock about, my dear my, daughter is;
Honor and dignity from her alone,
Derived are, and all this worlds blis
For which ye men do strive: few get, but many mis.
And fair Philotime she rightly hight,
The fairest wight that wonneth under sky,
But that this darksome nether world her light
Does dim with horror and deformity,
Worthy of heaven and hye felicity,
From whence the gods have her for envy thrust:
But since thou have found favor in mine eye,
Thy spouse I will her make, if that thou lust,
That she may thee advance for works and merits just.
Gramercy Mammon (said the gentle knight)
For so great grace and offered high estate;
But I, that am frail flesh and earthly wight,
Unworthy match for such immortal mate
My self well wot, and mine unequal fate;
And were I not, yet is my troth yplight,
And love auowd to other Lady late,
That to remove the same I have no might:
To change love causeless is reproach to warlike knight.
Mammon emmoued was with inward wrath;
Yet forcing it to feign, him forth thence led
Through griesly shadows by a beaten path,
Into a gardin goodly garnished
With herbs and fruits, whose kinds mote not be red:
Not such, as earth out of her fruitful woomb
Throws forth to men, sweet and well sauoured,
But direful deadly black both leaf and bloom,
Fit to adorn the dead, and deck the drery toombe.
There mournful Cypress grew in greatest store,
And trees of bitter Gall, and Heben sad,
Dead sleeping Poppy, and black Hellebore,
Cold Coloquintida, and Tetra mad,
Mortal Samnitis, and Cicuta bad,
Which with th'vniust Atheniens made to die
Wise Socrates, who thereof quaffing glad
Pourd out his life, and last Philosophy
To the fair Critias his dearest Belamy.
The Gordin of Proserpina this hight;
And in the midst thereof a silver seat,
With a thick Arber goodly over dight,
In which she often vsd from open heat
Her self to shroud, and pleasures to entreat.
Next thereunto did grow a goodly tree,
With branches broad dispred and body great,
Clothed with leaves, that none the wood mote see
And laden all with fruit as thick as it might be.
Their fruit were golden apples glistring bright,
That goodly was their glory to behold,
On earth like never grew, ne living wight
Like ever saw, but they from hence were sold;
For those, which Hercules with conquest bold
Got from great Atlas daughters, hence began,
And planted there, did bring forth fruit of gold:
And those with which the Eubaean young man wan
Swift Atalanta, when through craft he her out ran.
Here also sprung that goodly golden fruit,
With which Acontius got his lover true,
Whom he had long time sought with fruitless suit:
Here eke that famous golden Apple grew,
The which emongst the gods false Ate threw;
For which the Idaean Ladies disagreed,
Till partial Paris dempt it Venus dew,
And had of her, fair Helen for his meed,
That many noble Greeks and Trojans made to bleed.
The warlike Elfe, much wondered at this tree,
So fair and great, that shadowed all the ground,
And his broad branches, laden with rich fee,
Did stretch themselves without the utmost bound
Of this great gardin, compast with a mound,
Which ouer-hanging, they themselves did steep,
In a black flood which flowed about it round;
That is the river of Cocytus deep,
In which full many souls do endless wail and weep.
Which to behold, he clomb up to the bank,
And looking down, saw many damned wights,
In those sad waves, which direful deadly stanke,
Plonged continually of cruel Sprights,
That with their pitteous cries, and yelling shrights,
They made the further shore resounden wide:
Emongst the rest of those same ruefull sights,
One cursed creature, he by chance espide,
That drenched lay full deep, under the Garden side.
Deep was he drenched to the vpmost chin,
Yet gaped still, as coveting to drink
Of the cold liquor, which he waded in,
And stretching forth his hand, did often think
To reach the fruit, which grew upon the brincke:
But both the fruit from hand, and flood from mouth
Did fly abacke, and made him vainly swinke:
The whiles he steru'd with hunger and with drouth
He daily did, yet never thoroughly dyen couth.
The knight him seeing labor so in vain,
Asked who he was, and what he meant thereby:
Who groaning deep, thus answered him again;
Most cursed of all creatures under sky,
Lo Tantalus, I here tormented lie:
Of whom high Jove wont whylome feasted be,
Lo here I now for want of food do dye:
But if that thou be such, as I thee see,
Of grace I pray thee, give to eat and drink to me.
Nay, nay, thou greedy Tantalus (quoth he)
Abide the fortune of thy present fate,
And unto all that live in high degree,
Ensample be of mind intemperate,
To teach them how to use their present state.
Then began the cursed wretch aloud to cry,
Accusing highest Jove and gods ingrate,
And eke blaspheming heaven bitterly,
As author of injustice, there to let him dye.
He looked a little further, and espyde
Another wretch, whose carcass deep was drent
Within the river, which the same did hyde:
But both his hands most filthy feculent,
Above the water were on high extent,
And faynd to wash themselves incessantly;
Yet nothing cleaner were for such intent,
But rather fowler seemed to the eye;
So lost his labor vain and idle industry.
The knight him calling, asked who he was,
Who lifting up his head, him answered thus:
I Pilate am the falsest Judge, alas,
And most unjust, that by unrighteous
And wicked doom, to Jews despiteous
Delivered up the Lord of life to die,
And did acquit a murdrer felonous;
The whiles my hands I washed in purity,
The whiles my soul was soyld with foul iniquity.
Infinite more, tormented in like pain
He there beheld, too long here to be told:
Ne Mammon would there let him long remain,
For terror of the tortures manifold,
In which the damned souls he did behold,
But roughly him bespake. Thou fearful fool,
Why take not of that same fruit of gold,
Ne sit down on that same silver stool,
To rest thy weary person, in the shadow cool.
All which he did, to do him deadly fall
In frail intemperance through sinful bayt;
To which if he inclined had at all,
That dreadful feend, which did behind him wayt,
Would him have rent in thousand pieces strayt:
But he was wary wise in all his way,
And well perceived his deceiptfull slight,
Ne suffered lust his safety to betray;
So goodly did beguile the Guyler of the pray.
And now he has so long remained there,
That vital powers began wexe both weak and wan,
For want of food, and sleep, which two vpbeare,
Like mighty pillours, this frail life of man,
That none without the same enduren can.
For now three days of men were full outwrought,
Since he this hardy enterprise began:
For thy great Mammon fairly he besought,
Into the world to guide him back, as he him brought.
The God, though loath, yet was constraind t'obay,
For longer time, then that, no living wight
Below the earth, might suffered be to stay:
So back again, him brought to living light.
But all so soon as his enfeebled spright
Began suck this vital air into his breast,
As overcome with too exceeding might,
The life did flit away out of her nest,
And all his senses were with deadly fit oppressed.
Cant. VIII.
Sir Guyon laid in swowne is by
Acrates sons despoyld,
Whom Arthur soon has reskewed
And Paynim brethren foyld.
ANd is there care in heaven? and is there love
In heavenly spirits to these creatures bace,
That may compassion of their evils move?
There is: else much more wretched were the case
Of men, then beasts. But o th'exceeding grace
Of highest God, that loves his creatures so,
And all his works with mercy does embrace,
That blessed Angels, he sends to and fro,
To serve to wicked man, to serve his wicked foe.
How often do they, their silver bowers leave,
To come to succor us, that succor want?
How often do they with golden pineons, cleave
The flitting skies, like flying Pursuiuant,
Against foul feends to aid us millitant?
They for us fight, they watch and dewly ward,
And their bright Squadrons round about us plant,
And all for love, and nothing for reward:
O why should heavenly God to men have such regard?
During the while, that Guyon did abide
In Mamons house, the Palmer, whom whyleare
That wanton Maid of passage had denide,
By further search had passage found elsewhere,
And being on his way, approached near,
Where Guyon lay in trance, when suddenly
He heard a voice, that called loud and clear,
Come hither, come hither, o come hastily;
That all the fields resounded with the ruefull cry.
The Palmer lent his ear unto the noyce,
To weet, who called so importunely:
Again he heard a more efforced voice,
That bad him come in haste. He by and by
His feeble feet directed to the cry;
Which to that shadie delue him brought at last,
Where Mammon erst did sun his threasury:
There the good Guyon he found slumbring fast
In senseless dream; which sight at first him sore aghast.
Beside his head there sat a fair young man,
Of wondrous beauty, and of freshest years,
Whose tender bud to blossom new began,
And flourish fair above his equal pears;
His snowy front curled with golden hears,
Like Phoebus face adornd with sunny rays,
Divinely shone, and two sharp winged sheares,
Decked with diverse plumes, like painted Iayes,
Were fixed at his back, to cut his ayerie ways.
Like as Cupido on Idaean hill,
When having laid his cruel bow away,
And mortal arrows, wherewith he does fill
The world with murdrous spoils and bloody pray,
With his fair mother he him dights to play,
And with his goodly sisters, Graces three;
The Goddess pleased with his wanton play,
Suffers her self through sleep beguild to be,
The whiles the other Ladies mind their merry glee.
Whom when the Palmer saw, abasht he was
Through fear and wonder, that he naught could say,
Till him the child bespoke, Long lackt, alas,
Has been thy faithful aid in hard assay,
Whiles deadly fit thy pupil does dismay;
Behold this heavy sight, thou reverend Sire,
But dread of death and dolor do away;
For life ere long shall to her home retire,
And he that breathless seems, shall courage bold respire.
The charge, which God does unto me arret,
Of his dear safety, I to thee commend;
Yet will I not forgo, ne yet forget
The care thereof my self unto the end,
But evermore him succor, and defend
Against his foe and mine: watch thou I pray;
For evil is at hand him to offend.
So having said, eftsoons he began display
His painted nimble wings, and vanished quite away.
The Palmer seeing his left empty place,
And his slow eyes beguiled of their sight,
Woxe fore afraid, and standing still a space,
Gazed after him, as foul escapt by flight;
At last him turning to his charge behight,
With trembling hand his troubled pulse began try;
Where finding life not yet dislodged quight,
He much reioyst, and courd it tenderly,
As chicken newly hatched, from dreaded destiny.
At last he spide, where toward him did pace
Two Paynim knights, all armd as bright as sky,
And them beside an aged Sire did trace,
And far before a light-foot Page did fly,
That breathed strife and troublous enmity;
Those were the two sons of Acrates old,
Who meeting erst with Archimago sly,
Foreby that idle strond, of him were told,
That he, which erst them combatted, was Guyon bold.
Which to avenge on him they dearly vowed,
Where ever that on ground they mote him find;
False Archimage prouokt their courage proud,
And stryfull Atin in their stubborn mind
Coals of contention and whot vengeance tynd.
Now been they come, whereas the Palmer sat,
Keeping that slombred corse to him assynd;
Well knew they both his person, since of late
With him in bloody arms they rashly did debate.
Whom when Pyrrhochles saw, inflamed with rage,
That sire he soul bespake, Thou dotard vile,
That with thy brutenesse shendst thy comely age,
Abandone soon, I read, the caitiue spoil
Of that same outcast carcass, that erewhile
Made it self famous through false treachery,
And crowned his coward crest with knightly style;
Lo where he now inglorious does lie,
To prove he lived ill, that did thus foully dye.
To whom the Palmer fearelesse answered;
Certes, Sir knight, ye been too much to blame,
Thus for to blot the honor of the dead,
And with foul cowardice his carcass shame,
Whose living hands immortalizd his name.
Vile is the vengeance on the ashes cold,
And envy base, to bark at sleeping fame:
Was never wight, that treason of him told;
Your self his prowess proved and found him fires and bold.
Then said Cymochles; Palmer, thou do dote,
Ne can of prowess, ne of knighthood deem,
Save as thou see or hearst. But well I wot,
That of his puissance trial made extreme;
Yet gold all is not, that does golden seem,
Ne all good knights, that shake well spear and shield:
The worth of all men by their end esteem,
And then due praise, or due reproach them yield;
Bad therefore I him deem, that thus lies dead on field.
Good or bad (began his brother fierce reply)
What do I recke, since that he did entire?
Or what does his bad death now satisfy
The greedy hunger of revenging ire,
Since wrathful hand wrought not her own desire?
Yet since no way is left to wreake my spite,
I will him reaue of arms, the victors hire,
And of that shield, more worthy of good knight;
For why should a dead dog be decked in armor bright?
Fair Sir, said then the Palmer suppliaunt,
For knighthoods love, do not so foul a deed,
Ne blame your honor with so shameful vaunt
Of vile revenge. To spoil the dead of weed
Is sacrilege, and does all sins exceed;
But leave these relics of his living might,
To deck his herce, and trap his tomb-blacke steed.
What herce or steed (said he) should he have dight,
But be entombed in the raven or the kight?
With that, rude hand upon his shield he laid,
And the other brother began his helm unlace,
Both fiercely bent to have him disaraid;
Till that they spide, where toward them did pace
An armed knight, of bold and bounteous grace,
Whose squire bore after him an heben lance,
And couerd shield, Well kend him so far space
Th'enchaunter by his arms and amenaunce,
When under him he saw his Lybian steed to praunce.
And to those brethren said, Rise rise by live,
And unto battle do your selves address;
For yonder comes the prowest knight alive,
Prince Arthur, flower of grace and nobilesse,
That has to Paynim knights wrought great distress,
And thousand Sar'zins foully done to dye.
That word so deep did in their hearts impresse,
That both eftsoons vpstarted furiously,
And began themselves prepare to battle greedily.
But fierce Pyrrhochles, lacking his own sword,
The want thereof now greatly began to plain,
And Archimage besought, him that afford,
Which he had brought for Braggadocchio vain.
So would I (said th'enchaunter) glad and feign
Beteeme to you this sword, you to defend,
Or ought that else your honor might maintain,
But that this weapons power I well have kend,
To be contrary to the work, which ye intend.
For that same knights own sword this is of yore,
Which Merlin made by his almighty art
For that his noursling, when he knighthood swore,
Therewith to done his foes eternal smart.
The metal first he mixed with Medaewart,
That no enchauntment from his dint might save;
Then it in flames of Aetna wrought apart,
And seven times dipped in the bitter wave
Of hellish Styx, which hidden virtue to it gave.
The virtue is, that neither steel, nor stone
The stroke thereof from entrance may defend;
Ne ever may be used by his fone,
Ne forced his rightful owner to offend,
Ne ever will it break, ne ever bend.
Wherefore Morddure it rightfully is hight.
In vain therefore, Pyrrhochles, should I lend
The same to thee, against his lord to fight,
For sure it would deceive thy labor, and thy might.
Foolish old man, said then the Pagan wroth,
That weenest words or charms may force withstond:
Soon shall thou see, and then believe for troth,
That I can carue with this inchaunted brond
His Lords own flesh. Therewith out of his hond
That virtuous steel he rudely snatched away,
And Guyons shield about his wrest he bond;
So ready dight, fierce battle to assay,
And match his brother proud in battailous array.
By this that stranger knight in presence came,
And goodly salued them; who naught again
Him answered, as courtesy became,
But with stern looks, and stomachous disdain,
Gave signs of grudge and coffeehouse vain:
Then turning to the Palmer, he began spy
Where at his feet, with sorrowful demaine
And deadly hew, an armed corse did lie,
In whose dead face he red great magnanimity.
Said he then to the Palmer, Reverend sire,
What great misfortune has betidd this knight?
Or did his life her fatal date expyre,
Or did he fall by treason, or by fight?
How ever, sure I rue his pitteous plight.
Not one, nor other, (said the Palmer grave)
Has him befalne, but clouds of deadly night
A while his heavy eylids covered have,
And all his senses drowned in deep senseless wave.
Which, those same foes, that stand hereby,
Making advantage, to revenge their spite,
Would him disarme, and treaten shamefully,
Unworthy usage of redoubted knight.
But you, fair Sir, whose honorable sight
Does promise hope of help, and timely grace,
Mote I beseech to succor his sad plight,
And by your power protect his feeble case.
First praise of knighthood is, foul outrage to deface.
Palmer, (said he) no knight so rude, I ween,
As to done outrage to a sleeping ghost:
Ne was there ever noble courage seen,
That in advantage would his puissance bost:
Honor is least, where odds appears most.
May be, that better reason will assuage,
The rash reuengers heat. Words well dispost
Have secret power, to appease inflamed rage:
If not, leave unto me thy knights last patonage.
Tho turning to those brethren, thus bespoke,
Ye warlike pair, whose valorous great might
It seems, just wrongs to vengeance do provoke,
To wreake your wrath on this dead seeming knight,
Mote ought allay the storm of your despite,
And settle patience in so furious heat?
Not to debate the challenge of your right,
But for this carcass pardon I entreat,
Whom fortune has already laid in lowest seat.
To whom Cymochles said; For what art thou,
That make thy self his dayes-man, to prolong
The vengeance pressed? Or who shall let me now,
On this vile body from to wreake my wrong,
And make his carcass as the outcast dong?
Why should not that dead carrion satisfy
The guilt, which if he lived had thus long,
His life for due revenge should dear abie?
The trespass still does live, albe the person die.
Indeed (then said the Prince) the evil done
Dies not, when breath the body first does leave,
But from the grandsyre to the Nephews son,
And all his seed the curse does often cleave,
Till vengeance utterly the guilt bereave:
So straightly God does judge. But gentle knight,
That does against the dead his hand vpreare,
His honor stains with rancour and despite,
And great disparagment makes to his former might.
Pyrrhochles began reply the second time,
And to him said, Now felon sure I read,
How that thou art partaker of his crime:
Therefore by Termagaunt thou shall be dead.
With that his hand, more sad then lomp of lead,
Vplifting high, he weened with Morddure,
His own good sword Morddure, to cleave his head.
The faithful steel such treason no'uld endure,
But swaruing from the mark, his Lords life did assure.
Yet was the force so furious and so fell,
That horse and man it made to reele aside;
Nath'lesse the Prince would not forsake his sell:
For well of yore he learned had to ride,
But full of anger fiercely to him cride;
False traitor miscreant, thou broken have
The law of arms, to strike foe vndefide.
But thou thy treasons fruit, I hope, shall taste
Right sour, and feel the law, the which thou have defast.
With that his balefull spear, he fiercely bent
Against the Pagans breast, and therewith thought
His cursed life out of her lodge have rent:
But ere the point arrived, where it ought,
That seuen-fold shield, which he from Guyon brought
He cast between to ward the bitter stound:
Through all those foldes the steelehead passage wrought
And through his shoulder pierst; wherewith to ground
He groueling fell, all gored in his gushing wound.
Which when his brother saw, fraught with great grief
And wrath, he to him leaped furiously,
And fowly said, By Mahoune, cursed thief,
That direful stroke thou dearly shall aby.
Then hurling up his harmefull blade on hye,
Smote him so hugely on his haughty crest,
That from his saddle forced him to fly:
Else mote it needs down to his manly breast
Have cleft his head in twain, and life thence dispossessed.
Now was the Prince in dangerous distress,
Wanting his sword, when he on foot should fight:
His single spear could do him small redress,
Against two foes of so exceeding might,
The least of which was match for any knight.
And now the other, whom he erst did daunt,
Had reard himself again to cruel fight,
Three times more furious, and more puissaunt,
Unmindful of his wound, of his fate ignorant.
So both attonce him charge on either side,
With hideous strokes, and importable power,
That forced him his ground to trauerse wide,
And wisely watch to ward that deadly stowre:
For in his shield, as thick as stormy shower,
Their strokes did rain, yet did he never quail,
Ne backward shrink, but as a steadfast tower,
Whom foe with double battry does assail,
Them on her bulwark bears, and bids them naught avail.
So stoutly he withstood their strong assay,
Till that at last, when he advantage spyde,
His poinant spear he thrust with puissant sway
At proud Cymochles, whiles his shield was wide,
That through his thigh the mortal steel did gryde:
He swaruing with the force, within his flesh
Did break the lance, and let the head abide:
Out of the wound the red blood flowed fresh,
That underneath his feet soon made a purple plesh.
Horribly then he began to rage, and rail,
Cursing his Gods, and himself damning deep:
Als when his brother saw the red blood rail
Adowne so fast, and all his armor steep,
For very felnesse loud he began to weep,
And said, Caytiue, curffe on thy cruel hond,
That twice has sped; yet shall it not thee keep
From the third brunt of this my fatal brond:
Lo where the dreadful Death behind thy back does stond.
With that he struck, and the other struck withal,
That nothing seemed mote bear so monstrous might:
The one upon his covered shield did fall,
And glauncing down would not his owner byte:
But the other did upon his troncheon smite,
Which hewing quite a sunder, further way
It made, and on his hacqueton did lyte,
The which dividing with importune sway,
It seizd in his right side, and there the dint did stay.
Wide was the wound, and a large lukewarm flood,
Red as the Rose, thence gushed grievously;
That when the Paynim spyde the streaming blood,
Gave him great heart, and hope of victory.
On the other side, in huge perplexity,
The Prince now stood, having his weapon broke;
Naught could he hurt, but still at ward did ly:
Yet with his troncheon he so rudely stroke
Cymochles twice, that twice him forced his foot revoke.
Whom when the Palmer saw in such distress,
Sir Guyons sword he lightly to him raught,
And said; fair Son, great God thy right hand bless,
To use that sword so wisely as it ought.
Glad was the knight, and with fresh courage fraught,
When as again he armed felt his hond;
Then like a Lion, which has long time saught
His robbed whelps, and at the last them fond
Emongst the shepherd swaynes, then wexeth wood and yond.
So fierce he laid about him, and dealt blows
On either side, that neither mayle could hold,
Ne shield defend the thunder of his throws:
Now to Pyrrhochles many strokes he told;
Eft to Cymochles twice so many fold:
Then back again turning his busy hond,
Them both attonce compeld with courage bold,
To yield wide way to his hart-thrilling brond;
And though they both stood stiff, yet could not both withstond.
As saluage Bull, whom two fierce mastiues bayt,
When rancour does with rage him once engore,
Forgets with wary ward them to awayt,
But with his dreadful horns them drives before,
Or flings aloft, or treads down in the flore,
Breathing out wrath, and bellowing disdain,
That all the forest quakes to hear him rore:
So raged Prince Arthur twixt his foemen twain,
That neither could his mighty puissance sustain.
But ever at Pyrrhochles when he smit,
Who Guyons shield cast ever him before,
Whereon the Faery Queens pourtract was writ,
His hand relented, and the stroke forbore,
And his dear heart the picture began adore,
Which ost the Paynim saved from deadly stowre.
But him henceforth the same can save no more;
For now arrived is his fatal hour,
That no'te avoided be by earthly skill or power.
For when Cymochles saw the foul reproach,
Which them appeached, pricked with gulty shame,
And inward grief, he fiercely began approach,
Resolved to put away that loathly blame,
Or dye with honor and desert of fame;
And on the hauberk stroke the Prince so sore,
That quite disparted all the linked frame,
And pierced to the skin, but bit no more,
Yet made him twice to reele, that never moved before.
Whereat renfierst with wrath and sharp regret,
He stroke so hugely with his borrowd blade,
That it empierst the Pagans burganet,
And cleaving the hard steel, did deep invade
Into his head, and cruel passage made
Quite through his brain. He tombling down on ground,
Breathd out has ghost, which to the infernal shade
Fast flying, there eternal torment found,
For all the sins, wherewith his lewd life did abound,
Which when his german saw, the stony fear,
Ran to his heart, and all his sense dismayed,
Ne thenceforth life ne courage did appear,
But as a man, whom hellish feends have frayd,
Long trembling still he stood: at last thus said;
Traitor what have thou done? how ever may
Thy cursed hand so cruelly have swayd
Against that knight: Horrow and well away,
After so wicked deed why live thou longer day?
With that all desperate as loathing light,
And with revenge desiring soon to dye,
Assembling all his force and utmost might,
With his own sword he fierce at him did fly,
And struck, and foynd, and lasht outrageously,
Withouten reason or regard. Well knew
The Prince, with patience and sufferaunce sly
So hasty heat soon cooled to subdew:
Tho when this breathless woxe, that batteil began renew.
As when a windy tempest blows hye,
That nothing may withstand his stormy stowre,
The clouds, as things affrayd, before him fly;
But all so soon as his outrageous power
Is laid, they fiercely then begin to shoure,
And as in scorn of his spent stormy spite,
Now all attonce their malice forth do pour;
So did Sir Guyon bear himself in fight,
And suffered rash Pyrrhochles wast his idle might.
At last when as the Sarazin perceived,
How that strange sword refusd, to serve his need,
But when he stroke most strong, the dint deceived,
He flong it from him, and deuoyd of dreed,
Upon him lightly leaping without heed,
Twixt his two mighty arms engrasped fast,
Thinking to overthrow and down him tred:
But him in strength and skill the Prince surpast,
And through his nimble slight did under him down cast.
Naught booted it the Paynim then to strive;
For as a Bittur in the Eagles claw,
That may not hope by flight to escape alive,
Still waits for death with dread and trembling aw;
So he now subject to the victours law,
Did not once move, nor upward cast his eye,
Forvile disdain and rancour, which did gnaw
His heart in twain with sad melancholy,
As one that loathed life, and yet despisd to dye.
But full of Princely bounty and great mind,
The Conqueror naught cared him to slay,
But, casting wrongs and all revenge behind,
More glory thought to give life, then decay,
And said, Paynim, this is thy dismal day;
Yet if thou will renounce thy miscreaunce,
And my true liegeman yield thy self for ay,
Life will I grant thee for thy valiaunce,
And all thy wrongs will wipe out of my souenaunce.
Fool (said the Pagan) I thy gift defye,
But use thy fortune, as it does befall,
And say, that I not overcome do dye,
But in despite of life, for death do call.
Wroth was the Prince, and sorry yet withal,
That he so wilfully refused grace;
Yet since his fate so cruelly did fall,
His shining Helmet he began soon unlace,
And left his headless body bleeding all the place.
By this Sir Guyon from his trance awakt,
Life having maistered her senseless foe;
And looking up, when as his shield he lakt,
And sword saw not, he wexed wondrous woe:
But when the Palmer, whom he long ygoe
Have lost, he by him spide, right glad he grew,
And said, Dear sir, whom wandering to and fro
I long have lackt, I joy thy face to view;
Firm is thy faith, whom danger never fro me drew.
But rend what wicked hand has robbed me
Of my good sword and shield? The Palmer glad,
With so fresh hew vprising him to see,
Him answered; fair son, be no whit sad
For want of weapons, they shall soon be had.
So began he to discourse the whole debate,
Which that strange knight for him sustained had,
And those two Sarazins confounded late,
Whose carcases on ground were horribly prostrate.
Which when he heard, and saw the tokens true,
His heart with great affection was embayd,
And to the Prince with bowing reverence dew,
As to the Patron of his life, thus said;
My Lord, my liege, by whose most gracious aid
I live this day, and see my foes subdewd,
What may suffice, to be for meede repayd
Of so great graces, as ye have me showed,
But to be ever bound
To whom the Insant thus, Fair Sir, what need
Good turns be counted, as a servile bond,
To bind their doers, to receive their meede?
Are not all knights by oath bound, to withstond
Oppressors power by arms and puissant hond?
Suffice, that I have done my dew in place.
So goodly purpose they together fond,
Of kindness and of courteous aggrace;
The whiles false Archimage and Atin fled apace.
Cant. IX.
The house of Temperance, in which
does sober Almadwell,
Besiegd of many foes, whom stranger
knights to fight compel.
O Fall Gods works, which do this world adorn,
There is no one more fair and excellent,
Then is man's body both for power and form,
Whiles it is kept in sober government;
But none then it, more foul and indecent,
Distempred through misrule and passions bace:
It grows a Monster, and incontinent
Does loose his dignity and native grace.
Behold, who list, both one and other in this place.
After the Paynim brethren conquered were,
The Briton Prince recou'ring his stolen sword,
And Guyon his lost shield, they both yfere
Forth passed on their way in fair accord,
Till him the Prince with gentle court did board;
Sir knight, mote I of you this curt'sie read,
To weet why on your shield so goodly scord
Bear ye the picture of that Ladies head?
Full lively is the semblaunt, though the substance dead.
Fair Sir (said he) if in that picture dead
Such life ye read, and virtue in vain show,
What mote ye ween, if the true liuely-head
Of that most glorious visage ye did view?
But if the beauty of her mind ye knew,
That is her bounty, and imperial power,
Thousand times fairer then her mortal hew,
O how great wonder would your thoughts devour,
And infinite desire into your spirit pour!
She is the mighty Queen of Faerie,
Whose fair retrait I in my shield do bear;
She is the flower of grace and chastity,
Throughout the world renowned far and near,
My liefe, my liege, my Sovereign, my dear,
Whose glory shines as the morning star,
And with her light the earth enlumines clear;
Far reach her mercies, and her praises far,
As well in state of peace, as puissaunce in war.
Thrice happy man, (said then the Briton knight)
Whom gracious lot, and thy great valiaunce
Have made thee soldier of that Princess bright,
Which with her bounty and glad countenance
Does bless her servant, and them high advance.
How may strange knight hope ever to aspire,
By faithful service, and meet amenance,
Unto such bliss? sufficient were that hire
For loss of thousand lives, to dye at her desire.
Said Guyon, Noble Lord, what meed so great,
Or grace of earthly Prince so sovereign,
But by your wondrous worth and warlike feat
Ye well may hope, and easily attain?
But were your will, her sold to entertain,
And numbered be among knights of Maydenhed,
Great guerdon, well I wot, should you remain,
And in her favor high be reckoned,
As Arthegall, and Sophy now been honored.
Certes (then said the Prince) I God auow,
That since I arms and knighthood first did plight,
My whole desire has been, and yet is now,
To serve that Queen with all my power and might.
Now has the Sun with his lamp-burning light,
Walked round about the world, and I no less,
Since of that Goddess I have sought the sight,
Yet no where can her find: such happiness
Heaven does to me envy, and fortune fauourlesse.
Fortune, the foe of famous cheuisaunce
Seldom (said Guyon) yields to virtue aid,
But in her way throws mischief and mischaunce,
Whereby her course is stopped, and passage staid.
But you fair Sir, be not herewith dismayed,
But constant keep the way, in which ye stand;
Which were it not, that I am else delaid
With hard adventure, which I have in hand,
I labor would to guide you through all Faery land.
Gramercy Sir (said he) but mote I wot,
What strange adventure do ye now pursew?
Perhaps my succor, or aduizement meet
Mote stead you much your purpose to subdew.
Then began Sir Guyon all the story show
Of false Acrasia, and her wicked wiles,
Which to avenge, the Palmer him forth drew
From Faery court. So talked they, the whiles
They wasted had much way, and measurd many miles.
And now fair Phoebus began decline in have
His weary wagon to the Western vale,
Whenas they spide a goodly castle, plast
Foreby a river in a pleasant dale,
Which choosing for that euenings hospitale,
They thither marched: but when they came in sight,
And from their sweaty Coursers did auale,
They found the gates fast barred long ere night,
And every loup fast locked, as fearing foes despite.
Which when they saw, they weened foul reproach
Was to them done, their entrance to forstall,
Till that the Squire began nigher to approach;
And wind his horn under the castle wall,
That with the noise it shook, as it would fall:
Eftsoons forth looked from the highest spire
The watch, and loud unto the knights did call,
To weete, what they so rudely did require.
Who gently answered, They entrance did desire.
Fly fly, good knights, (said he) fly fast away
If that your lives ye love, as meet ye should;
Fly fast, and save your selves from near decay,
Here may ye not have entrance, though we would:
We would and would again, if that we could;
But thousand enemies about us rave,
And with long siege us in this castle hold:
Seven years this wize they us besieged have,
And many good knights slain, that have us sought to save.
Thus as he spoke, lo with outrageous cry
A thousand villeins round about them swarmd
Out of the rocks and caves adjoining nigh,
Vile caytiue wretches, ragged, rude, deformd,
All threatening death, all in strange manner armd,
Some with unwieldy clubs, some with long spears,
Some rusty knives, some staves in fire warmd.
Stern was their look, like wild amazed steares,
Staring with hollow eyes, and stiff vpstanding hears.
Fiersly at first those knights they did assail,
And drove them to recoile: but when again
They gave fresh charge, their forces began to fail,
Unable their encounter to sustain;
For with such puissaunce and impetuous maine
Those Champions broke on them, that forced them fly,
Like scattered Speepe, whenas the Shepherds swain
A Lion and a Tigre does espy,
With greedy pace forth rushing from the forest nigh.
A while they fled, but soon returned again
With greater fury, then before was found;
And evermore their cruel Captain
Sought with his rascal routs t'enclose them round,
And ouerrun to tread them to the ground.
But soon the knights with their bright-burning blades
Broke their rude troops, and orders did confound,
Hewing and slashing at their idle shades;
For though they bodies seem, yet substance from them fades.
As when a swarm of Gnats at euentide
Out of the fennes of Allan do arise,
Their murmuring small trompets sounden wide,
Whiles in the air their clustring army flies,
That as a cloud does seem to dim the skies;
Ne man nor beast may rest, or take repast,
For their sharp wounds, and noyous injuries,
Till the fierce Northern wind blustering blast
Does blow them quite away, and in the Ocean cast.
Thus when they had that troublous rout dispersed,
Unto the castle gate they come again,
And entrance craved, which was denied erst.
Now when report of that their perilous pain,
And combrous comflict, which they did sustain,
Came to the Ladies ear, which there did dwell,
She forth issewed with a goodly train
Of Squires and Ladies equipaged well,
And entertained them right fairly, as befell.
Alma she called was, a virgin bright;
That had not yet felt Cupides wanton rage,
Yet was she wooed of many a gentle knight,
And many a Lord of noble parentage,
That sought with her to lincke in marriage:
For she was fair, as fair mote ever be,
And in the flower now of her freshest age;
Yet full of grace and goodly modestee,
That even heaven rejoiced her sweet face to see.
In robe of lilly white she was arayd,
That from her shoulder to her heel down raught,
The train whereof loose far behind her strayd,
Braunched with gold and pearl, most richly wrought,
And borne of two fair Damsels, which were taught
That service well. Her yellow golden hear
Was trimly wouen, and in tresses wrought,
Ne other tire she on her head did wear,
But crowned with a garland of sweet Rosiere.
Goodly she entertaind those noble knights,
And brought them up into her castle hall;
Where gentle court and gracious delight
She to them made, with mildness virginal,
Showing her self both wise and liberal:
There when they rested had a season dew,
They her be sought of favor special,
Of that fair Castle to afford them view;
She granted, and them leading forth, the same did show.
First she them led up to the Castle wall,
That was so high, as foe might not it clime,
And all so fair, and sensible withal,
Not built of brick, ne yet of stone and lime,
But of thing like to that Egyptian slime,
Whereof king Nine whilome built Babell tower;
But o great pity, that no longer time
So goodly workmanship should not endure:
Soon it must turn to earth; no earthly thing is sure.
The frame thereof seemd partly circulare,
And part triangulare, o work divine;
Those two the first and last proportions are,
The one imperfect, mortal, foeminine;
The Other immortal, perfect, masculine,
And twixt them both a quadrate was the base,
Proportioned equally by seven and nine;
Nine was the circle set in heavens place,
All which compacted made a goodly Dyapase.
Therein two gates were placed seemly well:
The one before, by which all in did pas,
Did the other far in workmanship excel;
For not of wood, nor of enduring bras,
But of more worthy substance framed it was;
Doubly disparted, it did lock and close,
That when it locked, none might thorough pas,
And when it opened, no man might it close,
Still open to their friends, and closed to their foes.
Of hewn stone the porch was fairly wrought,
Stone more of value, and more smooth and fine,
Then let or Marble far from Ireland brought;
Over the which was cast a wandering vine,
Enchaced with a wanton yuie twine.
And over it a fair Portcullis hong,
Which to the gate directly did incline,
With comely compass, and compacture strong,
Neither unseemly short, nor yet exceeding long.
Within the Barbican a Porter sat,
Day and night duly keeping watch and ward,
Nor wight, nor word mote pass out of the gate,
But in good order, and with dew regard;
Vtterers of secrets he from thence debard,
Bablers of folly, and blazers of crime.
His larumbell might loud and wide be hard,
When cause requird, but never out of time;
Early and late it rong, at evening and at prime.
And round about the porch on every side
Twice sixteen warders sat, all armed bright
In glistring steel, and strongly fortifide:
Tall yeomen seemed they, and of great might,
And were enraunged ready, still for sight.
By them as Alma passed with her guestes,
They did obeysaunce, as beseemed right,
And then again returned to their restes:
The Porter eke to her did lout with humble gestes.
Thence she them brought into a stately Hall,
Wherein were many tables fair dispred,
And ready dight with drapets festival,
Against the viaundes should be ministered.
At the upper end there sat, yclad in red
Down to the ground, a comely personage,
That in his hand a white rod menaged,
He Steward was hight Diet; ripe of age,
And in demeanure sober, and in counsel sage.
And through the Hall there walked to and fro
A jolly yeoman, Marshall of the same,
Whose name was Appetite; he did bestow
Both guestes and meat, when ever in they came,
And knew them how to order without blame,
As him the Steward bad. They both atone
Did dewty to their Lady, as became;
Who passing by, forth led her guestes anon
Into the kitchen rowme, ne spard for niceness none.
It was a vaut ybuilt for great dispense,
With many raunges reard along the wall;
And one great chimney, whose long tonnell thence,
The smoke forth threw. And in the midst of all
There placed was a caudron wide and tall,
Upon a mighty furnace, burning whot,
More whot, then Aetn, or flaming Mongiball:
For day and night it brent, ne ceased not,
So long as any thing it in the caudron got.
But to delay the heat, least by mischaunce
It might break out, and set the whole on fire,
There added was by goodly ordinance,
An huge great pair of bellows, which did styre
Continually, and cooling breath inspyre.
About the Caudron many Cooks accoyld,
With hooks and ladles, as need did require;
The whiles the viandes in the vessel boyld
They did about their business sweat, and sorely toyld.
The master Cook was called Concoction,
A careful man, and full of comely guise:
The kitchen Clerk, that hight Digestion,
Did order all th'Achates in seemly wise,
And set them forth, as well he could devise.
The rest had several offices assind,
Some to remove the scum, as it did rise;
Others to bear the same away did mind;
And others it to use according to his kind.
But all the liquour, which was foul and wast,
Not good nor serviceable else for ought,
They in another great round vessel plast,
Till by a conduit pipe it thence were brought:
And all the rest, that noyous was, and naught,
By secret ways, that none might it espy,
Was close conuaid, and to the back-gate brought,
That cleped was Port Esquiline, whereby
It was avoided quite, and thrown out privily.
Which goodly order, and great workmans skill
When as those knights beheld, with rare delight,
And gazing wonder they their minds did fill;
For never had they seen so strange a sight.
Thence back again fair Alma led them right,
And soon into a goodly Parlour brought,
That was with royal arras richly dight,
In which was nothing pourtrahed, nor wrought,
Not wrought, nor pourtrahed, but easy to be thought.
And in the midst thereof upon the flower,
A lovely beuy of fair Ladies sat,
Courted of many a jolly Paramoure,
The which them did in modest wise amate,
And each one sought his Lady to aggrate;
And eke emongst them little Cupid played
His wanton sports, being returned late
From his fierce wars, and having from him laid
His cruel bow, wherewith he thousands has dismayed.
Diverse delights they found them selves to please;
Some song in sweet consort, some laughed for joy,
Some played with strawes, some idly sat at ease;
But other some could not abide to toy,
All pleasaunce was to them grief and annoy:
This fround, that faund, the third for shame did blush,
Another seemed envious, or coy,
Another in her teeth did gnaw a rush:
But at these strangers presence every one did hush.
Soon as the gracious Alma came in place,
They all attonce out of their seats arose,
And to her homage made, with humble grace:
Whom when the knights beheld, they began dispose
Themselves to court, and each a Damsel chose:
The Prince by chance did on a Lady light,
That was right fair and fresh as morning rose,
But somewhat sad, and solemn eke in sight,
As if some pensive thought co^straind her gentle spright.
In a long purple pall, whose skirt with gold,
Was fretted all about, she was arayd;
And in her hand a Poplar branch did hold:
To whom the Prince in courteous manner said;
Gentle Madame, why been ye thus dismayed,
And your fair beauty do with sadness spill?
Lives any, that you has thus ill apaid?
Or done your love, or done you lack your will?
What ever be the cause, it sure beseemes you ill.
Fair Sir, (said she half in disdainefull wise,)
How is it, that this word in me ye blame,
And in your self do not the same advise?
Him ill beseemes, another fault to name,
That may unawares be blotted with the same:
Pensive I yield I am, and sad in mind,
Through great desire of glory and of fame;
Ne ought I ween are ye therein behind,
That have twelve months sought one, yet no where can her find.
The Prince was inly moved at her speech,
Well weeting true, what she had rashly told;
Yet with fair samblaunt sought to hide the breach,
Which change of color did perforce unfold,
Now seeming flaming whot, now stony cold.
Tho turning soft aside, he did inquire,
What wight she was, that Poplar branch did hold:
It answered was, her name was Prays-desire.
That by well doing sought to honor to aspire.
The whiles, the Faerie knight did entertain
Another Damsel of that gentle crew,
That was right fair, and modest of demaine,
But that too often she chaung'd her native hew:
Strange was her tire, and all her garment blew,
Close round about her tuckt with many a plight:
Upon her fist the bird, which shonneth view,
And keeps in couerts close from living wight,
Did sit, as yet ashamd, how rude Pan did her dight.
So long as Guyon with her commoned,
Unto the ground she cast her modest eye,
And ever and anon with rosy red
The bashful blood her snowy cheeks did dye,
That her became, as polisht yuory,
Which cunning Craftesman hand has ouerlayd
With fair vermilion or pure lastery.
Great wonder had the knight, to see the maid
So straungely passioned, and to her gently said,
Fair Damzell, seems, by your troubled cheer,
That either me too bold ye ween, this wise
You to molest, or other ill to fear
That in the secret of your heart close lies,
From whence it does, as cloud from sea arise.
If it be I, of pardon I you pray;
But if ought else that I mote not devise,
I will, if please you it discure, assay,
To ease you of that ill, so wisely as I may.
She answered naught, but more abasht for shame,
Held down her head, the whiles her lovely face
The flashing blood with blushing did inflame,
And the strong passion mard her modest grace,
That Guyon meruayld at her uncouth case:
Till Alma him bespake, why wonder ye
Fair Sir at that, which ye so much embrace?
She is the fountain of your modestee;
You shamefast are, but Shamefastness it self is she.
Thereat the Elfe did blush in priuitee,
And turned his face away; but she the same
Dissembled fair, and faynd to ouersee.
Thus they awhile with court and goodly game,
Themselves did solace each one with his Dame,
Till that great Lady thence away them sought,
To view her castles other wondrous frame.
Up to a stately Turret she them brought,
Ascending by ten steps of Alablaster wrought.
That Turrets frame most admirable was,
Like highest heaven compassed around,
And lifted high above this earthly mass,
Which it suruew'd, as hills done lower ground;
But not on Ground mote like to this be found,
Not that, which antique Cadmus whylome built
In Thebes, which Alexander did confound;
Nor that proud tower of Troy, though richly guilt,
From which young Hectors blood by cruel Greeks was spilt.
The roof hereof was arched over head,
And decked with flowers and herbars daintily;
Two goodly Beacons, set in watches stead,
Therein gave light, and flamed continually:
For they of living fire most subtly
Were made, and set in silver sockets bright,
Covered with lids deuiz'd of substance sly,
That readily they shut and open might.
O who can tell the praises of that makers might!
Ne can I tell, ne can I stay to tell
This parts great workmanship, and wondrous power,
That all this other worlds work does excel,
And likest is unto that heavenly tower,
That God has built for his own blessed bower.
Therein were diverse rooms, and diverse stages,
But three the chiefest, and of greatest power,
In which there dwelt three honorable sages,
The wisest men, I ween, that lived in their ages.
Not he, whom Greece, the Nourse of all good arts,
By Phoebus doom, the wisest thought alive,
Might be compared to these by many parts:
Nor that sage Pylian sire, which did survive
Three ages, such as mortal men contriue,
By whose advise old Priams city fell,
With these in praise of policies mote strive.
These three in these three rooms did sundry dwell,
And counseled fair Alma, how to govern well.
The first of them could things to come foresee:
The next could of things present best aduize;
The third things past could keep in memoree,
So that no time, nor reason could arize,
But that the same could one of these comprize.
For thy the first did in the forepart sit,
That naught mote hinder his quick preiudize:
He had a sharp foresight, and working wit,
That never idle was, ne once could rest a whit.
His chamber was dispainted all within,
With sundry colors, in the which were writ
Infinite shapes of things dispersed thin;
Some such as in the world were never yet,
Ne can deuized be of mortal wit;
Some daily seen, and known by their names,
Such as in idle fantasies do flit:
Infernal Hags, Centaurs, feendes, Hippodames,
Apes, Lions, Aegles, Owls, fools, lovers, children, Dames.
And all the chamber filled was with flies,
Which buzzed all about, and made such sound,
That they encombred all men's ears and eyes,
Like many swarms of Bees assembled round,
After their hiues with honny do abound:
All those were idle thoughts and fantasies,
Devices, dreams, opinions unsound,
Shows, visions, sooth-sayes, and prophesies;
And all that fained is, as leasings, tales, and lies.
Emongst them all sat he, which wonned there,
That hight Phantastes by his nature true;
A man of years yet fresh, as mote appear,
Of swarth complexion, and of crabbed hew,
That him full of melancholy did show;
Bent hollow beetle brows, sharp staring eyes,
That mad or foolish seemd: one by his view
More deem him borne with ill disposed skies,
When oblique Saturn sat in the house of agonyes.
Whom Alma having showed to her guestes,
Thence brought the^ to the second room, whose walls
Were painted fair with memorable gestes,
Of famous Wisards, and with picturals
Of Magistrates, of courts, of tribunals,
Of commen wealths, of states, of policy,
Of laws, of judgments, and of decretals;
All arts, all science, all Philosophy,
And all that in the world was aye thought wittily.
Of those that room was full, and them among
There sat a man of ripe and perfect age,
Who did them meditate all his life long,
That through continual practice and usage,
He now was grown right wise, and wondrous sage.
Great pleasure had those stranger knights, to see
His goodly reason, and grave personage,
That his disciples both desired to be;
But Alma thence the^ led to th'hindmost room of three.
That chamber seemed ruinous and old,
And therefore was removed far behind.
Yet were the walls, that did the same uphold,
Right firm and strong, though somewhat they declind;
And therein sat an old oldman, half blind,
And all decrepit in his feeble corse,
Yet lively vigor rested in his mind,
And recompenst him with a better scorse:
Weak body well is changed for minds redoubled forse.
This man of infinite remembrance was,
And things foregone through many ages held,
Which he recorded still, as they did pas,
Ne suffered them to perish through long eld,
As all things else, the which this world does weld,
But laid them up in his immortal scrine,
Where they for ever incorrupted dweld:
The wars he well remembered of king Nine,
Of old Assaracus, and Inachus divine.
The years of Nestor nothing were to his,
Ne yet Mathusalem, though longest lived;
For he remembered both their infancies:
Ne wonder then, if that he were deprived
Of native strength now, that he them suruiu'd.
His chamber all was hanged about with rolls,
And old records from ancient times derived,
Some made in books, some in long parchme^t scrolles,
That were all worme-eaten, and full of canker holes.
Amidst them all he in a chair was set,
Tossing and turning them withouten end;
But for he was unable them to set,
A little boy did on him still attend,
To reach, when ever he for ought did send;
And often when things were lost, or laid amiss,
That boy them sought, and unto him did lend.
Therefore he Anamnestes cleped is,
And that old man Eumnestes, by their propertis.
The knights there entering, did him reverence dew
And wondered at his endless exercise,
Then as they began his Library to view,
And antique Registers for to auise,
There chanced to the Princes hand to rize,
An ancient book, hight Briton moniments,
That of this lands first conquest did deuize,
And old division into Regiments,
Till it reduced was to one man's governments.
Sir Guyon chaunst eke on another book,
That hight Antiquity of Faerie land.
In which when as he greedily did look;
Th'off-spring of Elues and Faries there he fond,
As it delivered was from hond to hond:
Whereat they burning both with fervent fire,
Their countries auncestry to understand,
Craved leave of Alma, and that aged sire,
To read those books; who gladly granted their desire.
Cant. X.
A chronicle of Briton kings,
from Brute to Vthers rain.
And rolls of Elfin Emperors,
till time of Gloriane.
WHo now shall give unto me words and sound,
Equal unto this haughty enterprise?
Or who shall lend me wings, with which from ground
My lowly verse may loftily arise,
And lift it self unto the highest skies?
More ample spirit, then hitherto was, wount,
Here needs me, whiles the famous auncestries
Of my most dreaded Sovereign I recount,
By which all earthly Princes she does far surmount.
Ne under Sun, that shines so wide and fair,
Whence all that lives, does borrow life and light,
Lives ought, that to her lineage may compaire,
Which though from earth it be derived right,
Yet does it self stretch forth to heavens hight,
And all the world with wonder ouerspred;
A labor huge, exceeding far my might:
How shall frail pen, with fear disparaged,
Conceive such sovereign glory, and great bountihed?
Argument worthy of Moenian quill,
Or rather worthy of great Phoebus rote,
Whereon the ruins of great, Ossa hill,
And triumphs of Phelegraean Jove he wrote,
That all the Gods admird his lofty note.
But if some relish of that heavenly lay
His learned daughters would to me report,
To deck my song withal, I would assay,
Thy name, o sovereign Queen, to blazon far away.
Thy name o sovereign Queen, thy realm and race,
From this renowned Prince derived arre,
Whom mightily vpheld that royal mace,
Which now thou bearst, to thee descended far
From mighty kings and conquerours in war,
Thy fathers and great Grandfathers of old,
Whose noble deeds above the Northern star
Immortal fame for ever has enrold;
As in that old man's book they were in order told.
The land, which warlike Britons now possess,
And therein have their mighty empire raysd,
In antique times was saluage wilderness,
Unpeopled, vnmanurd, vnprou'd, vnpraysd,
Ne was it Island then, ne was it paysd
Amid the Ocean waves, ne was it sought
Of merchants far, for profits therein praysd,
But was all desolate, and of some thought
By sea to have been from the Celtioke mayn-land brought.
Ne did it then deserve a name to have,
Till that the venturous Mariner that way
Learning his ship from those white rocks to save,
Which all along the Southern seacoast lay,
Threatening vnheedie wrecke and rash decay,
For safeties sake that same his sea-marke made,
And namd it Albion. But later day
Finding in it fit ports for fishers trade,
Began more the same frequent, and further to invade.
But far in land a saluage nation dwelt,
Of hideous Giants, and half beastly men,
That never tasted grace, nor goodness felt,
But like wild beasts lurking in loathsome den,
And flying fast as Roebucke through the fen,
All naked without shame, or care of cold,
By hunting and by spoiling lived then;
Of stature huge, and eke of courage bold,
That sons of men amazd their sternnesse to behold.
But whence they sprung, or how they were begot,
Uneath is to assure; uneath to wene
That monstrous error, which does some assot,
That Dioclesians fifty daughters shene
Into this land by chance have driven been,
Where companing with feends and filthy Sprights,
Through vain illusion of their lust unclean,
They brought forth Giants and such dreadful wights,
As far exceeded men in their immeasurd mights.
They held this land, and with their filthiness
Polluted this same gentle soil long time:
That their own mother loathd their beastliness,
And began abhor her broods unkindly crime,
All were they borne of her own native slime;
Until that Brutus anciently derived
From royal stock of old Assaraos line,
Driven by fatal error, here arrived,
And them of their unjust possession deprived.
But ere he had established his throne,
And spread his empire to the utmost shore,
He fought great battles with his saluage fone;
In which he them defeated evermore,
And many Giants left on groaning flore;
That well can witness yet unto this day
The western Hogh, besprincled with the gore
Of mighty Goemot, whom in stout fray
Corineus conquered, and cruelly did slay.
And eke that ample Pit, yet far renownd,
For the large leap, which Debon did compel
Coulin to make, being eight lugs of grownd;
Into the which returning back, he fell,
But those three monstrous stones do most excel
Which that huge son of hideous Albion,
Whose father Hercules in France did quell,
Great Godmer threw, in fierce contention,
At bold Canutus; but of him was slain anon.
In meed of these great conquests by them got,
Corineus had that Province utmost west,
To him assigned for his worthy lot,
Which of his name and memorable gest
He called Cornewaile, yet so called best:
And Debons shayre was, that is Deuonshyre:
But Canute had his portion from the rest,
The which he called Canutium, for his hyre;
Now Cantium, which Kent we commenly inquire.
Thus Brute this Realm unto his rule subdewd,
And reigned long in great felicity,
Loved of his friends, and of his foes eschewd,
He left three sons, his famous progeny,
Borne of fair Inogene of Italy;
Among whom he parted his imperial state,
And Locrine left chief Lord of Britany.
At last ripe age bad him surrender late
His life, and long good fortune unto final fate.
Locrine was left the sovereign Lord of all;
But Albanact had all the Northrene part,
Which of himself Albania, he did call;
And Camber did possess the Western quart,
Which Seuerne now from Logris does depart:
And each his portion peaceably enjoyed,
Ne was there outward breach, nor grudge in heart,
That once their quiet government annoyd,
But each his pains to others profit still employed.
Until a nation straung, with visage swart,
And courage fierce, that all men did affray,
Which through the world the^ swarmd in every part,
And ouerflow'd all countries far away,
Like Noyes great flood, with their importune sway,
This land invaded with like violence,
And did themselves through all the North display:
Until that Locrine for his Realms defense,
Did head against them make, and strong munifience.
He them encountered, a confused rout,
Foreby the River, that whylome was hight
The ancient Abus, where with courage stout
He them defeated in victorious fight,
And chaste so fiercely after fearful flight,
That forced their Chieftaine, for his safeties sake,
(Their Chieftaine Humber named was aright)
Unto the mighty stream him to betake,
Where he an end of battle, and of life did make.
The king returned proud of victory,
And insolent wox through unwonted ease,
That shortly he forgot the ieopardie,
Which in his land he lately did appease,
And fell to vain voluptuous disease:
He loved fair Lady Estrild, lewdly loved,
Whose wanton pleasures him too much did please,
That quite his heart from Guendolene removed,
From Guendolene his wife, though always faithful proved.
The noble daughter of Corineus
Would not endure to be so vile disdaind,
But gathering force, and courage valorous,
Encountered him in battle well ordaind,
In which him vanquished she to fly constraind:
But she so fast pursewd, that him she took,
And threw in bands, where he till death remaind;
Als his fair Leman, flying through a brook,
She ouerhent, naught moved with her piteous look.
But both her self, and eke her daughter dear,
Begotten by her kingly Paramoure,
The fair Sabrina almost dead with fear,
She there attached, far from all succoure;
The one she slew in that impatient stoure,
But the sad virgin innocent of all,
Adowne the rolling river she did pour,
Which of her name now Seuerne men do call:
Such was the end, that to disloyal love did fall.
Then for her son, which she to Locrin bore,
Madan was young, unmeet the rule of sway,
In her own hand the crown she kept in store,
Till ryper years he raught, and stronger stay:
During which time her power she did display
Through all this realm, the glory of her sex,
And first taught men a woman to obey:
But when her son to man's estate did wex,
She it surrendered, ne her self would longer vex.
Tho Madan raignd, unworthy of his race:
For with all shame that sacred throne he filled:
Next Memprise, as unworthy of that place,
In which being consorted with Manild,
For thirst of single kingdom him he killed.
But Ebranck salued both their infamies
With noble deeds, and warreyd on Brunchild
In Henault, where yet of his victories
Brave moniments remain, which yet that land enuies.
An happy man in his first days he was,
And happy father of fair progeny:
For all so many weeks as the year has,
So many children he did multiply;
Of which were twenty sons, which did apply,
Their minds to praise, and cheualrous desire:
Those germans did subdew all Germany,
Of whom it hight; but in the end their Sire
With foul repulse from France was forced to retire.
Which blot his son succeeding in his seat,
The second Brute, the second both in name,
And eke in semblance of his puissance great,
Right well recur'd, and did away that blame
With recompense of everlasting fame.
He with his victour sword first opened,
The bowels of wide France, a forlorn Dame,
And taught her first how to be conquered;
Since which, with sundry spoils she has been ransacked.
Let Scaldis tell, and let tell Hania,
And let the marsh of Estham bruges tell,
What color were their waters that same day,
And all the moore twixt Eluersham and Dell,
With blood of Henalois, which therein fell.
How often that day did sad Brunchildis see
The green shield did in dolorous vermell?
That not Scuith guiridh it mote seem to be.
But rather y Scuith gogh, sign of sad crueltee.
His son king Leill by fathers labor long,
Enjoyed an heritage of lasting peace,
And built Cairleill, and built Cairleon strong.
Next Huddibras his realm did not increase,
But taught the land from weary wars to cease.
Whose footsteps Bladud following, in arts
Excelled at Athens all the learned preace,
From whence he brought them to these saluage parts,
And with sweet science mollifide their stubborn hearts.
Ensample of his wondrous faculty,
Behold the boiling Bathes at Cairbadon,
Which sees with secret fire eternally,
And in their entrails, full of quick Brimston,
Nourish the flames, which they are warmed upon,
That to her people wealth they forth do well,
And health to every foreign nation:
Yet he at last contending to excel
The reach of men, through flight into fond mischief fell.
Next him king Leyr in happy peace long raind,
But had no issue male him to succeed,
But three fair daughters, which were well vptraind,
In all that seemed sit for kingly seed:
Among whom his realm he equally decreed
To have divided. Tho when feeble age
Nigh to his utmost date he saw proceed,
He called his daughters; and with speeches sage
Inquyrd, which of them most did love her parentage.
The eldest Gonorill began to protest,
That she much more then her own life him loved:
And Regan greater love to him professed,
Then all the world, when ever it were proou'd;
But Cordeill said she loved him, as behoou'd:
Whose simple answer, wanting colors fair
To paint it forth, him to displeasance moved,
That in his crown he counted her no hair,
But twixt the other twain his kingdom whole did shaire.
So wedded the one to Maglan king of Scots,
And the other to the king of Cambria,
And twixt them shayrd his realm by equal lots:
But without dowre the wise Cordelia,
Was sent to Aganip of Celtica.
Their aged Sire, thus cased of his crown,
A private life led in Albania,
With Gonorill, long had in great renown,
That naught him grieved to been from rule deposed down.
But true it is, that when the oil is spent,
The light goes out, and week is thrown away;
So when he had resignd his regiment,
His daughter began despise his drouping day,
And weary wax of his continual stay.
Tho to his daughter Rigan he repayrd,
Who him at first well used every way;
But when of his departure she despayrd,
Her bounty she abated, and his cheer empayrd.
The wretched man began then auise too late,
That love is not, where most it is professed,
Too truly tryde in his extremest state;
At last resolved likewise to prove the rest,
He to Cordelia him self addressed,
Who with entire affection him received,
As for her Sire and king her seemed best;
And after all an army strong she leau'd,
To war on those, which him had of his realm bereaved.
So to his crown she him restored again,
In which he did, made ripe for death by eld,
And after wild, it should to her remain:
Who peaceably the same long time did weld:
And all men's hearts in dew obedience held:
Till that her sisters children, woxen strong
Through proud ambition, against her rebeld,
And ouercommen kept in prison long,
Till weary of that wretched life, her self she hong.
Then began the bloody brethren both to rain:
But fierce Cundah began shortly to envy
His brother Morgan, pricked with proud disdain,
To have a pere in part of soueraintie,
And kindling coals of cruel enmity,
Raisd war, and him in battle overthrew:
Whence as he to those woodie hills did fly,
Which hight of him Glamorgan, there him slew:
Then did he reign alone, when he none equal knew.
His son Riuallo his dead room did supply,
In whose sad time blood did from heaven rain:
Next great Gurgustus, then fair Caecily
In constant peace their kingdoms did contain,
After whom Lago, and Kinmarke did rain,
And Gorbogud, till far in years he grew:
Till his ambitious sons unto them twain,
Arraught the rule, and from their father drew,
Stout Ferrex and stern Porrex him in prison threw.
But o, the greedy thirst of royal crown,
That knows no kindred, nor regardes no right,
Stird Porrex up to put his brother down;
Who unto him assembling foreign might,
Made war on him, and fell him self in fight:
Whose death t'auenge, his mother merciless,
Most merciless of women, VVyden hight,
Her other son fast sleeping did oppress,
And with most cruel hand him murdered pitiless.
Here ended Brutus sacred progeny,
Which had seven hundred years this scepter borne,
With high renown, and great felicity?
The noble branch from th'antique stock was torn
Through discord, and the royal throne forlorn:
Thenceforth this Realm was into factions rent,
Whilst each of Brutus boasted to be borne,
That in the end was left no moniment
Of Brutus, nor of Britons glory ancient.
Then up arose a man of matchless might,
And wondrous wit to menage high affairs,
Who stird up pity of the stressed plight
Of this sad Realm, cut into sundry shaires
By such, as claymd themselves Brutes rightful hairs,
Gathered the Princes of the people loose,
To taken counsel of their common cares;
Who with his wisdom won, him straight did choose,
Their king, and swore him fealty to win or loose.
Then made he head against his enemies,
And Ymner slew, or Logris miscreate;
Then Ruddoc and proud Stater, both allies,
This of Albanie newly nominate,
And that of Cambry king confirmed late,
He overthrew through his own valiaunce;
Whose countries he redus'd to quiet state,
And shortly brought to civil governance,
Now one, which erst were many, made through variaunce.
Then made he sacred laws, which some men say
Were unto him reueald in vision,
By which he freed the Traueilers high way,
The Churches part, and Ploughmans portion,
Restraining stealth, and strong extortion;
The gracious Numa of great Britanie:
For till his days, the chief dominion
By strength was wielded without policy;
Therefore he first wore crown of gold for dignity.
Donwallo did (for what may live for ay?)
And left two sons, of pearelesse prowess both;
That sacked Rome too dearly did assay,
The recompense of their perjured oath,
And ransackt Greece well tryde, when they were wroth;
Besides subjected France, and Germany,
Which yet their praises speak, all be they loath,
And inly tremble at the memory
Of Brennus and Bellinus, kings of Britany.
Next them did Gurgunt, great Bellinus son
In rule succeed, and eke in fathers praise;
He Easterland subdewd, and Danmarke won,
And of them both did foy and tribute raise,
The which was dew in his dead fathers days:
He also gave to fugitives of Spain,
Whom he at sea found wandering from their ways,
A seat in Ireland safely to remain,
Which they should hold of him, as subject to Britayne.
After him reigned Guitheline his hair,
The iustest man and trewest in his days,
Who had to wife Dame Mertia the fair,
A woman worthy of immortal praise,
Which for this Realm found many goodly lays,
And wholesome Statutes to her husbahd brought;
Her many deemd to have been of the Fayes,
As was Aegerie that Numa tought;
Those yet of her be Mertia^ laws both named and thought.
Her sons Sifillus after her did rain,
And then Kimarus, and then Danius;
Next whom Morindus did the crown sustain,
Who, had he not with wrath outrageous,
And cruel rancour dimmed his valorous
And mighty deeds, should matched have the best:
As well in that same field victorious
Against the foreign Morands he expressed;
Yet lives his memory, though carcas sleep in rest.
Five son he left begotten of one wife,
All which successively by turns did rain;
First Gorboman a man of virtuous life;
Next Archigald, who for his proud disdain,
Deposed was from Princedome sovereign,
And pitteous Elidure put in his sted;
Who shortly it to him restord again,
Till by his death he it recovered;
But Peridure and Vigent him disthronized.
In wretched prison long he did remain,
Till they outraigned had their utmost date,
And then therein reseized was again,
And ruled long with honorable state,
Till he surrendered Realm and life to fate.
Then all the sons of these five brethren raynd
By dew success, and all their Nephews late,
Even thrice eleven descents the crown retaynd,
Till aged Hely by dew heritage it gaynd.
He had two sons, whose eldest called Lud
Left of his life most famous memory,
And endless moniments of his great good:
The ruined walls he did reaedifye
Of Troynouant, against force of enemy,
And built that gate, which of his name is hight,
By which he lies entombed solemnly.
He left two sons, too young to rule aright,
Androgeus and Tenantius, pictures of his might.
Whilst they were young, Cassibalane their Eme
Was by the people chosen in their sted,
Who on him took the royal Diadem,
And goodly well long time it governed,
Till the proud Romans him disquieted,
And warlike Caesar, tempted with the name
Of this sweet Island, never conquered,
And envying the Britons blazed fame,
(O hideous hunger of dominion) hither came.
Yet twice they were repulsed back again,
And twice renforst, back to their ships to fly,
The whiles with blood they all the shore did stain.
And the gray Ocean into purple die:
Ne had they footing found at last perdie,
Had not Androgeus, false to native soil,
And envious or Uncles soueraintie,
Betrayed his country unto foreign spoil:
Naught else, but treason, from the first this la^d did foil.
So by him Caesar got the victory,
Through great bloushed, and many a sad assay,
In which him self was charged heavily
Of hardy Nennius, whom he yet did slay,
But lost his sword, yet to be seen this day.
Thenceforth this land was tributarie made
T'ambitious Rome, and did their rule obey,
Till Arthur all that reckoning did defray;
Yet often the Briton kings against them strongly swayd.
Next him Tenantius raignd, then Kimbeline,
What time the eternal Lord in fleshly slime
Enwombed was, from wretched Adams line
To purge away the guilt of sinful crime:
O joyous memory of happytime,
That heavenly grace so plenteously displayed;
(O too high ditty for my simple rhyme.)
Soon after this the Romans him wrrayd;
For that their tribute he refusd to let be paid.
Good Claudius, that next was Emperor,
An army brought, and with him battle fought,
In which the king was by a Treachetour
Disguised slain, ere any thereof thought:
Yet ceased not the bloody fight for ought;
For Aruirage his brothers place supplide,
Both in arms, and crown, and by that draught
Did drive the Romans to the weaker side,
That they to peace agreed. So all was pacifide.
Was never king more highly magnifide,
Nor dred of Romans, then was Aruirage,
For which the Emperor to him allide
His daughter Genuiss' in marriage:
Yet shortly he renounst the vassalage
Of Rome again, who hither hastly sent
Vespasian, that with great spoil and rage
Forwasted all, till Genuissa gent
Persuaded him to cease, and her Lord to relent.
He did; and him succeeded Marius,
Who ioyd his days in great tranquillity,
Then Coyll, and after him good Lucius,
That first received Christianity,
The sacred pledge of Christ's Euangely:
Yet true it is, that long before that day
Hither came Joseph of Arimathy,
Who brought with him the holy grayle, (they say)
And preached the truth, but since it greatly did decay.
This good king shortly without issew did,
Whereof great trouble in the kingdom grew,
That did her self in sundry parts divide,
And with her power her own self overthrew,
Whilst Romans daily did the weak subdew:
Which seeing stout Bunduca, up arose,
And taking arms, the Britons to her drew;
With whom she marched straight against her foes,
And them unawares besides the Seuerne did enclose.
There she with them a cruel battle tried,
Not with so good success, as she deserved;
By reason that the Captains on her side,
Corrupted by Paulinus, from her sweru'd:
Yet such, as were through former flight perseru'd,
Gathering again, her Host she did renew,
And with fresh courage on the victour served:
But being all defeated, save a few,
Rather then fly, or be captived her self she slew.
O famous moniment of women's praise,
Matchable either to Semiramis,
Whom antique history so high does raise,
Or to Hysiphil' or to Thomiris:
Her Host two hundred thousand numbered is;
Who whiles good fortune favored her might,
Triumphed often against her enimis;
And yet though overcome in hapless fight,
She triumphed on death, in enemies despite.
Her relics Fulgent having gathered,
Fought with Scuerus, and him overthrew;
Yet in the chase was slain of them, that fled:
So made them victours, whom he did subdew.
Then began Carausius tirannize anew,
And against the Romans bent their proper power,
But him Allectus treacherously slew,
And took on him the robe of Emperor:
Nath'lesse the same enjoyed but short happy hour:
For Asclepiodate him overcame,
And left inglorious on the vanquished plain,
Without or robe, or rag, to hide his shame.
Then afterward he in his stead did rain;
But shortly was by Coyll in battle slain:
Who after long debate, since Lucies time,
Was of the Britons first crowned Sovereign:
Then began this Realm renew her passed prime:
He of his name Coylchester built of stone and lime.
Which when the Romans heard, they hither sent
Constantius, a man of mickle might,
With whom king Coyll made an agreement,
And to him gave for wife his daughter bright,
Fair Helena, the fairest living wight;
Who in all godly thewes, and goodly praise
Did far excel, but was most famous hight
For skill in Music of all in her days,
As Well in curious instruments, as cunning lays.
Of whom he did great Constantine beget,
Who afterward was Emperor of Rome;
To which whiles absent he his mind did set,
Octauius here lept into his room,
And it usurped by unrighteous doom:
But he his title iustifide by might,
Slaying Traherne, and having overcome
The Roman legion in dreadful fight:
So settled he his kingdom, and confirmd his right.
But wanting issew male, his daughter dear,
He gave in wedlock to Maximian,
And him with her made of his kingdom heir,
Who soon by means thereof the Empire wan,
Till murdered by the friends of Gratian;
Then began the Hunnes and Picts invade this land,
During the reign of Maximinian;
Who dying left none heir them to withstand,
But that they ouerran all parts with easy hand.
The weary Britons, whose war-hable youth
Was by Maximian lately led away,
With wretched miseries, and woeful ruth,
Were to those Pagans made an open pray,
And daily spectacle of sad decay:
Whom Roman wars, which now four hundred years,
And more had wasted, could no whit dismay;
Till by consent of Commons and of Pears,
They crowned the second Constantine with joyous tears,
Who having often in battle vanquished
Those spoilefull Picts, and swarming Easterlings,
Long time in peace his Realm established,
Yet often annoyd with sundry bordragings
Of neighbor Scots, and foreign Scatterlings,
With which the world did in those days abound:
Which to outbarre, with painful pyonings
From sea to sea he heapt a mighty mound,
Which from Alcluid to Panwelt did that border bound.
Three sons he dying left, all under age;
By means whereof, their uncle Vortigere
Usurped the crown, during their pupillage;
Which th'Infants tutors gathering to fear,
Them closely into Armorick did bear:
For dread of whom, and for those Picts annoyes,
He sent to Germany, strange aid to rear,
From whence eftsoons arrived here three hoyes
Of Saxons, whom he for his safety imployes.
Two brethren were their Captains, which hight
Hengist and Horsus, well approved in war,
And both of them men of renowned might;
Who making vantage of their civil jar,
And of those forreiners, which came from far,
Grew great, and got large portions of land,
That in the Realm ere long they stronger arre,
Then they which sought at first their helping hand,
And Vortiger enforst the kingdom to aband.
But by the help of Vortimere his son,
He is again unto his rule restord,
And Hengist seeming sad, for that was done,
Received is to grace and new accord,
Through his fair daughters face, and flattring word;
Soon after which, three hundred Lords he slew
Of British blood, all sitting at his board;
Whose doleful moniments who list to rue,
The Eternal marks of treason may at Stonheng view.
By this the sons of Constantine, which fled,
Ambrise and Other did ripe years attain,
And here arriving, strongly challenged
The crown, which Vortiger did long detain:
Who flying from his guilt, by them was slain.
And Hengist eke soon brought to shameful death.
Thenceforth Aurelius peaceably did rain,
Till that through poison stopped was his breath;
So now entombed lies at Stoneheng by the heath.
After him Other, which Pendragon hight,
Succeding There abruptly it did end,
Without full point, or other Cesure right,
As if the rest some wicked hand did rend,
Or the Author self could not at least attend
To finish it: that so untimely breach
The Prince him self half seems to offend,
Yet secret pleasure did offense empeach,
And wonder of antiquity long stopped his speech.
At last quite ravished with delight, to hear
The royal Offspring of his native land,
Cryde out, Dear country, o how dearly dear
Ought thy remembrance, and perpetual band
Be to thy foster Child, that from thy hand
Did commun breath and nouriture receive?
How brutish is it not to understand,
How much to her we owe, that all us gave,
That gave unto us all, what ever good we have.
But Guyon all this while his book did read,
Ne yet has ended: for it was a great
And ample volume, that does far excead
My leisure, so long leaves here to repeat:
It told, how first Prometheus did create
A man, of many parts from beasts derived
And then stole fire from heaven, to animate
His work, for which he was by love deprived
Of life him self, and hart-strings of an Aegle riued.
That man so made, he called Elfe, to weet
Quick, the first author of all Elfin kind:
Who wandering through the world with weary feet,
Did in the gardins of Adonis find
A goodly creature, whom he deemd in mind
To beno earthly wight, but either Spright,
Or Angel, th'authour of all woman kind;
Therefore a Fay he her according hight,
Of whom all Faeryes spring, and fetch their lignage right.
Of these a mighty people shortly grew,
And puissaunt kings, which all the world warrayd,
And to them selves all Nations did subdew:
The first and eldest, which that scepter swayd,
Was Elfin; him all India obayd,
And all that now America men call:
Next him was noble Elfinan, who laid
Cleopolis foundation first of all:
But Elfiline enclosd it with a golden wall.
His son was Elfinell, who overcame
The wicked Gobbelines in bloody field:
But Elfant was of most renowned fame,
Who all of Crystal did Panthea build:
Then Elfar, who two brethren giants killed,
The one of which had two heads, the other three:
Then Elfinor, who was in Magic skild;
He built by art upon the glassy See
A bridge of bras, whose sound heavens thunder seemed to be
He left three sons, the which in order raynd,
And all their Offspring, in their dew descents,
Even seven hundred Princes, which maintaynd
With mighty deeds their sundry governments;
That were too long their infinite contents
Here to record, ne much material:
Yet should they be most famous moniments,
And bratie ensample, both of martial,
And civil rule to kings and states imperial.
After all these Elficleos did rain,
The wise Elficleos in great Majesty,
Who mightily that scepter did sustain,
And with rich spoils and famous victory,
Did high advance the crown of Faery:
He left two sons, of which fair Elferon
The eldest brother did untimely die;
Whose empty place the mighty Oberon
Doubly supplide, in spousall, and dominion.
Great was his power and glory over all,
Which him before, that sacred seat did fill,
That yet remains his wide memorial:
He dying left the fairest Tanaquill,
Him to succeed therein, by his last will:
Fairer and nobler lives none this hour,
Ne like in grace, ne like in learned skill;
Therefore they Glorian call that glorious flower,
Long may thou Glorian live, in glory and great power.
Beguild thus with delight of novelties,
And natural desire of countries state,
So long they red in those antiquities,
That how the time was fled, they quite forgate,
Till geutle Alma seeing it so late,
Perforce their studies broke, and them besought
To think, how supper did them long awaite.
So half unwilling from their books them brought,
And fairly feasted, as so nobles knights she ought.
Cant. XI.
The enemies of Temperaunce
besiege her dwelling place:
Prince Arthur them repelles, and foul
Maleger does deface.
WHat war so cruel, or what siege so sore,
As that, which strong affections do apply
Against the fort of reason evermore
To bring the soul into captivity:
Their force is fiercer through infirmity
Of the frail flesh, relenting to their rage,
And exercise most bitter tyranny
Upon the parts, brought into their bondage:
No wretchedness is like to sinful vellenage.
But in a body, which does freely yield
His parts to reasons rule obedient,
And lets her that ought the scepter weeld,
All happy peace and goodly government
Is settled there in sure establishment;
There Alma like a virgin Queen most bright,
Does flourish in all beauty excellent:
And to her guestes does bounteous banquet dight,
Attempted goodly well for health and delight.
Early before the Morn with cremosin ray,
The windows of bright heaven opened had,
Through which into the world the dawning day
Might look, that makes every creature glad,
Vprose Sir Guyon, in bright armor clad,
And to his purposd journey him prepared:
With him the Palmer eke in habit sad,
Him self addressed to that adventure hard:
So to the rivers side they both together fared.
Where them awaited ready at the ford
The Ferriman, as Alma had behight,
With his well rigged boat: They go abord,
And eftsoons began launch his bark forthright.
Ere long they rowed were quite out of sight,
And fast the land behind them fled away.
But let them pas, whiles wind and weather right
Do serve their turns: here I a while must stay,
To see a cruel fight done by the Prince this day.
For all so soon, as Guyon thence was gone
Upon his voyage with his trusty guide,
That wicked band of villeins fresh begone
That castle to assail on every side,
And lay strong siege about it far and wide.
So huge and infinite their numbers were,
That all the land they under them did hide;
So foul and ugly, that exceeding fear
Their visages impressed, when they approached near.
Them in twelve troops their Captain did dispart
And round about in sit steades did place,
Where each might best offend his proper part,
And his contrary object most deface,
As every one seemed meetest in that case.
Seven of the same against the Castle gate,
In strong entrenchments he did closely place,
Which with incessaunt force and endless hate,
They battred day and night, and entrance did awate.
The other five, five sundry ways he set,
Against the five great Bulwarks of that pile.
And unto each a Bulwark did arret,
T'assayle with open force or hidden guile,
In hope thereof to win victorious spoil.
They all that charge did seruently apply,
With greedy malice and importune toil,
And planted there their huge artillery,
With which they daily made most dreadful battery.
The first troop was a monstrous rablement
Of foul misshapen wights, of which some were
Headed like Owls, with beckes uncomely bent,
Others like Dogs, others like Gryphons dreare,
And some had wings, and some had claws to tear,
And every one of them had Lynces eyes,
And every one did bow and arrows bear:
All those were lawless lusts, corrupt enuies,
And covetous aspectes, all cruel enemies.
Those same against the bulwark of the Sight
Did lay strong siege, and battailous assault,
Ne once did yield it respit day nor night,
But soon as Titan began his head exault.
And soon again as he his light with hault,
Their wicked engines they against it bent:
That is each thing, by which the eyes may fault,
But two then all more huge and violent,
Beauty, and money, they that Bulwark sorely rent.
The second Bulwark was the Hearing sense,
Against which the second troop dessignment makes;
Deformed creatures, in strange difference,
Some having heads like Hearts, some like to Snakes,
Some like wild Bores late rouzd out of the brakes;
Slanderous reproaches, and foul infamies,
Leasings, backbytings, and vainglorious crakes,
Bad counsels, praises, and false flatteries.
All those a against that fort did bend their batteries.
Likewise that same third Fort, that is the Smell
Of that third troop was cruelly assayd:
Whose hideous shapes were like to feends of hell,
Some like to hounds, some like to Apes, dismayed,
Some like to Puttockes, all in plumes arayd:
All shaped according their conditions,
For by those ugly forms weren pourtrayd,
Foolish delights and fond abusions,
Which do that sense besiege with light illusions.
And that fourth band, which cruel battry bent,
Against the fourth Bulwark, that is the Taste,
Was as the rest, a grysie rablement,
Some mouthed like greedy Oystriges, some fast
Like loathly Toades, some fashioned in the wast
Like swine; for so deformd is luxury,
Surfeat, misdiet, and unthrifty wast,
Vain feasts, and idle superfluity:
All those this senses Fort assail incessantly.
But the fifth troop most horrible of hew,
And fierce or force, was dreadful to report:
For some like Snailes, some did like spyders show,
And some like ugly Vrchins thick and short:
Cruelly they assailed that fifth Fort,
Armed with darts of sensual delight,
With stings of carnal lust, and strong effort
Of feeling pleasures, with which day and night
Against that same fifth bulwark they continued fight.
Thus these twelve troops with dreadful puissance
Against that Castle restless siege did lay,
And evermore their hideous Ordinance
Upon the Bulwarks cruelly did play,
That now it began to threaten near decay:
And evermore their wicked Captain
Provoked them the breaches to assay,
Sometimes with threats, sometimes with hope of gain,
Which by the ransack of that piece they should attain.
On the other side, th'assieged Castles ward
Their steadfast stonds did mightily maintain,
And many bold repulse, and many hard
Atchieuement wrought with peril and with pain,
That goodly frame from ruin to sustain:
And those two brethren Giants did defend
The walls so stoutly with their sturdie maine,
That never entrance any durst pretend,
But they to direful death their groaning ghosts did send.
The noble virgin, Lady of the place,
Was much dismayed with that dreadful sight:
For never was she in so evil case,
Till that the Prince seeing her woeful plight,
Began her recomfort from so sad affright,
Offering his service, and his dearest life
For her defense, against that Carle to fight,
Which was their chief and the author of that strife:
She him remercied as the Patron of her life.
Eftsoons himself in glitterand arms he dight,
And his well proved weapons to him hent;
So taking courteous conge he behight,
Those gates to be vnbar'd, and forth he went.
Fair mote he thee, the prowest and most gent,
That ever brandished bright steel on hye:
Whom soon as that unruly rablement,
With his gay Squire issuing did espy,
They reard a most outrageous dreadful yelling cry.
And therewith all attonce at him let fly
Their fluttring arrows, thick as flakes of snow,
And round about him flock impetuously,
Like a great water flood, that tombling low
From the high mountains, threats to ouerflow
With suddein fury all the fertile plain,
And the sad husbandmans long hope does throw
A down the stream, and all his vows make vain,
Nor bounds nor banks his headlong ruin may sustain.
Upon his shield their heaped hayle he bore,
And with his sword dispersed the rascal flocks,
Which fled a sunder, and him fell before,
As withered leaves drop from their dried stocks,
When the wroth Western wind does reaue their locks;
And under neath him his courageous steed,
The fierce Spumador trod them down like docks,
The fierce Spumador borne of heavenly seed:
Such as Laomedon of Phoebus race did breed
Which suddeine horror and confused cry,
When as their Captain heard, in haste he yode,
The cause to weet, and fault to remedy;
Upon a Tygre swift and fierce he rode,
That as the wind ran underneath his lode,
Whiles his long legs nigh raught unto the ground;
Full large he was of limb, and shoulders broad,
But of such subtle substance and unsound,
That like a ghost he seemed, whose graue-clothes were unbound.
And in his hand a bended bow was seen,
And many arrows under his right side,
All deadly dangerous, all cruel keen,
Headed with flint, and feathers bloody did,
Such as the Indians in their quiuers hide;
Those could he well direct and straight as line,
And bid them strike the mark, which he had eyde,
Ne was their salve, ne was their medicine,
That mote recure their wounds: so inly they did tine.
As pale and wan as ashes was his look,
His body lean and meagre as a rake,
And skin all withered like a dried rooke,
Thereto as cold and drery as a Snake,
That seemed to tremble evermore, and quake:
All in a canuas thin he was bedight,
And girded with a belt of twisted brake,
Upon his head he wore an Helmet light,
Made of a dead man's skull, that seemed a ghastly sight.
Maleger was his name, and after him,
There followed fast at hand two wicked Hags,
With hoarie locks all loose, and visage grim;
Their feet unshod, their bodies wrapped in rags,
And both as swift on foot, as chased Stags;
And yet the one her other leg had lame,
Which with a staff, all full of little snags
She did disport, and Impotence her name:
But the other was Impatience, armed with raging flame.
Soon as the Carle from far the Prince espyde,
Glistring in arms and warlike ornament,
His Beast he felly pricked on either side,
And his mischievous bow full ready bent,
With which at him a cruel shaft he sent:
But he was wary, and it warded well
Upon his shield, that it no further went,
But to the ground the idle quarrel fell:
Then he another and another did expel.
Which to prevent, the Prince his mortal spear
Soon to him raught, and fierce at him did ride,
To be avenged of that shot whyleare:
But he was not so hardy to abide
That bitter stownd, but turning quick aside
His light-foot beast, fled fast away for fear:
Whom to pursue, the Infant after hide,
So fast as his good Courser could him bear,
But labor lost it was, to ween approach him near.
For as the winged wind his Tigre fled,
That view of eye could scarce him overtake,
Ne scarce his feet on ground were seen to tred;
Through hills and dales he speedy way did make,
Ne hedge ne ditch his ready passage brake,
And in his flight the villein turned his face,
(As wonts the Tartar by the Caspian lake,
When as the Russian him in fight does chase)
Unto his Tygres tail, and shot at him apace.
Apace he shot, and yet he fled apace,
Still as the greedy knight nigh to him drew,
And oftentimes he would relent his pace,
That him his foe more fiercely should pursew:
Who when his uncouth manner he did view,
He began auize to follow him no more,
But keep his standing, and his shaftes eschew,
Until he quite had spent his perlous store,
And then assail him fresh, ere he could shift for more.
But that lame Hag, still as abroad he strew
His wicked arrows, gathered them again,
And to him brought, fresh battle to renew:
Which he espying, cast her to restrain
From yielding succor to that cursed Swain,
And her attaching, thought her hands to tie;
But soon as him dismounted on the plain,
That other Hag did far away espy
Binding her sister, she to him ran hastily.
And catching hold of him, as down he lent,
Him backward overthrew, and down him stayed
With their rude hands and griefly graplement,
Till that the ville in coming to their aye,
Upon him fell, and lode upon him laid;
Full little wanted, but he had him slain,
And of the battle balefull end had made,
Had not his gentle Squire beheld his pain,
And commen to his reskew, ere his bitter bane.
So greatest and most glorious thing on ground
May often need the help of weaker hand;
So feeble is man's state, and life unsound,
That in assurance it may never stand,
Till it dissolved be from earthly band.
Proof be thou Prince, the prowest man alive,
And noblest borne of all in Briton land;
Yet thee fierce Fortune did so nearely drive,
That had not grace thee blessed, thou should not revive.
The Squire arriving, fiercely in his arms
Snatched first the one, and then the other Jade,
His chiefest lets and authors of his harms,
And them perforce withheld with threatened blade,
Least that his Lord they should behind invade;
The whiles the Prince pricked with reproachful shame,
As one awakt out of long slombring shade,
Reviving thought of glory and of fame,
United all his powers to purge himself from blame.
Like as a fire, the which in hollow cave
Has long been vnderkept, and down suppressed,
With murmurous disdain does inly rave,
And grudge, in so straight prison to be pressed,
At last breaks forth with furious unrest,
And strives to mount unto his native seat;
All that did erst it hinder and molest,
It now deuoures with flames and scorching heat,
And carries into smoke with rage and horror great.
So mightily the Briton Prince him rouzd
Out of his hold, and broke his caitiue bands,
And as a Bear whom angry curres have touzd,
Having off-shakt them, and escapt their hands,
Becomes more fell, and all that him withstands
Treads down and overthrows. Now had the Carle
Alighted from his Tigre, and his hands
Discharged of his bow and deadly quar'le,
To seize upon his foe flat lying on the marle.
Which now him turned to disauantage dear;
For neither can he fly, nor other harm,
But trust unto his strength and manhood meare,
Since now he is far from his monstrous swarm,
And of his weapons did himself disarme.
The knight yet wrothfull for his late disgrace,
Fiercely aduaunst his valorous right arm,
And him so sore smote with his iron mace,
That groueling to the ground he fell, and filled his place.
Well weened he, that field was then his own,
And all his labor brought to happy end,
When suddein up the villein overthrown,
Out of his swowne arose, fresh to contend,
And began himself to second battle bend,
As hurt he had not been. Thereby there lay
An huge great stone, which stood upon one end,
And had not been removed many a day;
Some land-marke seemed to be, or sign of sundry way.
The same he snatched, and with exceeding sway
Threw at his foe, who was right well aware
To shun the engine of his meant decay;
It booted not to think that throw to bear,
But ground he gave, and lightly leapt areare:
Eft fierce returning, as a Faulcon fair
That once has failed of her souse full near,
Remounts again into the open air,
And unto better fortune does her self prepaire.
So brave returning, with his brandisht blade,
He to the Carle himself again addressed,
And struck at him so sternely, that he made
An open passage through his riuen breast,
That half the steel behind his back did rest;
Which drawing back, he looked evermore
When the heart blood should gush out of his chest,
Or his dead corse should fall upon the flore;
But his dead corse upon the flore fell nathemore.
Ne drop of blood appeared shed to be,
All were the wound so wide and wondrous,
That through his carcass one might plainly see:
Half in a maze with horror hideous,
And half in rage, to be deluded thus,
Again through both the sides he struck him quight,
That made his spright to groan full piteous:
Yet nathemore forth fled his groaning spright,
But freshly as at first, prepared himself to fight.
Thereat he smitten was with great affright,
And trembling terror did his heart apall,
Ne wist he, what to think of that same sight,
Ne what to say, ne what to do at all;
He doubted, least it were some magical
Illusion, that did beguile his sense,
Or wandering ghost, that wanted funeral,
Or aerie spirit under false pretense,
Or hellish feend raysd up through devilish science.
His wonder far exceeded reasons reach,
That he began to doubt his dazeled sight,
And often of error did himself appeach:
Flesh without blood, a person without spright,
Wounds without hurt, a body without might,
That could do harm, yet could not harmed be,
That could not die, yet seemed a mortal wight,
That was most strong in most infirmitee;
Like did he never hear, like did he never see.
A while he stood in this astonishment,
Yet would he not for all his great dismay
Give over to effect his first intent,
And the utmost means of victory assay,
Or the utmost issew of his own decay.
His own good sword Mordure, that never fayld
At need, till now, he lightly threw away,
And his bright shield, that naught him now auayld,
And with his naked hands him forcibly assayld.
Twixt his two mighty arms him up he snatched,
And crushed his carcass so against his breast,
That the disdainful soul he thence dispatched,
And th'idle breath all utterly expressed:
Tho when he felt him dead, adowne he kest
The lumpish corse unto the senseless grownd;
Adowne he kest it with so puissant wrest,
That back again it did aloft rebownd,
And gave against his mother earth a gronefull sownd.
As when Jove's harnesse-bearing Bird from hie
Stoupes at a flying heron with proud disdain,
The stone-dead quarrey falls so forciblie,
That it rebounds against the lowly plain,
A second fall redoubling back again.
Then thought the Prince all peril sure was past,
And that he victor only did remain;
No sooner thought, then that the Carle as fast
Began heap huge strokes on him, as ere he down was cast.
Nigh his wits end then woxe the amazed knight,
And thought his labor lost and travel vain,
Against this lifelesse shadow so to fight:
Yet life he saw, and felt his mighty maine,
That whiles he marueild still, did still him pain:
For thy he began some other ways aduize,
How to take life from that dead-liuing swain,
Whom still he marked freshly to arize
From the earth, and from her womb new spirits to reprize.
He then remembered well, that had been said,
How The Earth his mother was, and first him bore;
She eke so often, as his life decayed,
Did life with usury to him restore,
And raysd him up much stronger then before,
So soon as he unto her womb did fall;
Therefore to ground he would him cast no more,
Ne him commit to grave terrestrial,
But bear him far from hope of succor usual.
Tho up he caught him twixt his puissant hands,
And having scruzd out of his carrion corse
The lothfull life, now loosd from sinful bands,
Upon his shoulders carried him perforse
Above three furlongs, taking his full course,
Until he came unto a standing lake;
Him thereinto he threw without remorse,
Ne stird, till hope of life did him forsake;
So end of that Carles days, and his own pains did make*
Which when those wicked Hags from far did spy,
Like two mad dogs they ran about the lands,
And the one of them with dreadful yelling cry,
Throwing away her broken chains and bands,
And having quenched her burning fire brands,
Hedlong her self did cast into that lake;
But Impotence with her own wilful hands,
One of Malegers cursed darts did take,
So riu'd her trembling heart, and wicked end did make.
Thus now alone he conqueror remains;
Tho coming to his Squire, that kept his steed,
Thought to have mounted, but his feeble veins
Him faild thereto, and served not his need,
Through loss of blood, which from his wounds did bleed,
That he began to faint, and life decay:
But his good Squire him helping up with speed,
With steadfast hand upon his horse did stay,
And led him to the Castle by the beaten way.
Where many Grooms and Squiers ready were,
To take him from his steed full tenderly,
And eke the fairest Alma met him there
With balm and wine and costly spicery,
To comfort him in his infirmity;
Eftsoons she causd him up to be conuayd,
And of his arms despoyled easily,
In sumptuous bed she made him to be laid,
And all the while his wounds were dressing, by him stayed.
Cant. XII.
Guyon by Palmers governance,
passing through perils great,
Does overthrow the Bower of bliss,
and Acrasie defeat.
NOw gins this goodly frame of Temperance
Fairly to rise, and her adorned head
To prick of highest praise forth to advance,
Formerly grounded, and fast setteled
On firm foundation of true bountihed;
And this brave knight, that for this virtue fights,
Now comes to point of that same perilous sted,
Where Pleasure dwelles in sensual delights,
Mo^gst thousand dangers, and ten thousand magic mights.
Two days now in that sea he sailed has,
Ne ever land beheld, ne living wight,
Ne ought save peril, still as he did pas:
Tho when appeared the third Morrow bright,
Upon the waves to spread her trembling light,
An hideous roaring far away they heard,
That all their senses filled with affright,
And straight they saw the raging surges reard
Up to the skies, that them of drowning made affeard.
Said then the Boteman, Palmer stere aright,
And keep an even course; for yonder way
We needs must pass (God do us well acquight,)
That is the Gulf of Greediness, they say,
That deep engorgeth all this worlds pray:
Which having swallowd up excessiuely,
He soon in vomit up again does lay,
And belcheth forth his superfluity,
That all the seas for fear do seem away to fly.
On the other side an hideous Rock is pight,
Of mighty Magnes stone, whose craggie clift
Depending from on high, dreadful to sight,
Over the waves his rugged arms does lift,
And threatens down to throw his ragged rift
On who so comes nigh; yet nigh it draws
All passengers, that none from it can shift:
For whiles they fly that Gulfes devouring jaws,
They on this rock are rent, and sunck in helpless wawes.
Forward they pass, and strongly he them rows,
Until they nigh unto that Gulf arrive,
Where stream more violent and greedy grows:
Then he with all his puissance does strive
To strike his oars, and mightily does drive
The hollow vessel through the threatfull wave,
Which gaping wide, to swallow them alive,
In th'huge abyss of his engulfing grave,
Does rore at them in vain, and with great terror rave.
They passing by, that griesly mouth did see,
Sucking the seas into his entralles deep,
That seemed more horrible then hell to be,
Or that dark dreadful hole of Tartare steep,
Through which the damned ghosts done often creep
Back to the world, bad livers to torment:
But naught that falls into this direful deep,
Ne that approaches nigh the wide descent,
May back return, but is condemned to be drent.
On the other side, they saw that perilous Rock,
Threatening it self on them to ruinate,
On whose sharp clifts the ribs of vessels broke,
And shiuered ships, which had been wrecked late,
Yet stuck, with carcasses exanimate
Of such, as having all their subtance spent
In wanton joys, and lusts intemperate,
Did afterward make shipwreck violent,
Both of their life, and fame for ever fowly blent.
For thy, this hight The Rock of vile Reproach,
A dangerous and detestable place,
To which nor fish nor foul did once approach,
But yelling Meawes, with Seagulles hoarse and bace,
And Cormoyrants, with birds of ravenous race,
Which still sat waiting on that wastfull clift,
For spoil of wretches, whose unhappy case,
After lost credit and consumed thrift,
At last them driven has to this despairefull drift.
The Palmer seeing them in safety past,
Thus said; behold th'ensamples in our sights,
Of lustful luxury and thriftlesse wast:
What now is left of miserable wights,
Which spent their looser days in lewd delights,
But shame and sad reproach, here to be red,
By these rent relics, speaking their ill plights?
Let all that live, hereby be counseled,
To shun Rock of Reproach, and it as death to dred.
So forth they rowed, and that Ferryman
With his stiff oars did brush the sea so strong,
That the hoare waters from his frigot ran,
And the light bubbles daunced all along,
Whiles the salt brine out of the billows sprung.
At last far off they many Islands spy,
On every side floting the floods among:
Then said the knight, Lo I the land descry,
Therefore old Sire thy course do thereunto apply.
That may not be, said then the Ferryman
Least we vnweeting hap to be fordonne:
For those same Islands, seeming now and than,
Are not firm land, nor any certain won,
But straggling plots, which to and fro do run
In the wide waters: therefore are they hight
The wandering Islands. Therefore do them shonne;
For they have often drawn many a wandering wight
Into most deadly danger and distressed plight.
Yet well they seem to him, that far does view,
Both fair and fruitful, and the ground dispred
With grassie green of delectable hew,
And the tall trees with leaves apparelled,
Are decked with blossoms did in white and red,
That mote the passengers thereto allure;
But whosoever once has fastened
His foot thereon, may never it recure,
But wandreth ever more uncertain and unsure.
As th'Isle of Delos whylome men report
Amid the Aegaean sea long time did stray,
Ne made for shipping any certain port,
Till that Latona traueiling that way,
Flying from Iunoes wrath and hard assay,
Of her fair twins was there delivered,
Which afterward did rule the night and day;
Thenceforth it firmly was established,
And for Apolloes honor highly herried.
They to him hearken, as beseems meet,
And pass on forward: so their way does ly,
That one of those same Islands, which do fleet
In the wide sea, they needs must passen by,
Which seemd so sweet and pleasant to the eye,
That it would tempt a man to touchen there:
Upon the banck they sitting did espy
A dainty damzell, dressing of her hear,
By whom a little skippet floting did appear.
She them espying, loud to them can call,
Bidding them nigher draw unto the shore;
For she had cause to bufie them withal;
And therewith loudly laughed: But nathemore
Would they once turn, but kept on as before:
Which when she saw, she left her locks vndight,
And running to her boat withouten ore,
From the departing land it launched light,
And after them did drive with all her power and might.
Whom ouertaking, she in merry sort
Them began to board, and purpose diversely,
Now faining dalliance and wanton sport,
Now throwing forth lewd words immodestly;
Till that the Palmer began full bitterly
Her to rebuke, for being loose and light:
Which not abiding, but more scornefully
Scoffing at him, that did her justly wite,
She turned her bote about, and from them rowed quite.
That was the wanton Phoedria, which late
Did ferry him over the Idle lake:
Whom naught regarding, they kept on their gate,
And all her vain allurements did forsake,
When them the wary Boateman thus bespake;
Here now behooves us well to auyse,
And of our safety good heed to take;
For here before a perlous passage lies,
Where many Mermayds haunt, making false melodies.
But by the way, there is a great Quicksand,
And a whirlepoole of hidden ieopardy,
Therefore, Sir Palmer, keep an even hand;
Scarce had he said, when hard at hand they spy
That quicksand nigh with water covered;
But by the checked wave they did descry
It plain, and by the sea discolored:
It called was the quicksand of Vnthriftyhed.
They passing by, a goodly Ship did see,
Laden from far with precious merchandise,
And bravely furnished, as ship might be,
Which through great disauenture, or mesprize,
Her self had run into that hazardize;
Whose mariners and merchants with much toil,
Labored in vain, to have recur'd their prize,
And the rich wares to save from pitteous spoil,
But neither toil nor travel might her back recoyle.
On the other side they see that perilous Poole,
That called was the VVhirlepoole of decay,
In which full many had with hapless doole
Been suncke, of whom no memory did stay:
Whose circled waters rapt with whirling sway,
Like to a restless wheel, still running round,
Did covet, as they passed by that way,
To draw the boat within the utmost bound
Of his wide Labyrinth, and then to have them dround.
But th'heedfull Boateman strongly forth did stretch
His brawnie arms, and all his body strain,
That the utmost sandy breach they shortly fetch,
Whiles the dred danger does behind remain.
Suddeine they see from midst of all the Maine,
The surging waters like a mountain rise,
And the great sea puffed up with proud disdain,
To swell above the measure of his guise,
As threatening to devour all, that his power despise.
The waves come rolling, and the billows rore
Outragiously, as they enraged were,
Or wrathful Neptune did them drive before
His whirling charet, for exceeding fear:
For not one puff of wind there did appear,
That all the three thereat woxe much afraid,
Vnweeting, what such horror strange did rear.
Eftsoons they saw an hideous host arrayd,
Of huge Sea monsters, such as living sense dismayed.
Most ugly shapes, and horrible aspects,
Such as Dame Nature self mote fear to see,
Or shame, that ever should so foul defects
From her most cunning hand escaped be;
All dreadful pourtraicts of deformitee:
Spring-headed Hydraes, and sea-shouldring Whales,
Great whirlpools, which all fishes make to flee,
Bright Scolopendraes, armed with silver scales,
Mighty Monoceros, with immeasured tails.
The dreadful Fish, that has deserved the name
Of Death, and like him looks in dreadful hew,
The griefly Wasserman, that makes his game
The flying ships with swiftness to pursew,
The horrible Sea-satyre, that does show
His fearful face in time of greatest storm,
Huge Ziffius, whom Mariners eschew
No less, then rocks, (as travelers inform,)
And greedy Rosmarines with visages deforme.
All these, and thousand thousands many more,
And more deformed Monsters thousand fold,
With dreadful noise, and hollow rombling rore,
Came rushing in the fomy waves enrold,
Which seemed to fly for fear, them to behold:
Ne wonder, if these did the knight appall;
For all that here on earth we dreadful hold,
Be but as bugs to fearen babes withal,
Compared to the creatures in the seas entrall.
Fear naught, (then said the Palmer well auiz'd;)
For these same Monsters are not these in deed,
But are into these fearful shapes disguised
By that same wicked witch, to work us dreed,
And draw from on this journey to proceed.
Tho lifting up his virtuous staff on hye,
He smote the sea, which calmed was with speed,
And all that dreadful Army fast began fly
Into great Tethys bosom, where they hidden lie.
Quit from that danger, forth their course they kept,
And as they went, they heard a ruefull cry
Of one, that wayld and pitiful wept,
That through the sea the resounding plaints did fly:
At last they in an Island did espy
A seemly Maiden, sitting by the shore,
That with great sorrow and sad agony,
Seemed some great misfortune to deplore,
And loud to them for succor called evermore.
Which Guyon hearing, straight his Palmer bad,
To stere the boat toward that doleful Maid,
That he might know, and ease her sorrow sad:
Who him auizing better, to him said;
Fair Sir, be not displeasd, if disobayd:
For ill it were to hearken to her cry;
For she is inly nothing ill apayd,
But only womanish fine forgery,
Your stubborn heart t'affect with frail infirmity.
To which when she your courage has inclind
Through foolish pity, then her guilefull bayt
She will embosome deeper in your mind,
And for your ruin at the last awayt.
The knight was ruled, and the Boateman strayt
Held on his course with stayed steadfastness,
Ne ever shruncke, ne ever sought to bayt
His tired arms for toylesome weariness,
But with his oars did sweep the watery wilderness.
And now they nigh approached to the sted,
Where as those Mermayds dwelt: it was a still
And calmy bay, on the one side sheltered
With the broad shadow of an hoarie hill,
On the other side an high rock toured still,
That twixt them both a peasaunt port they made,
And did like an half Theater fulfill:
There those five sisters had continual trade,
And vsd to bath themselves in that deceiptfull shade.
They were fair Ladies, till they fondly strived
With the Heliconian maids for maistery;
Of whom they ouer-comen, were deprived
Of their proud beauty, and the one moyity
Transformed to fish, for their bold surquedry,
But th'vpper half their hew retained still,
And their sweet skill in wonted melody;
Which ever after they abusd to ill,
T'allure weak travelers, whom gotten they did kill.
So now to Guyon, as he passed by,
Their pleasant tunes they sweetly thus applide;
O thou fair son of gentle Faery,
Thou art in mighty arms most magnifide
Above all knights, that ever battle tried,
O turn thy rudder hither-ward a while:
Here may thy storme-bet vessel safely ride;
This is the Port of rest from troublous toil,
The worlds sweet In, from pain and wearisome turmoyle.
With that the rolling sea resounding soft,
In his big base them sitly answered,
And on the rock the waves breaking aloft,
A solemn Mean unto them measured,
The whiles sweet Zephirus loud whisteled
His treble, a strange kind of harmony;
Which Guyons senses softly tickeled,
That he the boateman bad row easily,
And let him hear some part of their rare melody.
But him the Palmer from that vanity,
With temperate advice discounselled,
That they it past, and shortly began descry
The land, to which their course they leueled;
When suddeinly a gross fog over spread
With his dull vapor all that desert has,
And heavens cheerful face enueloped,
That all things one, and one as nothing was,
And this great Universe seemd one confused mas.
Thereat they greatly were dismayed, ne wist
How to direct their way in darkness wide,
But feared to wander in that wastfull mist,
For tombling into mischief vnespide.
Worse is the danger hidden, then descride.
Suddeinly an innumerable flight
Of harmefull fowls about them fluttering, cride,
And with their wicked wings them often did smight,
And sore annoyed, groping in that griesly night.
Even all the nation of unfortunate
And fatal birds about them flocked were,
Such as by nature men abhor and hate,
The ill-faste Owl, deaths dreadful messengere,
The hoars Night-rauen, trump of doleful drere,
The lether-winged Bat, days enemy,
The ruefull Strich, still waiting on the bear,
The Whistler shrill, that who so hears, does die,
The hellisn Harpies, prophets of sad destiny.
All those, and all that else does horror breed,
About them flew, and filled their sails with fear:
Yet stayed they not, but forward did proceed,
Whiles the one did row, and the other stiffly steare;
Till that at last the weather began to clear,
And the fair land it self did plainly show.
Said then the Palmer, Lo where does appear
The sacred soil, where all our perils grow;
Therefore, Sirknight, your ready arms about you throw.
He hearkened, and his arms about him took,
The whiles the nimble boat so well her sped,
That with her crooked keele the land she struck,
Then forth the noble Guyon sallied,
And his sage Palmer, that him governed;
But the other by his boat behind did stay.
They marched fairly forth, of naught ydred,
Both firmly armd for every hard assay,
With constancy and care, against danger and dismay.
Ere long they heard an hideous bellowing
Of many beasts, that roard outrageously,
As if that hungers point, or Venus sting
Had them enraged with fell surquedry;
Yet naught they feared, but past on hardily,
Until they came in view of those wild beasts:
Who all attonce, gaping full greedily,
And rearing fiercely their vpstarting crests,
Ran toward, to devour those unexpected guests.
But soon as they approcht with deadly threat,
The Palmer over them his staff vpheld,
His mighty staff, that could all charms defeat:
Eftsoons their stubborn courages were queld,
And high advanced crests down meekely feld,
In stead of fraying, they them selves did fear,
And trembled, as them passing they beheld:
Such wondrous power did in that staff appear,
All monsters to subdew to him, that did it bear.
Of that same wood it framed was cunningly,
Of which Caduceus whilome was made,
Caduceus the rod of Mercury,
With which he wonts the Stygian realms invade,
Through ghastly horror, and eternal shade;
The Infernal feends with it he can assuage,
And Orcus tame, whom nothing can persuade,
And rule the Furyes, when they most do rage:
Such virtue in his staff had eke this Palmer sage.
Thence passing forth, they shortly do arrive,
Whereas the Bower of Bliss was situate;
A place pick out by choice of best alive,
That natures work by art can imitate:
In which what ever in this worldly state
Is sweet, and pleasing unto living sense,
Or that may dayntiest fantasy aggrate,
Was poured forth with plentiful dispense,
And made there to abound with lavish affluence.
Goodly it was enclosed round about,
As Well their entered guestes to keep within,
As those unruly beasts to hold without;
Yet was the fence thereof but weak and thin;
Naught feared their force, that fortilage to win,
But wisdoms power, and temperaunces might,
By which the mightiest things efforced bin:
And eke the gate was wrought of substance light,
Rather for pleasure, then for battery or fight.
Yt framed was of precious yuory,
That seemd a work of admirable wit;
And therein all the famous history
Of Jason and Medaea was ywrit;
Her mighty charms, her furious loving fit,
His goodly conquest of the golden fleece,
His falsed faith, and love too lightly flit,
The wondered Argo, which in venturous piece
First through the Euxine seas bore all the flowr of Greece.
Ye might have seen the frothy billows fry
Under the ship, as thorough them she went,
That seemd the waves were into yuory,
Or yuory into the waves were sent;
And other where the snowy substance sprent
With vermell, like the boys blood therein shed,
A piteous spectacle did represent,
And otherwhiles with gold besprinkeled;
Yt seemd th'enchaunted flame, which did Creiisa wed.
All this, and more might in that goodly gate
Be red; that ever open stood to all,
Which thither came: but in the Porch there sat
A comely personage of stature tall,
And semblaunce pleasing, more then natural,
That travelers to him seemd to entize;
His looser garment to the ground did fall,
And flew about his heels in wanton wize,
Not fit for speedy pace, or manly exercize.
They in that place him Genius did call:
Not that celestial power, to whom the care
Of life, and generation of all
That lives, pertaines in charge particulare,
Who wondrous things concerning our welfare,
And strange phantomes does let us often forsee,
And often of secret ill bids us beware:
That is our Self, whom though we do not see,
Yet each does in him self it well perceive to be.
Therefore a God him sage Antiquity
Did wisely make, and good Agdistes call:
But this same was to that quite contrary,
The foe of life, that good enuyes to all,
That secretly does us procure to fall,
Through guilefull semblaunts, which he makes us see.
He of this Gardin had the gouernall,
And Pleasures porter was deuizd to be,
Holding a staff in hand for more formalitee.
With diverse flowers he daintily was decked,
And strowed round about, and by his side
A mighty Mazer bowl of wine was set
As if it had to him been sacrifide;
Wherewith all new-come guests he gratifide:
So did he eke Sir Guyon passing by:
But he his idle courtesy defide,
And overthrew his bowl disdainfully;
And broke his staff, with which he charmed semblants sly.
Thus being entered, they behold around
A large and spacious plain, on every side
Strowed with, pleasauns, whose fair grassy ground
Mantled with grenee, and goodly beautifide
With all the ornaments of Floraes pride,
Wherewith her mother Art, as half in scome
Of niggard Nature, like a pompous bride
Did deck her, and too lauishly adorn,
When forth from virgin bower she comes in the early morn.
Thereto the Heavens always Iouiall,
Looked on them lovely, still in steadfast state,
Ne suffered storm nor frost on them to fall,
Their tender buds or leaves to violate,
Nor scorching heat, nor cold intemperate
Tafflict the crearures, which therein did dwell,
But the mild air with season moderate
Gently attempred, and disposd so well,
That still it breathed forth sweet spirit and wholesome smell.
More sweet and wholesome, then the pleasant hill
Of Rhodope, on which the Nimphe, that bore
A gyaunt babe, her self for grief did kill;
Or the Thessalian Tempe, where of yore
Fair Daphne Phoebus heart with love did gore;
Or Ida, where the Gods loved to repair,
When ever they their heavenly bowres forlore;
Or sweet Parnasse, the ha unt of Muses fair;
Of Eden, if ought with Eden mote compaire.
Much wondered Guyon at the fair aspect
Of that sweet place, yet suffered no delight
To sincke into his sense, nor mind affect,
But passed forth, and looked still forward right,
Bridling his will, and maistering his might:
Till that he came unto another gate,
No gate, but like one, being goodly dight
With boughs and branches, which did broad dilate
Their clasping arms, in wanton wreathings intricate.
So fashioned a Porch with rare device,
Archt over head with an embracing vine,
Whose bounches hanging down, seemed to entice
All passers by, to taste their lushious wine,
And did themselves into their hands incline,
As freely offering to be gathered:
Some deep empurpled as the Hyacint,
Some as the Rubine, laughing sweetly red,
Some like fair Emeraudes, not yet well ripened.
And them amongst, some were of burnisht gold,
So made by art, to beautify the rest,
Which did themselves emongst the leaves enfold,
As lurking from the view of covetous guest,
That the weak bows, with so rich load oppressed,
Did bow adowne, as ouer-burdened.
Under that Porch a comely dame did rest,
Clad in fair weeds, but foul disordered,
And garments loose, that seemd unmeet for womanhed
In her left hand a Cup of gold she held,
And with her right the riper fruit did reach,
Whose sappy liquor, that with fullness sweld,
Into her cup she scruzd, with dainty breach
Of her fine fingers, without foul empeach,
That so fair wine press made the wine more sweet:
Thereof she vsd to give to drink to each,
Whom passing by she happened to meet:
It was her guise, all Strangers goodly so to greet,
So she to Gayon offered it to taste;
Who taking it out of her tender hond,
The cup to ground did violently cast,
That all in pecces it was broken fond,
And with the liquor stained all the land:
Whereat Excess exceedingly was wroth,
Yet no'te the same amend, ne yet withstond,
But suffered him to pass, all were she loath;
Who not regarding her displeasure forward goth.
There the mod dainty Paradise on ground,
It self does offer to his sober eye,
In which all pleasures plenteously abound,
And none does others happiness envy:
The painted flowers, the trees vpshooting hye,
The dales for shade, the hills for breathing space,
The trembling groves, the Crystal running by;
And that, which all fair works does most aggrace,
The art, which all that wrought, appeared in no place.
One would have thought, (so cunningly, the rude,
And scorned parts were mingled with the fine,)
That nature had for wantonness ensude
Art, and that Art at nature did repine;
So striving each the other to undermine,
Each did the others work more beautify;
So differing both in wills, agreed in fine:
So all agreed through sweet diversity,
This Gardin to adorn with all variety.
And in the midst of all, a fountain stood,
Of richest substance, that on earth might be,
So pure and shiny, that the silver flood
Through every channel running one might see;
Most goodly it with curious imageree
Was ouer-wrought, and shapes of naked boys,
Of which some seemd with lively iollitee,
To fly about, playing their wanton toys,
Whilst others did themselves embay in liquid joys,
And over all, of purest gold was spread,
A trayle of yuie in his native hew:
For the rich metal was so colored,
That wight, who did not well auis'd it view,
Would surely deem it to be yuie true:
Low his lascivious arms adown did creep,
That themselves dipping in the silver dew,
Their fleecy flowers they tenderly did steep,
Which drops of Crystal seemd for wantones to weep.
Infinite streams continually did well
Out of this fountain, sweet and fair to see
The which into an ample lauer fell,
And shortly grew to so great quantity,
That like a little lake it seemd to be;
Whose depth exceeded not three cubits hight,
That through the waves one might the bortom see,
All pau'd beneath with Iaspar shining bright,
That seemd the fountain in that sea did sail upright.
And all the margent round about was set,
With shady Laurel trees, thence to defend
The sunny beams, which on the billows bet,
And those which therein bathed, mote offend.
As Guyon happened by the same to wend,
Two naked Damzelles he therein espyde,
Which therein bathing, seemed to contend,
And wrestle wantonly, ne cared to hyde,
Their dainty parts from view of any, which them eyde.
Sometimes the one would lift the other quight
Above the waters, and then down again
Her plong, as over maistered by might,
Where both awhile would covered remain,
And each the other from to rise restrain;
The whiles their snowy limbs, as through a vele,
So through the Crystal waves appeared plain:
Then suddeinly both would themselves vnhele,
And th'amarous sweet spoils to greedy eyes reuele.
As that fair Star, the messenger of morn,
His deawy face out of the sea does rear:
Or as the Cyprian goddess, newly borne
Of The Oceans fruitful froth, did first appear:
Such seemed they, and so their yellow hear
Christalline humor dropped down apace.
Whom such when Guyon saw, he drew him near,
And somewhat began relent his earnest pace,
His stubborn breast began secret pleasaunce to embrace.
The wanton Maidens him espying, stood
Gazing a while at his unwonted guise;
Then the one her self low ducked in the flood,
Abasht, that her a stranger did a vise:
But the other rather higher did arise,
And her two lilly paps aloft displayed,
And all, that might his melting heart entise
To her delights, she unto him bewrayd:
The rest hid underneath, him more desirous made.
With that, the other likewise up arose,
And her fair locks, which formerly were bownd
Up in one knot, she low adowne did lose:
Which flowing long and thick, her clothed arownd,
And th'yuorie in golden mantle gownd:
So that fair spectacle from him was rest,
Yet that, which rest it, no less fair was fownd:
So hid in locks and waves from lookers theft,
Naught but her lovely face she for his looking left.
Withal she laughed, and she blushed withal,
That blushing to her laughter gave more grace,
And laughter to her blushing, as did fall:
Now when they spide the knight to slack his pace,
Them to behold, and in his sparkling face
The secret signs of kindled lust appear,
Their wanton meriments they did encreace,
And to him beckned, to approach more near,
And showed him many sights, that courage cold could rear.
On which when gazing him the Palmer saw,
He much rebukt those wandering eyes of his,
And counseld well, him forward thence did draw.
Now are they come nigh to the Bower of blis
Of her fond favorites so named amiss:
When thus the Palmer; Now Sir, well auise;
For here the end of all our travel is:
Here wonnes Acrasia, whom we must surprise,
Else she will slip away, and all our drift despise.
Eftsoons they heard a most melodious sound,
Of all that mote delight a dainty ear,
Such as attonce might not on living ground,
Save in this Paradise, be heard elsewhere:
Right hard it was, for wight, which did it hear,
To read, what manner music that mote be:
For all that pleasing is to living ear,
Was there consorted in one harmonee,
Birds, voices, instruments, winds, waters, all agree.
The joyous birds shrouded in cheerful shade,
Their notes unto the voice attempred sweet;
The Angelical soft trembling voices made
To th'instruments divine respondence meet:
The silver sounding instruments did meet
With the base murmr of the waters fall:
The waters fall with difference discreet,
Now soft, now loud, unto the wind did call:
The gentle warbling wind low answered to all.
There, whence that Music seemed heard to be,
Was the fair Witch her self now solacing,
With a new Lover, whom through sorceree
And witchcraft, she from far did thither bring:
There she had him now laid a slombering,
In secret shade, after long wanton joys:
Whilst round about them pleasauntly did sing
Many fair Ladies, and lascivious boys,
That ever mixed their song with light licentious toys.
And all that while, right over him she hong,
With her false eyes fast fixed in his sight,
As seeking medicine, whence she was stong,
Or greedily depasturing delight:
And often inclining down with kisses light,
For fear of waking him, his lips bedewd,
And through his humid eyes did suck his spright,
Quite molten into lust and pleasure lewd;
Wherewith she sighed soft, as if his case she rewd.
The whiles some one did chaunt this lovely lay;
Ah see, who so fair thing do feign to see,
In springing flower the image of thy day;
Ah see the Virgin Rose, how sweetly she
Does first peep forth with bashful modestee,
That fairer seems, the less ye see her may;
Lo see soon after, how more bold and free
Her bared bosom she does broad display;
Lo see soon after, how she fades, and falls away.
So passes, in the passing of a day,
Of mortal life the leaf, the bud, the flower,
Ne more does flourish after first decay,
That erst was sought to deck both bed and bower,
Of many a Lady, and many a Paramowre:
Gather therefore the Rose, whilst yet is prime,
For soon comes age, that will her pride deflowre:
Gather the Rose of love, whilst yet is time,
Whilst loving thou may loved be with equal crime.
He ceast, and then began all the quire of birds
Their diverse notes t'attune unto his lay,
As in approuance of his pleasing words.
The constant pair heard all, that he did say,
Yet swarued not, but kept their forward way,
Through many covert groves, and thickets close,
In which they creeping did at last display
That wanton Lady, with her lover lose,
Whose sleepie head she in her lap did soft dispose.
Upon a bed of Roses she was laid,
As faint through heat, or dight to pleasant sin,
And was arayd, or rather disarayd,
All in a vele of silk and silver thin,
That hid no whit her alablaster skin,
But rather showed more white, if more might be:
More subtle web Arachne can not spin,
Nor the fine nets, which often we wouen see
Of scorched deaw, do not in the air more lightly flee.
Her snowy breast was bare to ready spoil
Of hungry eyes, which n'ote therewith be filled,
And yet through languour of her late sweet toil,
Few drops, more clear then Nectar, forth distild,
That like pure Orient perles adowne it trild,
And her fair eyes sweet smyling in delight,
Moystened their fiery beams, with which she thrild
Frail hearts, yet quenched not; like starry light
Which sparckling on the silent waves, does seem more bright.
The young man sleeping by her, seemd to be
Some goodly swayne of honorable place,
That certes it great pity was to see
Him his nobility so foul deface;
A sweet regard, and amiable grace,
Mixed with manly sternnesse did appear
Yet sleeping, in his well proportiond face,
And on his tender lips the downy hear
Did now but freshly spring, and silken blossoms bear.
His warlike arms, the idle instruments
Of sleeping praise, were hong upon a tree,
And his brave shield, full of old moniments,
Was fowly ra'st, that none the signs might see;
Ne for them, ne for honor cared he,
Ne ought, that did to his advancement tend,
But in lewd loves, and wastfull luxuree,
His days, his goods, his body he did spend:
O horrible enchantment, that him so did blend.
The noble Elfe, and careful Palmer drew
So nigh them, minding naught, but lustful game,
That suddein forth they on them rusht, and threw
A subtle net, which only for the same
The skillful Palmer formally did frame.
So held them under fast, the whiles the rest
Fled all away for fear of fowler shame.
The fair Enchauntresse, so unawares oppressed,
Tryde all her arts, and all her sleights, thence out to wrest.
And eke her lover strove: but all in vain;
For that same net so cunningly was wound,
That neither guile, nor force might it distraine.
They took them both, and both them strongly bound
In captive bands, which there they ready found:
But her in chains of adamant he tide;
For nothing else might keep her safe and sound;
But Verdant (so he hight) he soon vntyde,
And counsel sage in steed thereof to him applyde.
But all those pleasant bowres and Palace brave,
Guyon broke down, with rigor pitiless;
Ne ought their goodly workmanship might save
Them from the tempest of his wrathfulnesse,
But that their bliss he turned to balefulnesse:
Their groves he feld, their gardins did deface,
Their arbers spoyld, their Cabinets suppress,
Their banquet houses burn, their buildings race,
And of the fairest late, now made the fowlest place.
Then led they her away, and eke that knight
They with them led, both sorrowful and sad:
The way they came, the same retourn'd they right,
Till they arrived, where they lately had
Charmed those wild-beasts, that raged with fury mad.
Which now awaking, fierce at them began fly,
As in their mistress reskew, whom they lad;
But them the Palmer soon did pacify.
Then Guyon asked, what meant those beasts, which there didly.
Said he, these seeming beasts are men indeed,
Whom this Enchauntresse has transformed thus,
Whylome her lovers, which her lusts did feed,
Now turned into figures hideous,
According to their minds like monstrous.
Sad end (quoth he) of life intemperate,
And mournful meed of joys delicious:
But Palmer, if it mote thee so aggrate,
Let them returned be unto their former state.
Straight way he with his virtuous staff them struck,
And straight of beasts they comely men became;
Yet being men they did unmanly look,
And stared ghastly, some for inward shame,
And some for wrath, to see their captive Dame:
But one above the rest in special,
That had an hog been late, hight Grille by name,
Repined greatly, and did him miscall,
That had from hoggish form him brought to natural.
Said Guyon, See the mind of beastly man,
That has so soon forgot the excellence
Of his creation, when he life began,
That now he chooses, with vile difference,
To be a beast, and lack intelligence.
To whom the Palmer thus, The donghill kind
Delights in filth and foul incontinence:
Let Grill be Grill, and have his hoggish mind,
But let us hence depart, whilst wether serves and wind.
THE THIRD BOOK OF THE FAERIE QVEENE. Containing, THE LEGEND OF BRITOMARTIS.
OR Of Chastity.
IT falls me here to write of Chastity,
That fairest virtue, far above the rest;
For which what needs me fetch from Faery
Foreign ensamples, it to have expressed?
Since it is shrined in my Soueraines breast,
And formed so lively in each perfect part,
That to all Ladies, which have it professed,
Need but behold the pourtraict of her heart,
If pourtrayd it might be by any living art.
But living art may not least part express,
Nor life-resembling pencill it can paint,
All were it Zeuxis or Praxiteles:
His daedale hand would fail, and greatly faint,
And her perfections with his error taint:
Ne Poets wit, that passes Painter far
In picturing the parts of beauty daint,
So hard a workmanship adventure darre,
For fear through want of words her excellence to mar.
How then shall I, Apprentice of the skill,
That whylome in diuinest wits did rain,
Presume so high to stretch mine humble quill?
Yet now my lucklesse lot does me constrain
Hereto perforce. But o dred Sovereign
Thus far forth pardon, since that choicest wit
Cannot your glorious pourtraict figure plain
That I in colored shows may shadow it,
And antique praises unto present persons fit.
But if in living colors, and right hew,
Your self you covet to see pictured,
Who can it do more lively, or more true,
Then that sweet verse, with Nectar sprinckeled,
In which a gracious servant pictured
His Cynthia, his heavens fairest light?
That with his melting sweetness ravished,
And with the wonder of her beams bright,
My senses lulled are in slomber of delight.
But let that same delitious Poet lend
A little leave unto a rusticke Muse
To sing his mistress praise, and let him mend,
If ought amiss her liking may abuse:
Ne let his fairest Cynthia refuse,
In mirrours more then one her self to see,
But either Gloriana let her choose,
Or in Belphoebe fashioned to be:
In the one her rule, in the other her rare chastitee.
Cant. I.
Guyon encountreth Britomart,
fair Florimell is chaced:
Duessaes trains and Materastaes
champions are defaced.
THe famous Briton Prince and Faerie knight,
After long ways and perilous pains endured,
Having their weary limbs to perfect plight
Restord, and sorry wounds right well recured,
Of the fair Alma greatly were procured,
To make there longer soiourne and abode;
But when thereto they might not be allured,
From seeking praise, and deeds of arms abroad,
They courteous conge took, and forth together yode.
But the captived Acrasia he sent,
Because of travel long, a nigher way,
With a strong guard, all reskew to prevent,
And her to Faerie court safe to convey,
That her for witness of his hard assay,
Unto his Faerie Queen he might present:
But he himself betook another way,
To make more trial of his hardiment,
And seek adventures, as he with Prince Arthur went.
Long so they traveled through wastefull ways,
Where dangers dwelt, and perils most did won,
To hunt for glory and renowned praise;
Full many Countries they did ouerronne,
From the vprising to the setting Sun,
And many hard adventures did atchieue;
Of all the which they honor ever won,
Seeking the weak oppressed to relieve,
And to recover right for such, as wrong did grieve.
At last as through an open plain they yode,
They spide a knight, that toward pricked fair,
And him beside an aged Squire there rode,
That seemed to couch under his shield three-square,
As if that age bad him that burden spare,
And yield it those, that stouter could it wield:
He them espying, began himself prepare,
And on his arm address his goodly shield
That bore a Lion passant in a golden field.
Which seeing good Sir Guyon, dear besought
The Prince of grace, to let him run that turn.
He granted: then the Faery quickly raught
His poinant spear, and sharply began to spurn
His fomy steed, whose fiery feet did burn
The verdant grass, as he thereon did tread;
Ne did the other back his foot return,
But fiercely forward came withouten dread,
And bent his dreadful spear against the others head.
They been ymet, and both their points arrived,
But Guyon drove so furious and fell,
That seemed both shield and plate it would have riued;
Nathelesse it bore his foe not from his sell,
But made him stagger, as he were not well:
But Guyon self, ere well he was aware,
Nigh a spears length behind his crouper fell,
Yet in his fall so well him self he bare,
That mischievous mischance his life and limbs did spare.
Great shame and sorrow of that fall he took;
For never yet, since warlike arms he bore,
And shiuering spear in bloody field first shook,
He found himself dishonored so sore.
Ah gentlest knight, that ever armor bore,
Let not thee grieve dismounted to have been,
And brought to ground, that never wast before;
For not thy fault, but secret power unseen,
That spear enchaunted was, which laid thee on the green.
But weenedst thou what wight thee overthrew,
Much greater grief and shamefuller regret
For thy hard fortune then thou would renew,
That of a single damzell thou were met
On equal plain, and there so hard beset;
Even the famous Britomart it was,
Whom strange adventure did from Britain fet,
To seek her lover (love far sought alas,)
Whose image she had feene in Venus looking glass.
Full of disdainefull wrath, he fierce vprose,
For to revenge that foul reproachful shame,
And snatching his bright sword began to close
With her on foot, and stoutly forward came;
Die rather would he, then endure that same.
Which when his Palmer saw, he began to fear
His toward peril and untoward blame,
Which by that new rencounter he should rear:
For death sat on the point of that enchaunted spear.
And hasting toward him began fair persuade,
Not to provoke misfortune, nor to ween
His spears default to mend with cruel blade;
For by his mighty Science he had seen
The secret virtue of that weapon keen,
That mortal puissance mote not withstond:
Nothing on earth mote always happy been.
Great hazard were it, and adventure fond,
To loose long gotten honor with one evil hond.
By such good means he him discounselled,
From prosecuting his revenging rage;
And eke the Prince like treaty handeled,
His wrathful will with reason to assuage,
And laid the blame, not to his carriage,
But to his starting steed, that swaru'd aside,
And to the ill purueyance of his page,
That had his furnitures not firmly tide:
So is his angry courage fairly pacifyde.
Thus reconcilement was between them knit,
Through goodly temperance, and affection chaste,
And either vowed with all their power and wit,
To let not others honor be defaste,
Of friend or foe, who ever it embaste,
Ne arms to bear against the others side:
In which accord the Prince was also plaste,
And with that golden chain of concord tide.
So goodly all agreed, they forth yfere did ride.
O goodly usage of those antique times,
In which the sword was servant unto right;
When not for malice and contentious crimes,
But all for praise, and proof of manly might,
The martial brood accustomed to fight:
Then honor was the meed of victory,
And yet the vanquished had no despite:
Let later age that noble use envy,
Vile rancour to avoid, and cruel surquedrie.
Long they thus traveled in friendly wise,
Through countries waste, and eke well edifyde,
Seeking adventures hard, to exercise
Their puissance, whylome full dernely tryde:
At length they came into a forest wide,
Whose hideous horror and sad trembling sound
Full griesly seemed: Therein they long did ride,
Yet tract of living creatures none they found,
Save Bears, Lions, and Bulls, which romed them around.
All suddenly out of the thickest brush,
Upon a milke-white Palfrey all alone,
A goodly Lady did foreby them rush,
Whose face did seem as clear as Crystal stone,
And eke through fear as white as whales bone:
Her garments all were wrought of beaten gold,
And all her steed with tinsell trappings shone,
Which fled so fast, that nothing mote him hold,
And scarce them leisure gave, her passing to behold.
Still as she fled, her eye she backward threw,
As fearing evil, that pursewd her fast;
And her fair yellow locks behind her flew,
Loosely dispersed with puff of every blast:
All as a blazing star does far outcast
His hearie beams, and flaming locks dispred,
At sight whereof the people stand aghast:
But the sage wisard tells, as he has red,
That it importunes death and doleful drerihed.
So as they gazed after her a while,
Lo where a griesly Foster forth did rush,
Breathing out beastly lust her to defile:
His tyreling jade he fiercely forth did push,
Through thick and thin, both over bank and bush
In hope her to attain by hook or crook,
That from his gorie sides the blood did gush:
Large were his limbs, and terrible his look,
And in his clownish hand a sharp bore spear he shook.
Which outrage when those gentle knights did see,
Full of great envy and fell gealosy,
They stayed not to auise, who first should be,
But all spurd after fast, as they mote fly,
To reskew her from shameful villainy.
The Prince and Guyon equally byliue
Her self pursewd, in hope to win thereby
Most goodly meede, the fairest Dame alive:
But after the foul foster Timias did strive.
The whiles fair Britomart, whose constant mind,
Would not so lightly follow beauties chase,
Ne reckt of Ladies Love, did stay behind,
And them awayted there a certain space,
To weet if they would turn back to that place:
But when she saw them gone, she forward went,
As lay her journey, through that perlous Pace,
With steadfast courage and stout hardiment;
Ne evil thing she feared, ne evil thing she meant.
At last as nigh out of the wood she came,
A stately Castle far away she spyde,
To which her steps directly she did frame.
That Castle was most goodly edifyde,
And plaste for pleasure nigh that forest side:
But fair before the gate a spacious plain,
Mantled with green, it self did spredden wide,
On which she saw six knights, that did darraine
Fierce battle against one, with cruel might and maine.
Mainly they all attonce upon him laid,
And sore beset on every side around,
That nigh he breathless grew, yet naught dismayed,
Ne ever to them yielded foot of ground
All had he lost much blood through many a wound,
But stoutly dealt his blows, and every way
To which he turned in his wrathful stound,
Made them recoile, and fly from dred decay,
That none of all the six before, him durst assay.
Like dastard Curres, that having at a bay
The saluage beast embost in weary chase,
Dare not adventure on the stubborn pray,
Ne byte before, but rome from place to place,
To get a snatch, when turned is his face.
In such distress and doubtful ieopardy,
When Britomart him saw, she ran a pace
Unto his reskew, and with earnest cry,
Bad those same six forbear that single enemy.
But to her cry they list not lenden ear,
Ne ought the more their mighty strokes surceasse,
But gathering him round about more near,
Their direful rancour rather did encreasse;
Till that she rushing through the thickest preasse,
Perforce disparted their compacted gyre,
And soon compeld to hearken unto peace:
Tho began she myldly of them to inquyre
The cause of their dissension and outrageous ire.
Whereto that single knight did answer frame;
These six would me enforce by odds of might,
To change my liefe, and love another Dame,
That death me liefer were, then such despite,
So unto wrong to yield my wrested right:
For I love one, the truest one on ground,
Ne list me change; she the Errant Damzell hight,
For whose dear sake full many a bitter stownd,
I have endured, and tasted many a bloody wound.
Certes (said she) then been ye six to blame,
To ween your wrong by force to justify:
For knight to leave his Lady were great shame,
That faithful is, and better were to die.
All loss is less, and less the infamy,
Then loss of love to him, that loves but one;
Ne may love be compeld by maisterie;
For soon as maisterie comes, sweet love anon
Takes his nimble wings, and soon away is gone.
Then spoke one of those six, There dwells here
Within this castle wall a Lady fair,
Whose sovereign beauty has no living pere,
Thereto so bounteous and so debonaire,
That never any mote with her compaire.
She has ordaind this law, which we approve,
That every knight, which does this way repair,
In case he have no Lady, nor no love,
Shall do unto her service never to remove.
But if he have a Lady or a Love,
Then must he her forgo with foul defame,
Or else with us by dint of sword approve,
That she is fairer, then our fairest Dame,
As did this knight, before ye hither came.
Perdie (said Britomart) the choice is hard:
But what reward had he, that overcame?
He should advanced be to high regard,
(Said they) and have our Ladies love for his reward.
Therefore a read Sir, if thou have a love.
Love have I sure, (quoth she) but Lady none;
Yet will I not fro mine own love remove,
Ne to your Lady will I service done,
But wreake your wrongs wrought to this knight alone,
And prove his cause. With that her mortal spear
She mightily auentred toward one,
And down him smot, ere well aware he wear,
Then to the next she rode, and down the next did bear.
Ne did she stay, till three on ground she laid,
That none of them himself could rear again;
The fourth was by that other knight dismayed,
All were he weary of his former pain,
That now there do but two of six remain;
Which two did yield, before she did them smight.
Ah (said she then) now may ye all see plain,
That truth is strong, and true love most of might,
That for his trusty servant does so strongly fight.
Too well we see, (said they) and prove too well
Our faulty weakness, and your matchless might:
For thy fair Sir, yours be the Damozell,
Which by her own law to your lot does light,
And we your liege men faith unto you plight.
So underneath her feet their swords they shard,
And after her besought, well as they might,
To enter in, and reap the dew reward:
She granted, and then in they all together fared.
Long were it to describe the goodly frame,
And stately port of Castle Ioyeous,
(For so that Castle hight by commune name)
Where they were entertaind with courteous
And comely glee of many gracious
Fair Ladies, and many a gentle knight,
Who through a Chamber long and spacious,
Eftsoons them brought unto their Ladies sight.
That of them cleeped was the Lady of delight.
But for to tell the sumptuous array
Of that great chamber, should be labor lost:
For living wit, I ween, cannot display
The royal riches and exceeding cost,
Of every pillour and of every post;
Which all of purest bullion framed were,
And with great pearls and precious stones embost,
That the bright glister of their beams clear
Did sparckle forth great light, and glorious did appear.
These stranger knights through passing, forth were led
Into an inner rowme, whose royaltee
And rich purueyance might uneath be red;
Mote Princes place be seem so decked to be.
Which stately manner when as they did see,
The image of superfluous riotize,
Exceeding much the state of mean degree,
They greatly wondered, whence so sumptuous guize
Might be maintaynd, and each began diuersely deuize.
The walls were round about apparelled
With costly clothes of Arras and of Toure,
In which with cunning hand was pourtrahed
The love of Venus and her Paramoure
The fair Adonis, turned to a flower,
A work of rare device, and wondrous wit.
First did it show the bitter balefull stowre,
Which her assayd with many a fervent fit,
When first her tender heart was with his beauty smit.
Then with what sleights and sweet allurements she
Entyst the Boy, as well that art she knew,
And wooed him her Paramoure to be;
Now making girlonds of each flower that grew,
To crown his golden locks with honor dew;
Now leading him into a secret shade
From his Beauperes, and from bright heavens view,
Where him to sleep she gently would persuade,
Or bathe him in a fountain by some covert glade.
And whilst he slept, she over him would spread
Her mantle, colored like the starry skies,
And her soft arm lay underneath his head,
And with ambrosiall kisses bathe his eyes;
And whilst he bathed with her two crafty spies,
She secretly would search each dainty lim,
And throw into the well sweet Rosemaryes,
And fragrant violets, and Pances trim,
And ever with sweet Nectar she did sprinkle him.
So did she steal his heedelesse heart away,
And ioyd his love in secret vnespyde.
But for she saw him bent to cruel play,
To hunt the saluage beast in forest wide,
Dreadful of danger, that mote him betyde,
She often and often aduiz'd him to refrain
From chase of greater beasts, whose brutish pride
Mote breed him scath unawares: but all in vain;
For who can shun the chance, that dest'ny does ordain?
Lo, where beyond he lies languishing,
Deadly engored of a great wild Bore,
And by his side the Goddess groueling
Makes for him endless moan, and evermore
With her soft garment wipes away the gore,
Which stains his snowy skin with hateful hew:
But when she saw no help might him restore,
Him to a dainty flower she did transmew,
Which in that cloth was wrought, as if it lively grew.
So was that chamber clad in goodly wize,
And round about it many beds were dight,
As whilome was the antique worlds guize,
Some for untimely ease, some for delight,
As pleased them to use, that use it might:
And all was full of Damzels, and of Squires,
Dancing and reueling both day and night,
And swimming deep in sensual desires,
And Cupid still emongst them kindled lustful fires.
And all the while sweet Music did divide
Her looser notes with Lydian harmony;
And all the while sweet birds thereto applide
Their dainty lays and dulcet melody,
Ay caroling of love and iollity,
That wonder was to hear their trim consort.
Which when those knights beheld, with scornful eye,
They sdeigned such lascivious disport,
And loathed the loose demeanure of that wanton sort.
Thence they were brought to that great Ladies view,
Whom they found sitting on a sumptuous bed,
That glistred all with gold and glorious show,
As the proud Persian Queens accustomed:
She seemd a woman of great bountihed,
And of rare beauty, saving that askaunce
Her wanton eyes, ill signs of womanhed,
Did roll too highly, and too often glaunce,
Without regard of grace, or comely amenaunce.
Long work it were, and needless to deuize
Their goodly entertainment and great glee:
She caused them be led in courteous wize
Into a bower, disarmed for to be,
And cheared well with wine and spiceree:
The Redcrosse Knight was soon disarmed there,
But the brave Maid would not disarmed be,
But only vented up her vmbriere,
And so did let her goodly visage to appear.
As when fair Cynthia, in dark some night,
Is in a noyous cloud enueloped,
Where she may find the substance thin and light,
Breaks forth her silver beams, and her bright head
Discouers to the world discomfited;
Of the poor traveler, that went astray,
With thousand blessings she is heried;
Such was the beauty and the shining ray,
With which fair Britomart gave light unto the day.
And eke those six, which lately with her fought,
Now were disarmd, and did them selves present
Unto her view, and company vnsoght;
For they all seemed courteous and gent,
And all six brethren, borne of one parent,
Which had them traynd in all ciuilitee,
And goodly taught to tilt and turnament;
Now were they liegemen to this Lady free,
And her knights service ought, to hold of her in fee.
The first of them by name Gardante hight,
Aiolly person, and of comely view;
The second was Parlante, a bold knight,
And next to him Iocante did ensew;
Basciante did him self most courteous show;
But fierce Bacchante seemd too fell and keen;
And yet in amies Noctante greater grew:
All were fair knights, and goodly well beseene,
But to fair Britomart they all but shadows been.
For she was full of amiable grace,
And manly terror mixed therewithal,
That as the one stird up affections bace,
So the other did men's rash desires apall,
And hold them back, that would in error fall;
As he, that has espide a vermeill Rose,
To which sharp thorns and breres the way forstall,
Dare not for dread his hardy hand expose,
But wishing it far off, his idle wish does lose.
Whom when the Lady saw so fair a wight.
All ignorant of her contrary sex,
(For she her weend a fresh and lusty knight)
She greatly began enamoured to wex,
And with vain thoughts her falsed fancy vex:
Her fickle heart conceived hasty fire,
Like sparks of fire, which fall in sclender flex,
That shortly brent into extreme desire,
And ransackt all her veins with passion entire.
Eftsoons she grew to great impatience
And into terms of open outrage brust,
That plain discovered her incontinence,
Ne reckt she, who her meaning did mistrust;
For she was given all to fleshly lust,
And poured forth in sensual delight,
That all regard of shame she had discust,
And meet respect: of honor put to flight:
So shameless beauty soon becomes a loathy sight,
Fair Ladies, that to love captiued arre,
And chaste desires do nourish in your mind,
Let not her fault your sweet affections mar,
Ne blot the bounty of all womankind;
Among thousands good one wanton Dame to find:
Emongst the Roses grow some wicked weeds;
For this was not to love, but lust inclind;
For love does always bring forth bounteous deeds,
And in each gentle heart desire of honor breeds.
Naught so of love this looser Dame did skill,
But as a coal to kindle fleshly flame,
Giving the bridle to her wanton will,
And treading under foot her honest name:
Such love is hate, and such desire is shame.
Still did she roue at her with crafty glaunce
Of her false eyes, that at her heart did aim,
And told her meaning in her countenance;
But Britomart dissembled it with ignorance.
Supper was shortly dight and down they sat,
Where they were served with all sumptuous fare,
Whiles fruitful Ceres, and Lyaeus sat
Pourd out their plenty, without spite or spare:
Naught wanted there, that dainty was and rare;
And aye the cups their bancks did ouerflow,
And aye between the cups, she did prepare
Way to her love, and secret darts did throw;
But Britomart would not such guilfull message know.
So when they slaked had the fervent heat
Of appetite with meats of every sort,
The Lady did fair Britomart entreat,
Her to disarme, and with delightful sport
To loose her warlike limbs and strong effort,
But when she mote not thereunto be won,
(For she her sex under that strange purport
Did use to hide, and plain apparaunce shonne:)
In plainer wise to tell her grieuaunce she begone.
And all attonce discovered her desire
With sighs, and sobs, and plaints, and piteous grief,
The outward sparks of her in burning fire;
Which spent in vain, at last she told her brief,
That but if she did lend her short relief,
And do her comfort, she mote algates dye.
But the chaste damzell, that had never priefe
Of such malengine and fine forgerie,
Did easily believe her strong extremity.
Full easy was for her to have belief,
Who by self-feeling of her feeble sex,
And by long trial of the inward grief,
Wherewith imperious love her heart did vex,
Could judge what pains do loving hearts perplexe.
Who means no guile, beguiled soonest shall,
And to fair semblaunce does light faith annexe;
The bird, that knows not the false fowlers call,
Into his hidden net full easily does fall.
For thy she would not in discourteise wise,
Scorn the fair offer of good will professed;
For great rebuke it is, love to despise,
Or rudely sdeigne a gentle hearts request;
But with fair countenance, as beseemed best,
Her entertaynd; nath'lesse she inly deemd
Her love too light, to woo a wandering guest:
Which she misconstruing, thereby esteemd
That from like inward fire that outward smoke had steemd,
Therewith a while she her flit fancy fed,
Till she mote win fit time for her desire,
But yet her wound still inward freshly bled,
And through her bones the false instilled fire
Did spread it self, and venime close inspire.
Tho were the tables taken all away,
And every knight, and every gentle Squire
Can choose his dame with Basciomani gay,
With whom he meant to make his sport and courtly play.
Some fell to dance, some fell to hazardry,
Some to make love, some to make meriment,
As diverse wits to diverse things apply;
And all the while fair Malecasta bent
Her crafty engines to her close intent.
By this the eternal lamps, wherewith high love
Does light the lower world, were half yspent,
And the moist daughters of huge Atlas strove
Into the Ocean deep to drive their weary drove.
High time it seemed then for every wight
Them to betake unto their kindly rest;
Eftsoons long waxen torches weren light,
Unto their bowres to guiden every guest:
Tho when the Britonesse saw all the rest
Avoided quite, she began her self despoile,
And safe commit to her soft fetherednest,
Where through long watch, and late days weary toil,
She soundly slept, and careful thoughts did quite assoile.
Now when as all the world in silence deep
Yshrowded was, and every mortal wight
Was drowned in the depth of deadly sleep,
Fair Malecasta, whose engrieued spright
Could find no rest in such perplexed plight,
Lightly arose out of her weary bed,
And under the black vele of guilty Night,
Her with a scarlot mantle covered,
That was with gold and Ermines fair enueloped.
Then panting soft, and trembling every joint,
Her fearful feet toward the bower she moved;
Where she for secret purpose did appoint
To lodge the warlike maid unwisely loved,
And to her bed approaching, first she proved,
Whether she slept or wakt, with her soft hand
She softly felt, if any member moved,
And lent her weary ear to understand,
If any puff of breath, or sign of sense she fond.
Which whenas none she fond, with easy snift,
For fear least her unawares she should abrayd,
Th'embroderd quilt she lightly up did lift,
And by her side her self she softly laid,
Of every finest fingers touch affrayd;
Ne any noise she made, ne word she spoke,
But inly sighed. At last the royal Maid
Out of her quiet slomber did awake,
And chaungd her weary side, the better ease to take.
Where feeling one close couched by her side,
She lightly lept out of her filed bed,
And to her weapon ran, in mind to gride
The loathed leachour. But the Dame half ded
Through suddein fear and ghastly drerihed,
Did shrieke alowd, that through the house it rong,
And the whole family therewith adred,
Rashly out of their rouzed couches sprung,
And to the troubled chamber all in arms did throng.
And those six Knights that Ladies Champions,
And eke the Redcrosse knight ran to the stownd,
Half armd and half unarmed, with them attons:
Where when confusedly they came, they fownd
Their Lady lying on the senseless grownd;
On the other side, they saw the warlike Maid
All in her snow-white smock, with locks vnbownd,
Threatening the point of her auenging blade,
That with so troublous terror they were all dismayde.
About their Lady first they flockt arownd,
Whom having laid in comfortable couch,
Shortly they reard out of her frosen swownd;
And afterward they began with foul reproach
To stir up strife, and troublous contecke broch:
But by ensample of the last days loss,
None of them rashly durst to her approach,
Ne in so glorious spoil themselves embosse;
Her succourd eke the Champion of the bloody Cross.
But one of those six knights, Gardante hight,
Drew out a deadly bow and arrow keen,
Which forth he sent with felonous despite,
And fell intent against the virgin sheene:
The mortal steel stayed not, till it was seen
To gore her side, yet was the wound not deep,
But lightly rased her soft silken skin,
That drops of purple blood thereout did weep,
Which did her lilly smock with stains of vermeil steep.
Wherewith enraged she fiercely at them flew,
And with her flaming sword about her laid,
That none of them foul mischief could eschew,
But with her dreadful strokes were all dismayed:
Here, there, and every where about her swayd
Her wrathful steel, that none mote it a bide;
And eke the Redcrosse knight gave her good aid,
Ay joining foot to foot, and side to side,
That in short space their foes they have quite terrifide.
Tho whenas all were put to shameful flight,
The noble Britomartis her arayd,
And her bright arms about her body dight:
For nothing would she longer there be stayed,
Where so loose life, and so ungentle trade
Was vsd of Knights and Ladies seeming gent:
So early ere the gross Earthes gryesy shade,
Was all dispersed out of the firmament,
They took their steeds, and forth upon their journey went.
Cant. II.
The Redcrosse knight to Britomart
describes Artegall:
The wondrous myrrhour, by which she
in love with him did fall.
HEre have I cause, in men just blame to find,
That in their proper praise too partial be,
And not indifferent to woman kind,
To whom no share in arms and cheualrie
They do impart, ne maken memory
Of their brave gestes and prowese martial;
Scarce do they spare to one or two or three,
Rowme in their writs; yet the same writing small
Does all their deeds deface, and dims their glories all,
But by record of anqique times I find,
That women wont in wars to bear most sway,
And to all great exploits them selue inclind:
Of which they still the girlond bore away,
Till envious Men fearing their rules decay.
Began coin straight laws to curb their liberty;
Yet since they warlike arms have laid away:
They have excelled in arts and policy
That now we foolish men that praise gin eker'enuy.
Of warlike puissaunce in ages spent,
Be thou fair Britomart, whose praise I write
But of all wisdom be thou precedent,
Endite I would as dewtie does excite;
But ah my rimes too rude and rugged arre,
When in so high an object they do lite,
And striving, fit to make, I fear do mar:
Thy self thy praises tell, and make them known far.
She traveling with Guyon by the way,
Of sundry things fair purpose began to find,
T'abridg their journey long, and lingering day;
Among which it fell into that Faeries mind,
To ask this Briton Maid, what uncouth wind,
Made her dissemble her disguised kind:
Fair Lady she him seemd, like Lady dressed,
But fairest knight alive, when armed washer breast.
Thereat she sighing softly, had no power
To speak a while, ne ready answer make,
But with hart-thrilling throbs and bitter stowre,
As if she had a fever fit, did quake,
And every dainty limb with horror shake;
And ever and anon the rosy red,
Flasht through her face, as it had been a flake
Oflightning, through bright heaven fulmined;
At last the passion past she thus him answered.
Fair Sir, I let you weete, that from the hour
I taken was from nourses tender pap,
I have been trained, up in warlike stowre,
To tossen spear and shield, and to affrap
The warlike ryder to his most mishap;
Sithence I loathed have my life to lead,
As Ladies wont, in pleasures wanton lap,
To finger the fine needle and nyce thread;
Me lever were with point of foemans spear be dead.
All my delights deeds of arms is set,
To hunt out perils and adventures hard,
By sea, by land, where so they may be met,
Only for honor and for high regard,
Without respect of richesse or reward.
For such intent into these parts I came,
Withouten compass, or withouten card,
Far fro my native soil, that is by name
The greater Britain, here to seek for praise and fame.
Fame blazed has, that here in Faery land
Do many famous Knights and Ladies won,
And many strange adventures to be fond,
Of which great worth and worship may be won;
Which I to prove, this voyage have begone.
But mote I weet of you, right courteous knight,
Tidings of one, that has unto me done
Late foul dishonor and reproachful spite,
The which I seek to wreake, and Arthegall he hight.
The word gone out, she back again would call,
As her repenting so to have missayd,
But that he it vp-taking ere the fall,
Her shortly answered; Fair martial Maid
Certes ye misa uised been, t'vpbrayd
A gentle knight with so vnknightly blame:
For weet ye well of all, that ever played
At tilt or tourney, or like warlike game,
The noble Arthegall has ever borne the name.
For thy great wonder were it, if such shame
Should ever enter in his bounteous thought,
Or ever do, that mote deseruen blame:
The noble courage never weeneth ought,
That may unworthy of it self be thought.
Therefore, fair Damzell, be ye well aware,
Least that too far ye have your sorrow sought:
You and your country both I wish welfare,
And honor both; for each of other worthy are.
The royal Maid woxe inly wondrous glad,
To hear her Love so highly magnifide,
And ioyd that ever she affixed had,
Her heart on knight so goodly glorifide,
How ever finely she it faind to hide:
The loving mother, that nine months did bear,
In the dear closet of her pain full side,
Her tender babe, it seeing safe appear,
Does not so much rejoice, as she rejoiced theare.
But to occasion him to further talk,
To feed her humor with his pleasing style,
Her list in strifull terms with him to balke,
And thus replide, How ever, Sir, ye file
Your courteous tongue, his praises to compile,
It ill beseemes a knight of gentle sort,
Such as ye have him boasted, to beguile
A simple maid, and work so heinous tort,
In shame of knighthood, as I largely can report.
Let be therefore my vengeance to dissuade,
And read, where I that faytour false may find.
Ah, but if reason fair might you persuade,
To slake your wrath, and mollify your mind,
(Said he) perhaps ye should it better find:
For hardy thing it is, to ween by might,
That man to hard conditions to bind,
Or ever hope to match in equal fight,
Whose prowess paragon saw never living wight.
Ne soothlich is it easy for to read,
Where now on earth, or how he may be found;
For he ne wonneth in one certain stead,
But restless walks all the world around,
Ay doing things, that to his same redound,
Defending Ladies cause, and Orphans right,
Where so he hears, that any does confound
Them comfortless, through tyranny or might;
So is his sovereign honor raisde to heavens hight.
His feeling words her feeble sense much pleased,
And softly sunck into her molten heart;
Heart that is inly hurt, is greatly eased
With hope of thing, that may allegge his smart;
For pleasing words are like to Magic art,
That does the charmed Snake in slomber lay:
Such secret ease felt gentle Britomart,
Yet list the same efforce with faind gainesay;
So dischord often in Music makes the sweeter lay.
And said, Sir knight, these idle terms forbear,
And since it is uneath to find his haunt,
Tell me some marks, by which he may appear,
If chance I him encounter parauant;
For perdie one shall other slay, or daunt:
What shape, what shield, what arms, what steed, what sted,
And what so else his person most may vaunt?
All which the Redcrosse knight to point ared,
And him in every part before her fashioned.
Yet him in every part before she knew,
How ever list her now her knowledge feign,
Since him whilome in Britain she did view,
To her revealed in a mirrhour plain,
Whereof did grow her first engraffed pain;
Whose root and stalk so bitter yet did taste,
That but the fruit more sweetness did contain,
Her wretched days in dolor she mote wast,
And yield the pray of love to loathsome death at last.
By strange occasion she did him behold,
And much more strangely began to love his sight,
As it in books has written been of old.
In Deheubarth that now South Wales is hight,
What time king Ryence reigned, and dealed right,
The great Magitian Merlin had deuiz'd,
By his deep science, and hell-dreaded might,
A looking glass, right wondrously aguiz'd,
Whose virtues through the wide world soon were solemnized.
It virtue had, to show in perfect sight,
What ever thing was in the world contaynd,
Betwixt the lowest earth and heavens hight,
So that it to the looker appertaynd;
What ever foe had wrought, or friend had faynd,
Therein discovered was, ne ought mote pas,
Ne ought in secret from the same remaynd;
For thy it round and hollow shaped was,
Like to the world it self, and seemed a world of glass.
Who wonders not, that reads so wondrous work?
But who does wonder, that has red the Tower,
Wherein the Egyptian Phaeo long did lurk
From all men's view, that none might her discoure,
Yet she might all men view out of her bower?
Great Ptolomaee it for his lemans sake
Ybuilded all of glass, by Magic power,
And also it impregnable did make;
Yet when his love was false, he with a peaze it brake.
Such was the glassie globe that Merlin made,
And gave unto king Ryence for his guard,
That never foes his kingdom might invade,
But he it knew at home before he hard
Tidings thereof, and so them still debarred.
It was a famous Present for a Prince,
And worthy work of infinite reward,
That treasons could bewray, and foes convince;
Happy this Realm, had it remained ever since.
One day it fortuned, fair Britomart
Into her fathers closet to repair;
For nothing he from her reserved apart,
Being his only daughter and his hair:
Where when she had espied that mirrhour fair,
Her self a while therein she vewd in vain;
Tho her auizing of the virtues rare,
Which thereof spoken were, she began again
Her to be think of, that mote to her self pertain.
But as it falls, in the gentlest hearts
Imperious Love has highest set his throne,
And tyrannizeth in the bitter smarts
Of them, that to him buxome are and prone:
So thought this Maid (as maidens use to done)
Whom fortune for her husband would allot,
Not that she lusted after any one;
For she was pure from blame of sinful blot,
Yet wist her life at last must lincke in that same knot.
Eftsoons there was presented to her eye
A comely knight, all armed in complet wize,
Through whose bright ventayle lifted up on hye
His manly face, that did his foes agrize,
And friends to terms of gentle truce entize,
Looked forth, as Phoebus face out of the east,
Betwixt two shadie mountains does arize;
Portly his person was, and much increast
Through his Heroicke grace, and honorable gest.
His crest was covered with a couchant Hound,
And all his armor seemed of antique mould,
But woundrous massy and assured sound,
And round about yfretted all with gold,
In which there written was with ciphers old,
Achilles arms, which Arthegall did win.
And on his shield enueloped seuenfold
He bore a crowned little Ermilin,
That decked the azure field with her fair pouldred skin.
The Damzell well did view his personage,
And like well, ne further fastened not,
But went her way; ne her unguilty age
Did ween, unawares, that her unlucky lot
Lay hidden in the bottom of the pot;
Of hurt vnwift most danger does redound:
But the false Archer, which that arrow shot
So slyly, that she did not feel the wound,
Did smyle full smoothly at her weetlesse woeful stound.
Thenceforth the feather in her lofty crest,
Ruffed of love, began lowly to avail,
And her proud portance, and her princely gest,
With which she erst tryumphed, now did quail:
Sad, solemn, sour, and full of fancies frail
She woxe; yet wist she neither how, nor why,
She wist not, silly Maid, what she did aile,
Yet wist, she was not well at ease perdy,
Yet thought it was not love, but some melancholy.
So soon as Night had with her pallid hew
Defast the beauty of the shining sky,
And reft from men the worlds desired view,
She with her Nourse adowne to sleep did lie;
But sleep full far away from her did fly:
In stead there of fad sighs, and sorrows deep
Kept watch and ward about her warily,
That naught she did but wayle, and often steep
Her dainty couch with tears, which closely she did weep.
And if that any drop of slombring rest
Did chance to still into her weary spright,
When feeble nature felt her self oppressed,
Straight way with dreams, and with fantastic sight
Of dreadful things the same was put to flight,
That often out of her bed she did astart,
As one with view of ghastly feends affright:
Tho began she to renew her former smart,
And think of that fair visage, written in her heart.
One night, when she was tossed with such unrest,
Her aged Nurse, whose name was Glauce hight,
Feeling her leap out of her loathed nest,
Betwixt her feeble arms her quickly keight,
And down again in her warm bed her dight;
Ah my dear daughter, ah my dearest dread,
What uncouth fit (said she) what evil plight
Has thee oppressed, and with sad drearyhead
Changed thy lively cheer, and living made thee dead?
For not of naught these suddeine ghastly fears
All night afflict thy natural repose,
And all the day, when as thine equal pears
Their fit disports with fair delight do chose,
Thou in dull corners do thy self enclose,
Ne tastest Princes pleasures, ne do spread
Abroad thy fresh youths fairest flower, but lose
Both leaf and fruit, both too untimely shed,
As one in wilful bale for ever buried.
The time, that mortal men their weary cares
Do lay away, and all wild beasts do rest,
And every river eke his course forbeares
Then does this wicked evil thee infest,
And riue with thousand throbs thy thrilled breast;
Like an huge Aetn' of deep engulfed grief,
Sorrow is heaped in thy hollow chest,
Whence forth it breaks in sighs and anguish rife,
As smoke and sulphur mingled with confused strife.
Aye me, how much I fear, least love it be;
But if that love it be, as sure I read
By known signs and passions, which I see,
Be it worthy of thy race and royal sead,
Then I auow by this most sacred head
Of my dear foster child, to ease thy grief,
And win thy will: Therefore away do dread;
For death nor danger from thy dew relief
Shall me debar, tell me therefore my liefest liefe.
So having said, her twixt her arms twain
She straightly straynd, and colled tenderly,
And every trembling joint, and every vain
She softly felt, and rubbed busily,
To do the frosen cold away to fly;
And her fair deawy eyes with kisses dear
She often did bath, and often again did dry;
And ever her importund, not to fear
To let the secret of her heart to her appear.
The Damzell pauzd, and then thus fearfully;
Ah Nurse, what needs thee to eke my pain?
Is not enough, that I alone do dye,
But it must doubled be with death of twain?
For naught for me but death there does remain.
O daughter dear (said she) despair no whit;
For never sore, but might a salve obtain:
That blinded God, which has ye blindly smit,
Another arrow has your lovers heart to hit.
But mine is not (quoth she) like others wound;
For which no reason can find remedy.
Was never such, but mote the like be found,
(Said she) and though no reason may apply
Salve to your sore, yet love can higher stye,
Then reasons reach, and often has wonders done.
But neither God of love, nor God of sky
Can do (said she) that, which cannot be done.
Things often impossible (quoth she) seem, ere begone.
These idle words (said she) do naught assuage
My stubborn smart, but more annoyance breed,
For no no usual fire, no usual rage
It is, o Nurse, which on my life does feed,
And suckes the blood, which from my heart does bleed.
But since thy faithful zeal lets me not hyde
My crime, (if crime it be) I will it reed.
Nor Prince, nor pere it is, whose love has gryde
My feeble breast of late, and launched this wound wide.
Nor man it is, nor other living wight;
For then some hope I might unto me draw,
But the only shade and semblant of a knight,
Whose shape or person yet I never saw,
Has me subjected to loves cruel law:
The same one day, as me misfortune led,
I in my fathers wondrous mirrhour saw,
And pleased with that seeming goodly-hed,
Unawares the hidden hook with bait I swallowed.
Since it has infixed faster hold
Within my bleeding bowels, and so sore
Now ranckleth in this same frail fleshly mould,
That all mine entrails flow with poysnous gore,
And th'vlcer grows daily more and more;
Ne can my running sore find remedy,
Other then my hard fortune to deplore,
And languish as the leaf fallen from the tree,
Till death make one end of my days and misery.
Daughter (said she) what need ye be dismayed,
Or why make ye such Monster of your mind?
Of much more uncouth thing I was affrayd;
Of filthy lust, contrary unto kind:
But this affection nothing strange I find;
For who with reason can you aye reprove,
To love the semblant pleasing most your mind,
And yield your heart, whence ye cannot remove?
No guilt in you, but in the tyranny of love.
Not so the Arabian Myrrh did set her mind;
Not so did Biblis spend her pining heart,
But loved their native flesh against all kind,
And to their purpose used wicked art:
Yet played Pasiphae a more mostrous part,
That loved a Bull, and learnd a beast to be;
Such shameful lusts who loathes not, which depart
From course of nature and of modesty?
Sweet love such lewdnes bands from his fair company.
But thine my Dear (welfare thy heart my dear)
Though strange beginning had, yet fixed is
On one, that worthy may perhaps appear;
And certes seems bestowed not amiss:
Joy thereof have thou and eternal blis.
With that vpleaning on her elbow weak,
Her alablasted breast she soft did kis,
Which all that while she felt to pant and quake,
As it an Earthquake were; at last she thus bespake.
Beldame, your words do work me little ease;
For though my love be not so lewdly bent,
As those ye blame, yet may it naught appease
My raging smart, ne ought my flame relent,
But rather does my helpelesse grief augment.
For they, how ever shameful and unkind,
Yet did possess their horrible intent:
Short end of sorrows they thereby did find;
So was their fortune good, though wicked were their mind.
But wicked fortune mine, though mind be good,
Can have no end, nor hope of my desire,
But feed on shadows, whiles I die for food,
And like a shadow wexe, whiles with entire
Affection, I do languish and expire.
I fonder, then Cephisus foolish child,
Who having vewed in a fountain shere
His face, was with the love thereof beguild;
I fonder love a shade, the body far exild.
Naught like (quoth she) for that same wretched boy
Was of himself the idle Paramoure;
Both love and lover, without hope of joy,
For which he faded to a watery flower.
But better fortune thine, and better hour,
Which love the shadow of a warlike knight;
No shadow, but a body has in power:
That body, wheresoever that it light,
May learned be by ciphers, or by Magic might.
But if thou may with reason yet repress
The growing evil, ere it strength have got,
And thee abandond wholly do possess,
Against it strongly strive, and yield thee not,
Till thou in open field adowne be smot.
But if the passion master thy frail might,
So that needs love or death must be thy lot,
Then I auow to thee, by wrong or right
To compass thy desire, and find that loved knight.
Her cheerful words much cheard the feeble spright
Of the sick virgin, that her down she laid
In her warm bed to sleep, if that she might;
And the old-woman carefully displayed
The clothes about her round with busy aid;
So that at last a little creeping sleep
Surprisd her sense: She therewith well apayd,
The drunken lamp down in the oil did steep,
And set her by to watch, and set her by to weep.
Early the morrow next, before that day
His joyous face did to the world reveal,
They both vprose and took their ready way
Unto the Church, their prayers to appeal,
With great devotion, and with little zeal:
For the fair Damzell from the holy hearse
Her loue-sicke heart to other thoughts did steal;
And that old Dame said many an idle verse,
Out of her daughters heart fond fancies to reuerse.
Returned home, the royal Infant fell
Into her former fit; for why, no power
Nor guidance of her self in her did dwell.
But th'aged Nurse her calling to her bower,
Had gathered Rue, and Sauine, and the flower
Of Camphara, and Calamint, and Dill,
All which she in a earthen Pot did pour,
And to the brim with Colt wood did it fill,
And many drops of milk and blood through it did spill.
Then taking thrice three hairs from off her head,
Them trebly breaded in a threefold lace,
And round about the pots mouth, bound the thread,
And after having whispered a space
Certain sad words, with hollow voice and bace,
She to the virgin said, thrice said she it;
Come daughter come, come; spit upon my face,
Spit thrice upon me, thrice upon me spit;
Th'vneuen number for this business is most fit.
That said, her round about she from her turned,
She turned her contrary to the Sun,
Thrice she her turned contrary, and returned,
All contrary, for she the right did shun,
And ever what she did, was straight undone.
So thought she to undo her daughters love:
But love, that is in gentle breast begone,
No idle charms so lightly may remove,
That well can witness, who by trial it does prove.
Ne ought it mote the noble Maid avail,
Ne slake the fury of her cruel flame,
But that she still did waste, and still did wayle,
That through long laugour, and hart-burning brame
She shortly like a pyned ghost became,
Which long has waited by the Stygian strond.
That when old Glauce saw, for fear least blame
Of her miscarriage should in her be fond,
She wist not how t'amend, nor how it to withstond.
Cant. III.
Merlin bewrayes to Britomart,
the state of Artegall.
And shows the famous Progeny
which from them springen shall.
MOst sacred fire, that burnest mightily
In living breasts, ykindled first above,
Emongst the eternal spheres and lamping sky,
And thence pourd into men, which men call Love;
Not that same, which does base affections move
In brutish minds, and filthy lust inflame,
But that sweet fit, that does true beauty love,
And choseth virtue for his dearest Dame,
Whence spring all noble deeds and never dying fame:
Well did Antiquity a God thee deem,
That over mortal minds have so great might,
To order them, as best to thee does seem,
And all their actions to direct aright;
The fatal purpose of divine foresight,
Thou do effect in destined descents,
Through deep impression of thy secret might,
And stirredst up th'Heroes high intents,
Which the late world admyres for wondrous monime^ts.
But thy dread darts in none do triumph more,
Ne brauer proof in any, of thy power
Shew'dst thou, then in this royal Maid of yore,
Making her seek an unknown Paramoure,
From the worlds end, through many a bitter stowre:
From whose two loins thou afterward did raise
Most famous fruits of matrimonial bower,
Which through the earth have spread their living praise,
That fame in trompe of gold eternally displayes.
Begin then, o my dearest sacred Dame,
Daughter of Phoebus and of Memory,
That do ennoble with immortal name
The warlike Worthies, from antiquity,
In thy great volume of Eternity:
Begin, o Clio, and recount from hence
My glorious Soueraines goodly auncestie,
Till that by dew degrees and long pretense,
Thou have it lastly brought unto her Excellence.
Full many ways within her troubled mind,
Old Glauce, cast, to cure this Ladies grief:
Full many ways she sought, but none could find,
Nor herbs, nor charms, nor counsel, that is chief
And choicest medicine for sick hearts relief:
For thy great care she took, and greater fear,
Least that it should her turn to foul repriefe,
And sore reproach, when so her father dear
Should of his dearest daughters hard misfortune hear.
At last she her auisd, that he, which made
That mirrhour, wherein the sick Damsel
So straungely vewed her strange lovers shade,
To weet, the learned Merlin, well could tell,
Under what coast of heaven the man did dwell,
And by what means his love might best be wrought:
For though beyond the Africa Ismaell,
Or th'Indian Peru he were, she thought
Him forth through infinite endeavor to have sought.
Forthwith themselves disguising both in strange
And base attire, that none might them bewray,
To Maridunum, that is now by change
Of name Cayr-Merdin called, they took their way:
There the wise Merlin whylome wont (they say)
To make his won, low underneath the ground,
In a deep delue, far from the view of day,
That of no living wight he mote be found,
When so he counseld with his sprights enco^past round.
And if thou ever happen that same way
To travel, go to see that dreadful place:
It is an hideous hollow cave (they say)
Under a rock that lies a little space
From the swift Barry, tombling down apace,
Emongst the woodie hills of Dyneuowre:
But dare thou not, I charge, in any case,
To enter into that same balefull Bower,
For fear the cruel Feends should thee unawares deuowre.
But standing high aloft, low lay thine ear,
And there such ghastly noise of iron chains,
And brazen Caudrons thou shall rombling hear,
Which thousand sprights with long enduring pains
Do toss, that it will stonne thy feeble brains,
And oftentimes great groans, and grievous stounds,
When too huge toil and labor them constraines:
And oftentimes loud strokes, and ringing sounds
From under that deep Rock most horribly rebounds.
The cause some say is this: A little while
Before that Merlin did, he did intend,
A brazen wall in compass to compile
About Cairmardin, and did it commend
Unto these Sprights, to bring to perfect end.
During which work the Lady of the Lake,
Whom long he loved, for him in have did send,
Who thereby forced his workmen to forsake,
Them bound till his return, their labor not to slake.
In the mean time through that false Ladies train,
He was surprisd, and buried under bear,
Ne ever to his work returned again:
Nath'lesse those feends may not their work forbear,
So greatly his commandment they fear,
But there do toil and travel day and night,
Until that brazen wall they up do rear:
For Merlin had in Magic more insight,
Then ever him before or after living wight.
For he by words could call out of the sky
Both Sun and Moon, and make them him obey:
The land to sea, and sea to maineland dry,
And darkesome night he eke could turn to day:
Huge hosts of men he could alone dismay,
And hosts of men of meanest things could frame,
When so him list his enemies to fray:
That to this day for terror of his fame,
The feends do quake, when any him to them does name.
And sooth, men say that he was not the son
Of mortal Sire, or other living wight,
But wondrously begotten, and begone
By false illusion of a guilefull Spright,
On a fair Lady Nonne, that whilome hight
Matilda, daughter to Pubidius,
Who was the Lord of Mathrauall by right,
And coosen unto king Ambrosius:
Whence he endued was with skill so marvelous.
They here ariuing, staid a while without,
Ne durst adventure rashly in to wend,
But of their first intent began make new dout
For dread of danger, which it might portend:
Until the hardy Maid (with love to friend)
First entering, the dreadful Mage there found
Deep busied bout work of wondrous end,
And writing strange characters in the ground,
With which the stubborn feends he to his service bound.
He naught was moved at their entrance bold:
For of their coming well he wist before,
Yet list them bid their business to unfold,
As if ought in this world in secret store
Were from him hidden, or unknown of yore.
Then Glauce thus, let not it thee offend,
That we thus rashly through thy darkesome door,
Unawares have pressed: for either fatal end,
Or other mighty cause us two did hither send.
He bad tell on; And then she thus began.
Now have three Moons with borrowed brothers light,
Thrice shined fair, and thrice seemed dim and wan,
Since a sore evil, which this virgin bright
Tormenteth, and does plonge in doleful plight,
First rooting took; but what thing it mote be,
Or whence it sprung, I cannot read aright:
But this I read, that but if remedee,
Thou her afford, full shortly I her dead shall see.
Therewith th'Enchaunter softly began to smyle
At her smooth speeches, weeting inly well,
That she to him dissembled womanish guyle,
And to her said, Beldame, by that ye tell,
More need of leach-craft has your Damozell,
Then of my skill: who help may have elsewhere,
In vain seeks wonders out of Magic spell.
The Old woman wox half blanck, those words to hear;
And yet was loath to let her purpose plain appear.
And to him said, If any leaches skill,
Or other learned means could have redrest
This my dear daughters deep engraffed ill,
Certes I should be loath thee to molest:
But this sad evil, which does her infest,
Does course of natural cause far exceed,
And housed is within her hollow breast,
That either seems some cursed witches deed,
Or evil spright, that in her does such torment breed.
The wisard could no longer bear her board,
But brusting forth in laughter, to her said;
Glauce, what needs this colorable word,
To cloak the cause, that has it self bewrayd?
Ne ye fair Britomartis, thus arayd,
More hidden are, then Sun in cloudy vele;
Whom thy good fortune, having fate obayd,
Has hither brought, for succor to appele:
The which the powers to thee are pleased to reuele.
The doubtful Maid, seeing her self descryde,
Was all abasht, and her pure yuory
Into a clear Carnation suddeine did;
As fair Aurora rising hastily,
Does by her blushing tell, that she did lie
All night in old Tithonus frosen bed,
Whereof she seems ashamed inwardly.
But her old Nourse was naught dishartened,
But vauntage made of that, which Merlin had ared.
And said, Since then thou know all our grief,
(For what do not thou know?) of grace I pray,
Pity our plaint, and yield us meet relief.
With that the Prophet still a while did stay,
And then his spirit thus began forth display;
Most noble Virgin, that by fatal lore
Have learned to love, let no whit thee dismay
The hard begin, that meets thee in the door.
And with sharp fits thy tender heart oppresses sore.
For so must all things excellent begin,
And eke enrooted deep must be that Tree,
Whose big embodied branches shall not lin,
Till they to heavens hight forth stretched be.
For from thy womb a famous Progeny
Shall spring, out of the ancient Trojan blood,
Which shall revive the sleeping memory
Of those same antique Peers, the heavens brood,
Which Greece and Asian rivers stained with their blood.
Renowned kings, and sacred Emperors,
Thy fruitful Offspring, shall from thee descend;
Brave Captains, and most mighty warriors,
That shall their conquests through all lands extend,
And their decayed kingdoms shall amend:
The feeble Britons, broken with long war,
They shall vpreare, and mightily defend
Against their foreign foe, that comes from far,
Till universal peace compound all civil jar.
It was not, Britomart, thy wandering eye,
Glauncing unawares in charmed looking glass,
But the straight course of heavenly destiny,
Led with eternal providence, that has
Guided thy glaunce, to bring his will to pas:
Ne is thy fate, ne is thy fortune ill,
To love the prowest knight, that ever was.
Therefore submit thy ways unto his will,
And do by all dew means thy destiny fulfill.
But read (said Glauce) thou Magitian
What means shall she out seek, or what ways take?
How shall she know, how shall she find the man?
Or what needs her to toil, since fates can make
Way for themselves, their purpose to partake?
Then Merlin thus; Indeed the fates are firm,
And may not shrinck, though all the world do shake:
Yet ought men's good endeavors them confirm,
And guide the heavenly causes to their constant term.
The man whom heavens have ordaynd to be
The spouse of Britomart, is Arthegall:
He wonneth in the land of Fayeree,
Yet is no Fary borne, ne sib at all
To Elfes, but sprung of seed terrestrial,
And whilome by false Faries stolen away,
Whiles yet in infant cradle he did crall;
Ne other to himself is known this day,
But that he by an Elfe was gotten of a Fay.
But sooth he is the son of Gorlois,
And brother unto Cador Cornish king,
And for his warlike feats renowned is,
From where the day out of the sea does spring,
Until the closure of the Evening.
From thence, him firmly bound with faithful band,
To this his native soil thou back shall bring,
Strongly to aid his country, to withstand
The power of foreign Paynims, which invade thy land.
Great aid thereto his mighty puissaunce,
And dreaded name shall give in that sad day:
Where also proof of thy prow valiaunce
Thou then shall make, to increase thy lovers pray.
Long time ye both in arms shall bear great sway,
Till thy wombes burden thee from them do call,
And his last fate him from thee take away,
Too rathe cut off by practice criminal
Of secret foes, that him shall make in mischief fall.
Where thee yet shall he leave for memory
Of his late puissaunce, his Image dead,
That living him in all actiuity
To thee shall represent. He from the head
Of his coosin Constantius without dread
Shall take the crown, that was his fathers right,
And therewith crown himself in the others stead:
Then shall he issew forth with dreadful mighty,
Against his Saxon foes in bloody field to fight.
Like as a Lion, that in drowsy cave
Has long time slept, himself so shall he shake,
And coming forth, shall spread his banner brave
Over the troubled South, that it shall make
The warlike Mertians for fear to quake:
Thrice shall he fight with them, and twice shall win,
But the third time shall fair accordaunce make:
And if he then with victory can lin,
He shall his days with peace bring to his earthly In.
His son, hight Vortipore, shall him succeed
In kingdom, but not in felicity;
Yet shall he long time war with happy speed,
And with great honor many battles try:
But at the last to th'importunity
Of froward fortune shall be forced to yield.
But his son Malgo shall full mightily
Avenge his fathers loss, with spear and shield,
And his proud foes discomfit in victorious field.
Behold the man, and tell me Britomart,
If ay more goodly creature thou did see;
How like a Gyaunt in each manly part
Bears he himself with portly maiestee,
That one of the old Heroes seems to be:
He the six Islands, comprouinciall
In ancient times unto great Britainee,
Shall to the same reduce, and to him call
Their sundry kings to do their homage several.
All which his son Careticus awhile
Shall well defend, and Saxons power suppress,
Until a stranger king from unknown soil
Arriving, him with multitude oppress;
Great Gormond, having with huge mightiness
Ireland subdewd, and therein fixed his throne,
Like a swift Otter, fell through emptiness,
Shall ouerswim the sea with many one
Of his Norueyses, to assist the Britons fone.
He in his fury all shall ouerrunne,
And holy Church with faithless hands deface,
That thy sad people utterly fordonne,
Shall to the utmost mountains fly apace:
Was never so great wast in any place,
Nor so foul autrage done by living men:
For all thy Cities they shall sack and race,
And the green grass, that grows, they shall bren,
That even the wild beast shall die in starued den.
Whiles thus the Britons do in languour pine,
Proud Etheldred shall from the North arise,
Serving the ambitious will of Augustine,
And passing Dee with hardy enterprise,
Shall back repulse the valiant Brockwell twice,
And Bangor with massacred Martyrs fill;
But the third time shall rue his foolhardise:
For Cadwan pitying his peoples ill,
Shall stoutly him defeat, and thousand Saxons kill.
But after him, Cadwallin mightily
On his son Edwin all those wrongs shall wreake;
Ne shall avail the wicked sorcery
Of false Pellite, his purposes to break,
But him shall slay, and on a gallows bleake
Shall give th'enchaunter his unhappy hire
Then shall the Britons, late dismayed and weak,
From their long vassalage gin to respire,
And on their Paynim foes avenge their ranckled ire.
Ne shall he yet his wrath so mitigate,
Till both the sons of Edwin he have slain,
Offricke and Osricke, twins unfortunate,
Both slain in battle upon Layburne plain,
Together with the king of Louthiane,
Hight Adin, and the king of Orkeny,
Both joint partakers of the fatal pain:
But Penda, fearful of like desteny,
Shall yield him self his liegeman, and swear fealty.
Him shall he make his fatal Instrument,
T'afflict the other Saxons vnsubdewd;
He marching forth with fury insolent
Against the good king Oswald, who indewd
With heavenly power, and by Angels reskewd,
All holding crosses in their hands on hye,
Shall him defeat withouten blood imbrewd:
Of which, that field for endless memory,
Shall Heuenfield be called to all posterity.
Whereat Cadwallin wroth, shall forth issew,
And an huge host into Northumber lead,
With which he godly Oswald shall subdew,
And crown with martyrdom his sacred head.
Whose brother Oswin, daunted with like dread,
With price of silver shall his kingdom buy,
And Penda, seeking him adowne to tread,
Shall tread adowne, and do him fowly dye,
But shall with gifts his Lord Cadwallin pacify.
Then shall Cadwallin dye, and then the rain
Of Britons eke with him attonce shall dye;
Ne shall the good Cadwallader with pain,
Or power, behable it to remedy,
When the full time prefixed by destiny,
Shall Be expird of Britons regiment.
For heaven it self shall their success envy,
And them with plagues and murrins pestilent
Consume, till all their warlike puissaunce be spent.
Yet after all these sorrows, and huge hills
Of dying people, during eight years space,
Cadwallader not yielding to his ills,
From Armoricke, where long in wretched case
He lived, returning to his native place,
Shall Be by vision staid from his intent:
For th'heauens have decreed, to displace
The Britons, for their sins dew punishment,
And to the Saxons ouer-giue their government.
Then woe, and woe, and everlasting woe,
Be to the Briton babe, that shall be borne,
To live in thraldom of his fathers foe;
Late King, now captive, late Lord, now forlorn,
The worlds reproach, the cruel victours scorn,
Banished from Princely bower to wastfull wood:
O who shall help me to lament, and mourn
The royal seed, the antique Trojan blood,
Whose Empire longer here, then ever any stood.
The Damzell was full deep empassioned,
Both for his grief, and for her peoples sake,
Whose future woes so plain he fashioned,
And sighing sore, at length him thus bespake;
Ah but will heavens fury never slake,
Nor vengeance huge relent it self at last?
Will not long misery late mercy make,
But shall their name for ever be defast,
And quite from the earth their memory be rast?
Nay but the term (said he) is limited,
That in this thraldom Britons shall abide,
And the just revolution measured,
That they as Strangers shall be notifide.
For twice four hundredth shall be supplide,
Ere they to former rule restored shall be.
And their importune fates all satisfide:
Yet during this their most obscuritee,
Their beams shall often break forth, that men them fair may see.
For Rhodoricke, whose surname shall be Great,
Shall of him self a brave ensample show,
That Saxon kings his friendship shall entreat;
And Howell Dha shall goodly well indew
The saluage minds with skill of just and true;
Then Griffyth Conan also shall up rear
His dreaded head, and the old sparks renew
Of native courage, that his foes shall fear,
Least back again the kingdom he from them should bear.
Ne shall the Saxons selves all peaceably
Enjoy the crown, which they from Britons won
First ill, and after ruled wickedly:
For ere two hundred years be full ouerronne,
There shall a Raven far from rising Sun,
With his wide wings upon them fiercely fly,
And bid his faithless chickens ouerronne
The fruitful plains, and with fell cruelty,
In their avenge, tread down the victours surquedry.
Yet shall a third both these, and thine subdew;
There shall a Lion from the sea-bord wood
Of Neustria come roaring, with a crew
Of hungry whelps, his battailous bold brood,
Whose claws were newly dipped in cruddy blood,
That from the Daniske Tyrants head shall rend
Th'vsurped crown, as if that he were wood,
And the spoil of the country conquered
Emongst his young ones shall divide with bountyhed.
Tho when the term is full accomplishid,
There shall a spark of fire, which has long-while
Been in his ashes raked up, and hid,
Be freshly kindled in the fruitful I Will
Of Mona, where it lurked in exile;
Which shall break forth into bright burning flame,
And reach into the house, that bears the style
Of royal majesty and sovereign name;
So shall the Briton blood their crown again reclame.
Thenceforth eternal union shall be made
Between the nations different before,
And sacred Peace shall lovingly persuade
The warlike minds, to learn her goodly lore,
And civil arms to exercise no more:
Then shall a royal virgin rain, which shall
Stretch her white rod over the Belgicke shore,
And the great Castle smite so sore with all,
That it shall make him shake, and shortly learn to fall.
But yet the end is not. There Merlin stayed,
As ouercomen of the spirits power,
Or other ghastly spectacle dismayed,
That secretly he saw, yet note discoure:
Which suddein fit, and half extatick stoure
When the two fearful women saw, they grew
Greatly confused in behauioure;
At last the fury past, to former hew
She turned again, and cheerful looks did show.
Then, when them selves they well instructed had
Of all, that needed them to be inquird,
They both conceiving hope of comfort glad,
With lighter hearts unto their home retird;
Where they in secret counsel close conspird,
How to effect so hard an enterprise,
And to possess the purpose they desird:
Now this, now that twixt them they did devise,
And diverse plots did frame, to mask in strange devise.
At last the Nourse in her foolhardy wit
Conceived a bold devise, and thus bespake;
Daughter, I deem that counsel aye most fit,
That of the time does dew advantage take;
Ye see that good king Other now does make
Strong war upon the Paynim brethren, hight
Octa and Oza, whom he lately brake
Beside Cayr Verolame, in victorious fight,
That now all Britanie does burn in arms bright.
That therefore naught our passage may empeach,
Let us in feigned arms our selves disguize,
And our weak hands (whom need new strength shall teach
The dreadful spear and shield to exercize:
Ne certes daughter that same warlike wize
I ween, would you misseeme; for ye been tall,
And large of limb, t'atchieue an hard emprize,
Ne ought ye want, but skill, which practice small
Will bring, and shortly make you a maid Martial.
And sooth, it ought your courage much inflame,
To hear so often, in that royal house,
From whence to none inferior ye came:
Bards tell of many women valorous
Which have full many feats aduenturous
Performd, in paragone of proudest men:
The bold Bunduca, whose victorious
Exploits made Rome to quake, stout Guendolen,
Renowned Martia, and redoubted Emmilen.
And that, which more then all the rest may sway,
Late days ensample, which these eyes beheld,
In the last field before Meneuia
Which Other with those foreign Pagans held,
I saw a Saxon Virgin, the which feld
Great Vlfin thrice upon the bloody plain,
And had not Carados her hand withheld
From rash revenge, she had him surely slain,
Yet Carados himself from her escapt with pain.
Ah read, (quoth Britomart) how is she hight?
Fair Angela (quoth she) men do her call,
No whit less fair, then terrible in fight:
She has the leading of a Martial
And mighty people, dreaded more then all
The other Saxons, which do for her sake
And love, themselves of her name Angles call.
Therefore fair Infant her ensample make
Unto thy self, and equal courage to thee take.
Her hearty words so deep into the mind
Of the young Damzell sunk, that great desire
Of warlike arms in her forthwith they tynd,
And generous stout courage did inspire,
That she resolved, vnmeeting to her Sire,
Aduent'rous knighthood on her self to don,
And counseld with her Nourse, her Maids attire
To turn into a massy habergeon,
And bad her all things put in readiness anon.
The Old woman naught, that needed, did omit;
But all things did conuiently puruay:
It fortuned (so time their turn did fit)
A band of Britons ryding on forray
Few dryes before, had gotten a great pray
Of Saxon goods, emongst the which was seen
A goodly Armor, and full rich array,
Which longed to Angela, the Saxon Queen,
All fretted round with gold, and goodly well beseene.
The same, with all the other ornaments,
King Ryence caused to be hanged hy
In his chief Church, for endless moniments
Of his success and gladfull victory:
Of which her self auising readily,
In th'euening late old Glauce thither led
Fair Britomart, and that same Armory
Down taking, her therein appareled,
Well as she might, and with brave bauldrick garnished.
Beside those arms there stood a mighty spear,
Which Bladud made by Magic art of yore,
And vsd the same in battle aye to bear;
Since which it had bin here preserved in store,
For his great virtues proved long before:
For never wight so fast in sell could sit,
But him perforce unto the ground it bore:
Both spear she took, and shield, which hong by it:
Both spear and shield of great power, for her purpose fit
Thus when she had the virgin all arayd,
Another harness, which did hang thereby,
About her self she dight, that the young Maid
She might in equal arms accompany,
And as her Squire attend her carefully:
Tho to their ready Steeds they clombe full light,
And through back ways, that none might them espy,
Covered with secret cloud of silent night,
Themselves they forth conuayd, and passed forward right.
Ne rested they, till that to Faery land
They came, as Merlin them directed late:
Where meeting with this Redcrosse knight, she fond
Of diverse things discourses to dilate,
But most of Arthegall, and his estate.
At last their ways so fell, that they mote part
Then each to other well affectionate,
Friendship professed with unfeigned heart,
The Redcrosse knight diuerst, but forth rode Britomart.
Cant. IIII.
Bold Marinell of Britomart,
Is thrown on the Rich strond:
Fair Florimell of Arthur is
Long followed, but not fond.
WHere is the Antique glory now become,
That whilome wont in women to appear?
Where be the brave atchieuements done by some?
Where be the battles, where the shield and spear,
And all the conquests, which them high did rear,
That matter made for famous Poets verse,
And boastfull men so often abasht to hear?
Been they all dead, and laid in doleful hearse?
Or done they only sleep, and shall again reuerse?
If they be dead, then woe is me therefore:
But if they sleep, o let them soon awake:
For all too long I burn with envy sore,
To hear the warlike feats, which Homere spoke
Of bold Panthesilee, which made a lake
Of Greekish blood so often in Trojan plain;
But when I read, how stout Debora struck
Proud Sisera, and how Camill' has slain
The huge Orsilochus, I swell with great disdain.
Yet these, and all that else had puissaunce,
Cannot with noble Britomart compare,
As Well for glory of great valiaunce,
As for pure chastity and virtue rare,
That all her goodly deeds do well declare.
Well worthy stock, from which the branches sprung,
That in late years so fair a blossom bare,
As thee, o Queen, the matter of my song,
Whose lignage from this Lady I derive along.
Who when through speeches with the Redcrosse knight,
She learned had the estate of Arthegall,
And in each point her self informd aright,
A friendly league of love perpetual
She with him bound, and Conge took withal.
Then he forth on his journey did proceed,
To seek adventures, which mote him befall,
And win him worship through his warlike deed,
Which always of his pains he made the chiefest meed.
But Britomart kept on her former course,
Ne ever dofte her arms, but all the way
Grew pensive through that amorous discourse,
By which the Redcrosse knight did erst display
Her lovers shape, and cheualrous array;
A thousand thoughts she fashioned in her mind,
And in her feigning fancy did pourtray
Him such, as fittest she for love could find,
Wise, warlike, personable, courteous, and kind.
With such selfe-pleasing thoughts her wound she fed,
And thought so to beguile her grievous smart;
But so her smart was much more grievous bred,
And the deep wound more deep engord her heart,
That naught but death her dolor mote depart.
So forth she rode without repose or rest,
Searching all lands and each remotest part,
Following the guidaunce of her blinded guest,
Till that to the seacoast at length she her addres
There she a lighted from her light-foot beast,
And sitting down upon the rocky shore,
Bad her old Squire unlace her lofty creast;
Tho having vewd a while the surges hoar,
That against the craggy clifts did loudly rore,
And in their raging surquedry disdaynd,
That the fast earth affronted them so sore,
And their deuoring couetize restraynd,
Thereat she sighed deep, and after thus complaynd.
Huge sea of sorrow, and tempestuous grief,
Wherein my feeble bark is tossed long,
Far from the hoped haven of relief,
Who do thy cruel billows beat so strong,
And thy moist mountains each on others throng,
Threatening to swallow up my fearful life?
O do thy cruel wrath and spightfull wrong
At length allay, and stint thy stormy strife,
Which in these troubled bowels reigns, and rages rife.
For else my feeble vessel crazd, and cracked
Through thy strong buffets and outrageous blows,
Cannot endure, but needs it must be wrackt
On the rough rocks, or on the sandy shallowes,
The whiles that love it steres, and fortune rows;
Love my lewd Pilot has a restless mind
And fortune Boteswaine no assurance knows,
But sail withouten stars, against tide and wind:
How can they other do, since both are bold and blind?
Thou God of winds, that raignest in the seas,
That raignest also in the Continent,
At last blow up some gentle gale of ease,
The which may bring my ship, ere it be rent,
Unto the gladsome port of her intent:
Then when I shall my self in safety see,
A table for eternal moniment
Of thy great grace, and my great ieopardee,
Great Neptune, I auow to hallow unto thee.
Then sighing softly sore, and inly deep,
She shut up all her plaint in privy grief;
For her great courage would not let her weep,
Till that old Glauce began with sharp repriefe,
Her to restrain, and give her good relief,
Through hope of those, which Merlin had her told
Should of her name and nation be chief,
And fetch their being from the sacred mould
Of her immortal womb, to be in heaven enrold.
Thus as she her recomforted, she spyde,
Where far away one all in armor bright,
With hasty gallop toward her did ride;
Her dolor soon she ceast, and on her dight
Her Helmet, to her Courser mounting light:
Her former sorrow into suddein wrath,
Both coosen passions of distroubled spright,
Converting, forth she beats the dustie path;
Love and despite attonce her courage kindled has.
As when a foggy mist has ouercast
The face of heaven, and the clear air engrost,
The world in darkness dwells, till that at last
The watery Southwinde from the seabord cost
Vpblowing, does disperse the vapor lo'st,
And poures it self forth in a stormy shower;
So the fair Britomart having disclo'st
Her clowdy care into a wrathful stowre,
The mist of grief dissolved, into vengeance power,
Eftsoons her goodly shield addressing fair,
That mortal spear she in her hand did take,
And unto battle did her self prepaire.
The knight approaching, sternely her bespake;
Sir knight, that do thy voyage rashly make
By this forbidden way in my despite,
Ne do by others death ensample take,
I read thee soon retire, whiles thou have might,
Least afterward it be too late to take thy flight.
Ythrild with deep disdain of his proud threat,
She shortly thus; Fly they, that need to fly;
Words fearen babes. I mean not thee entreat
To pass; but maugre thee will pass or die.
Ne longer stayed for the other to reply,
But with sharp spears the rest made dearly known.
Srongly the strange knight ran, and sturdily
Struck her full on the breast, that made her down
Decline her head, and touch her crouper with her crown.
But she again him in the shield did smite
With so fierce fury and great puissaunce,
That through his threesquare scuchin percing quite,
And through his mayled hauberque, by mischaunce
The wicked steel through his left side did glaunce;
Him so transfixed she before her bore
Beyond his croupe, the length of all her lance,
Till sadly soucing on the sandy shore,
He tombled on an heap, and wallowd in his gore.
Like as the sacred Ox, that careless stands,
With gilden horns, and flowery girlonds crowned,
Proud of his dying honor and dear bands,
Whiles th'altars fume with frankincense arownd,
All suddenly with mortal stroke astownd,
Does groueling fall, and with his streaming gore
Distaines the pillours, and the holy grownd,
And the fair flowers, that decked him before;
So fell proud Marinell upon the precious shore.
The martial Maid stayed not him to lament,
But forward rode, and kept her ready way
Along the strond, which as she ouer-went,
She saw bestrowed all with rich array
Of pearls and precious stones of great assay,
And all the gravel mixed with golden owre;
Whereat she wondered much, but would not stay
For gold, or perles, or precious stones an hour,
But them despised all; for all was in her power.
Whiles thus he lay in deadly stonishment,
Tidings hereof came to his mothers ear;
His mother was the blacke-browd Cymoent,
The daughter of great Nereus, which did bear
This warlike son unto an earthly pear,
The famous Dumarin; who on a day
Finding the Nymph a sleep in secret wheare,
As he by chance did wander that same way,
Was taken with her love, and by her closely lay.
There he this knight of her begot, whom borne
She of his father Marinell did name,
And in a rocky cave as wight forlorn,
Long time she fostred up, till he became
A mighty man at arms, and mickle fame
Did get through great adventures by him done:
For never man he suffered by that same
Rich strond to travel, whereas he did won,
But that he must do battle with the Sea-nymphes son.
An hundred knights of honorable name
He had subdew'd, and them his vassals made,
That through all Farie land his noble fame
Now blazed was, and fear did all invade,
That none durst passen through that perilous glade.
And to advance his name and glory more,
Her Sea-god sire she dearly did persuade,
T'endow her son with threasure and rich store,
Boue all the sons, that were of earthly wombes ybore.
The God did grant his daughters dear demand,
To done his Nephew in all riches flow;
Eftsoons his heaped waves he did command,
Out of their hollow bosom forth to throw
All the huge threasure, which the sea below
Had in his greedy gulf devoured deep,
And him enriched through the overthrow
And wreckes of many wretches, which did weep,
And often wail their wealth, which he from them did keep.
Shortly upon that shore there heaped was,
Exceeding riches and all precious things,
The spoil of all the world, that it did pas
The wealth of The East, and pomp of Persian kings;
Gold, amber, yuorie, perles, owches, rings,
And all that else was precious and dear,
The sea unto him voluntary brings,
That shortly he a great Lord did appear,
As was in all the land of Faery, or elsewheare.
Thereto he was a doughtie dreaded knight,
Tryde often to the scath of many dear,
That none in equal arms him matchen might,
The which his mother seeing, began to fear
Least his too haughty hardines might rear
Some hard mishap, in hazard of his life:
For thy she often him counseld to forbear
The bloody battle, and to stir up strife,
But after all his war, to rest his weary knife.
And for his more assurance, she inquired
One day of Proteus by his mighty spell,
(For Proteus was with prophecy inspired)
Her dear sons destiny to her to tell,
And the sad end of her sweet Marinell.
Who through foresight of his eternal skill,
Bad her from womankind to keep him well:
For of a woman he should have much ill,
A virgin strange and stout him should dismay, or kill.
For thy she gave him warning every day,
The love of women not to entertain;
A lesson too too hard for living clay,
From love in course of nature to refrain:
Yet he his mothers lore did well retain,
And ever from fair Ladies love did fly;
Yet many Ladies fair did often complain,
That they for love of him would algates die:
Die, who so list for him, he was loves enemy.
But ah, who can deceive his destiny,
Or ween by warning to avoid his fate?
That when he sleeps in most security,
And safest seems, him soonest does amate,
And finds dew effect or soon or late.
So feeble is the power of fleshly arm.
His mother bad him women's love to hate,
For she of woman's force did fear no harm;
So weening to have armed him, she did quite disarme.
This was that woman, this that deadly wound,
That Proteus prophecide should him dismay,
The which his mother vainly did expound,
To be hart-wounding love, which should assay
To bring her son unto his last decay.
So tickle be the terms of mortal state,
And full of subtle sophismes, which do play
With double senses, and with false debate,
Tapproue the unknown purpose of eternal fate.
Too true the famous Marinell it fownd,
Who through late trial, on that wealthy Strond
Inglorious now lies in senseless swownd,
Through heavy stroke of Britomartis hond.
Which when his mother dear did understand,
And heavy tidings heard, whereas she played
Amongst her watery sisters by a pond,
Gathering sweet daffadillyes, to have made
Gay girlonds, from the Sun their forheads fair to shade.
Eftsoons both flowers and girlonds far away
She flong, and her fair deawy locks yrent,
To sorrow huge she turned her former play,
And gameson merth to grievous dreriment:
She threw her self down on the Continent,
Ne word did speak, but lay as in a swowne,
Whiles all her sisters did for her lament,
With yelling outcries, and with shrieking sown;
And every one did tear her girlond from her crown.
Soon as she up out of her deadly fit
Arose, she bad her charet to be brought,
And all her sisters, that with her did sit,
Bad eke attonce their charets to be sought;
Tho full of bitter grief and pensive thought,
She to her wagon clombe; clombe all the rest,
And forth together went, with sorrow fraught.
The waves obedient to their beheast,
Them yielded ready passage, and their rage surceast.
Great Neptune stood amazed at their sight,
Whiles on his broad round back they softly slid
And eke himself mournd at their mournful plight,
Yet wist not what their wailing meant, yet did
For great compassion of their sorrow, bid
His mighty waters to them buxome be:
Eftsoons the roaring billows still abid,
And all the griefly Monsters of the Sea
Stood gaping at their gate, and wondered them to see.
A teme of Dolphins raunged in array,
Drew the smooth charet of sad Cymoent;
They were all taught by Triton, to obey
To the long trains, at her commandment:
As swift as swallows, on the waves they went,
That their broad flaggie finnes no foam did rear,
Ne bubbling roundell they behind them sent;
The rest of other fishes drawn wear,
Which with their finny oars the swelling sea did sheare.
Soon as they been arrived upon the brim
Of the Rich strond, their charets they forlore,
And let their temed fishes softly swim
Along the margent of the fomy shore,
Least they their finnes should bruze, and surbate sore
Their tender feet upon the stony ground:
And coming to the place, where all in gore
And cruddy blood enwallowed they found
The lucklesse Marinell, lying in deadly swound;
His mother swowned thrice, and the third time
Could scarce recovered be out of her pain;
Had she not been deuoyd of mortal slime,
She should not then have been reliu'd again,
But soon as life recovered had the rain,
She made so piteous moan and dear wayment,
That the hard rocks could scarce from tears refrain,
And all her sister Nymphs with one consent
Supplide her sobbing breaches with sad complement.
Dear image of my self (she said) that is,
The wretched son of wretched mother borne,
Is this thine high advancement, o is this
The Immortal name, with which thee yet unborn
Thy Gransire Nereus promised to adorn?
Now lie thou of life and honor reft;
Now lie thou a lump of earth forlorn,
Ne of thy late life memory is left,
Ne can thy irreuocable destiny be weft?
Fond Proteus, father of false prophecis,
And they more fond, that credit to thee give,
Not this the work of woman's hand ywis,
That so deep wound through these dear members drive.
I feared love: but they that love do live,
But they that die, do neither love nor hate.
Nath'lesse to thee thy folly I forgive,
And to my self, and to accursed fate
The guilt I do ascribe: dear wisdom bought too late.
O what auailes it of immortal seed
To been ybred and never borne to die?
Far better I it deem to die with speed,
Then waste in woe and wailefull misery.
Who dies the utmost dolor does abye,
But who that lives, is left to wail his loss:
So life is loss, and death felicity.
Sad life worse then glad death: and greater cross
To see friends grave, the^ dead the grave self to engrosse.
But if the heavens did his days envy,
And my short bliss malign, yet mote they well
Thus much afford me, ere that he did die
That the dim eyes of my dear Marinell
I mote have closed, and him bed farewell,
Since other offices for mother meet
They would not grant.
Yet maulgre them farewell, my sweetest sweet;
Farewell my sweetest son, since we no more shall meet.
Thus when they all had sorrowed their fill,
They softly began to search his griesly wound:
And that they might him handle more at will,
They him disarmed, and spredding on the ground
Their watchet mantles frindgd with silver round,
They softly wipt away the gelly blood
From th'orifice; which having well vpbound,
They pourd in sovereign balm, and Nectar good,
Good both for earthly medicine, and for heavenly food.
Tho when the lilly handed Liagore,
(This Liagore whylome had learned skill
In leaches craft, by great Appolloes lore,
Since her whylome upon high Pindus hill,
He loved, and at last her womb did fill
With heavenly seed, whereof wise Paeon sprung)
Did feel his pulse, she knew their stayed still
Some little life his feeble sprites among;
Which to his mother told, despeire she from her flong.
Tho up him taking in their tender hands,
They easily unto her charet bear:
Her teme at her commandment quiet stands,
Whiles they the corse into her wagon rear,
And strew with flowers the lamentable bear:
Then all the rest into their coches clim,
And through the brackish waves their passage sheare;
Upon great Neptunes neck they softly swim,
And to her watery chamber swiftly carry him.
Deep in the bottom of the sea, her bower
Is built of hollow billows heaped hye,
Like to thick clouds, that threat a stormy shower,
And vauted all within, like to the sky,
In which the Gods do dwell eternally:
There they him laid in easy couch well dight;
And sent in haste for Tryphon, to apply
Salues to his wounds, and medicines of might:
For Tryphon of sea gods the sovereign leach is hight.
The whiles the Nymphs sit all about him round,
Lamenting his mishap and heavy plight;
And often his mother vewing his wide wound,
Cursed the hand, that did so deadly smight
Her dearest son, her dearest hearts delight.
But none of all those curses ouertooke
The warlike Maid, th'ensample of that might,
But fairly well she thriu'd, and well did brook
Her noble deeds, ne her right course for ought forsook.
Yet did false Archimage her still pursew,
To bring to pass his mischievous intent,
Now that he had her singled from the crew
Of courteous knights, the Prince, and Faery gent,
Whom late in chase of beauty excellent
She left, pursewing that same foster strong;
Of whose foul outrage they impatient,
And full of fiery zeal, him followed long,
To reskew her from shame, and to revenge her wrong.
Through thick and thin, through mountains and through plains,
Those two great cha^pions did attonce pursew
The fearful damzell, with incessant pains:
Who from them fled, as light-foot hare from view
Of hunter swift, and sent of hounds true.
At last they came unto a double way,
Where, doubtful which to take, her to reskew,
Themselves they did dispart, each to assay,
Whether more happy were, to win so goodly pray.
But Timias, the Princes gentle Squire,
That Ladies love unto his Lord forlent,
And with proud envy, and indignant ire,
After that wicked foster fiercely went.
So been they three three sundry ways ybent.
But fairest fortune to the Prince befell,
Whose chance it was, that soon he did repent,
To take that way, in which that Damozell
Was fled before, afraid of him, as feend of hell.
At last of her far off he gained view:
Then began he freshly prick his fomy steed,
And ever as he nigher to her drew,
So evermore he did increase his speed,
And of each turning still kept wary heed:
Aloud to her he oftentimes did call,
To do away vain doubt, and needless dreed:
Full myld to her he spoke, and often let fall
Many meek words, to stay and comfort her withal.
But nothing might relent her hasty flight;
So deep the deadly fear of that foul swain
Was erst impressed in her gentle spright:
Like as a fearful Dove, which through the rain,
Of the wide air her way does cut amain,
Having far off espyde a Tassell gent,
Which after her his nimble wings does strain,
Doubleth her haste for fear to be for-hent,
And with her pineons cleaues the liquid firmament.
With no less haste, and eke with no less dreed,
That fearful Lady fled from him, that meant
To her no evil thought, nor evil deed;
Yet former fear of being fowly shent,
Carried her forward with her first intent:
And though often looking backward, well she vewd,
Her self freed from that foster insolent,
And that it was a knight, which now her sewd,
Yet she no less the knight feared, then that villein rude.
His uncouth shield and strange arms her dismayed,
Whose like in Faery land were seldom seen,
That fast she from him fled, no less affrayd,
Then of wild beasts if she had chased been:
Yet he her followd still with courage keen,
So long that now the golden Hesperus
Was mounted high in top of heaven sheene,
And warnd his other brethren ioyeous,
To light their blessed lamps in Jove's eternal house.
All suddenly dim woxe the dampish air,
And griesly shadows covered heaven bright,
That now with thousand stars was decked fair;
Which when the Prince beheld, a lothfull sight,
And that perforce, for want of longer light,
He mote surcease his suit, and lose the hope
Of his long labor, he began fowly wit
His wicked fortune, that had turned aslope,
And cursed night, that reft from him so goodly scope.
Tho when her ways he could no more descry,
But to and fro at disauenture strayd;
Like as a ship, whose Lodestarre suddenly
Covered with clouds, her Pilot has dismayed;
His wearisome pursuit perforce he stayed,
And from his lofty steed dismounting low,
Did let him forage. Down himself he laid
Upon the grassie ground, to sleep a throw;
The cold earth was his couch, the hard steel his pillow.
But gentle Sleep enuyde him any rest;
In stead thereof sad sorrow, and disdain
Of his hard hap did vex his noble breast,
And thousand fancies bet his idle brain
With their light wings, the sights of semblants vain:
Often did he wish, that Lady fair mote be
His Faery Queen, for whom he did complain:
Or that his Faery Queen were such, as she:
And ever hasty Night he blamed bitterly.
Night thou foul Mother of annoyance sad,
Sister of heavy death, and nourse of woe,
Which wast begot in heaven, but for thy bad
And brutish shape thrust down to hell below,
Where by the grim flood of Cocytus slow
Thy dwelling is, in Herebus black house,
(Black Herebus thy husband is the foe
Of all the Gods) where thou ungracious,
Half of thy days do lead in horror hideous.
What had the eternal Maker need of thee,
The world in his continual course to keep,
That do all things deface, ne let see
The beauty of his work? Indeed in sleep
The slothful body, that does love to steep
His lustlesse limbs, and drown his baser mind,
Does praise thee often, and often from Stygian deep
Calls thee, his goddess in his error blind,
And great Dame Natures handmaide, chearing every kind.
But well I wot, that to an heavy heart
Thou art the root and nurse of bitter cares,
Breeder of new, renewer of old smarts:
In stead of rest thou lendest railing tears,
In stead of sleep thou sendest troublous fears,
And dreadful visions, in the which alive
The drearie image of sad death appears:
So from the weary spirit thou do drive
Desired rest, and men of happiness deprive.
Under thy mantle black there hidden lie,
Light-shonning theft, and traitorous intent,
Abhorred bloodshed, and vile felony,
Shameful deceit, and danger imminent;
Foul horror, and eke hellish dreriment:
All these I wot in thy protection be,
And light do shonne, for fear of being shent:
For lightylike is loathed of them and thee,
And all that lewdness love, do hate the light to see.
For day discouers all dishonest ways,
And shows each thing, as it is indeed:
The praises of high God he fair displayes,
And his large bounty rightly does areed.
Days dearest children be the blessed seed,
Which darkness shall subdew, and heaven win:
Truth is his daughter; he her first did breed,
Most sacred virgin, without spot of sin.
Our life is day, but death with darkness does begin.
O when will day then turn to me again,
And bring with him his long expected light?
O Titan, haste to rear thy joyous waine:
Speed thee to spread abroad thy beams bright?
And chase away this too long lingering night,
Chase her away, from whence she came, to hell.
She, she it is, that has me done despite:
There let her with the damned spirits dwell,
And yield her room to day, that can it govern well.
Thus did the Prince that weary night outweare,
In restless anguish and unquiet pain:
And early, ere the morrow did vpreare
His deawy head out of the Ocean maine,
He up arose, as half in great disdain,
And clombe unto his steed. So forth he went,
With heavy look and lumpish pace, that plain
In him bewraid great grudge and maltalent:
His steed eke seemed t'apply his steps to his intent.
Cant. V.
Prince Arthur hears of Florimell:
three fosters Timias wound,
Belphebe finds him almost dead,
and reareth out of sownd.
WOnder it is to see, in diverse minds,
How diversely love does his pageants play,
And shows his power in variable kinds:
The bafer wit, whose idle thoughts always
Are wont to cleave unto the lowly clay,
It stirs up to sensual desire,
And in lewd sloth to wast his careless day:
But in brave sprite it kindles goodly fire,
That to all high desert and honor does aspire.
Ne suffers it uncomely idleness,
In his free thought to build her sluggish nest:
Ne suffers it thought of ungentleness,
Ever to creep into his noble breast,
But to the highest and the worthiest
Lifts it up, that else would lowly fall:
It lets not fall, it lets it not to rest:
It lets not scarce this Prince to breath at all,
But to his first poursuit him forward still does call.
Who long time wandered through the forest wide,
To find some issue thence, till that at last
He met a Dwarf, that seemed terrifyde
With some late peril, which he hardly past,
Or other accident, which him aghast;
Of whom he asked, whence he lately came,
And whither now he traveled so fast:
For sore he swat, and running through that same
Thick forest, was be scratcht, and both his feet nigh lame.
Panting for breath, and almost out of heart,
The Dwarf him answered, Sir, ill mote I stay
To tell the same. I lately did depart
From Faery court, where I have many a day
Served a gentle Lady of great sway,
And high account through out all Elfin land,
Who lately left the same, and took this way:
Her now I seek, and if ye understand
Which way she fared has, good Sir tell out of hand.
What mister wight (said he) and how arayd?
Royally clad (quoth he) in cloth of gold,
As meetest may beseem a noble maid;
Her fair locks in rich circlet be enrold,
And fairer wight did never Sun behold,
And on a Palfrey rides more white then snow,
Yet she her self is whiter manifold:
The surest sign, whereby ye may her know,
Is, that she is the fairest wight alive, I trow.
Now certes swain (said he) such one I ween,
Fast flying through this forest from her fo,
A foul ill favored foster, I have seen;
Her self, well as I might, I reskewd tho,
But could not stay; so fast she did foregoe,
Carried away with wings of speedy fear.
Ah dearest God (quoth he) that is great woe,
And wondrous ruth to all, that shall it hear.
But can ye read Sir, how I may her find, or where.
Perdy me lever were to weeten that,
(Said he) then ransom of the richest knight,
Or all the good that ever yet I gat:
But froward fortune, and too forward Night
Such happiness did, maulgre, to me spite,
And fro me rest both life and light atone.
But Dwarf aread, what is that Lady bright,
That through this forest wandreth thus alone;
For of her error strange I have great ruth and moan.
That Lady is (quoth he) where so she be,
The bountiest virgin, and most debonaire,
That ever living eye I ween did see;
Lives none this day, that may with her compare
In steadfast chastity and virtue rare,
The goodly ornaments of beauty bright;
And is ycleped Florimell the fair,
Fair Florimell beloved of a many a knight,
Yet she loves none but one, that Marinell is hight.
A Sea-nymphes son, that Marinell is hight,
Of my dear Dame is loved dearly well;
In other none, but him, she sets delight,
All her delight is set on Marinell;
But he sets naught at all by Florimell:
For Ladies love his mother long ygoe
Did him, they say, forwarne through sacred spell.
But fame now flies, that of a foreign foe
He is yslaine, which is the ground of all our woe.
Five days there be, since he (they say) was slain,
And four, since Florimell the Court for-went,
And vowed never to return again,
Till him alive or dead she did invent.
Therefore, fair Sir, for love of knighthood gent,
And honor of true Ladies, if ye may
By your good counsel, or bold hardiment,
Or succor her, or me direct the way;
Do one, or other good, I you most humbly pray.
So may you gain to you full great renown,
Of all good Ladies through the world so wide,
And happily in her heart find highest rowme,
Of whom ye seek to be most magnifide:
At least eternal meede shall you abide.
To whom the Prince; Dwarf, comfort to thee take,
For till thou tidings learn, what her betide,
I here auow thee never to forsake.
Ill wears he arms, that nill them use for Ladies sake.
So with the Dwarf he back returned again,
To seek his Lady, where he mote her find;
But by the way he greatly began complain
The want of his good Squire late left behind,
For whom he wondrous pensive grew in mind,
For douht of danger, which mote him betide;
For him he loved above all mankind,
Having him true and faithfall ever tried,
And bold, as ever Squire that waited by knights side.
Who all this while full hardly was assayd
Of deadly danger, which to him betid;
For whiles his Lord pursewd that noble Maid,
After that foster foul he fiercely rid,
To been avenged of the shame, he did
To that fair Damzell: Him he chaced long
Through the thick woods, wherein he would have hid
His shameful head from his auengement strong.
And often him threatened death for his outrageous wrong.
Nathlesse the villen sped himself so well,
Whether through swiftness of his speedy beast;
Or knowledge of those woods, where he did dwell,
That shortly he from danger was releast,
And out of sight escaped at the least;
Yet not escaped from the dew reward
Of his bad deeds, which daily he increast,
Ne ceased not, till him oppressed hard
The heavy plague, that for such leachours is prepared.
For soon as he was vanished out of sight,
His coward courage began emboldned be,
And cast t avenge him of that foul despite,
Which he had borne of his bold enimee.
Tho to his brethren came: for they were three
Ungracious children of one graceless sire,
And unto them complained, how that he
Had used been of that foolehardy Squire;
So them with bitter words he stird to bloody ire.
Forthwith themselves with their sad instruments
Of spoil and murder they began arm byliue,
And with him forth into the forest went,
To wreake the wrath, which he did erst revive
In their stern breasts, on him which late did drive
Their brother to reproach and shameful flight:
For they had vowed, that never he alive
Out of that forest should escape their might;
Vile rancour their rude hearts had filled with such despite.
Within that wood there was a covert glade,
Foreby a narrow foord, to them well known,
Through which it was uneath for wight to wade;
And now by fortune it was overflowed:
By that same way they knew that Squire unknown
Mote algates pass; for thy themselves they set
There in await, with thick woods over grown,
And all the while their malice they did whet
With cruel threats, his passage through the ford to let.
It fortuned, as they deuized had,
The gentle Squire came ryding that same way,
Vnweeting of their wile and treason bad,
And through the ford to passen did assay;
But that fierce foster, which late fled away,
Stoutly forth stepping on the further shore,
Him boldly bad his passage there to stay,
Till he had made amends, and full restore
For all the damage, which he had him done before.
With that at him a quiu'ring dart he threw,
With so fell force and villeinous despighte,
That through his haberieon the forkehead flew,
And through the linked mayles empierced quite,
But had no power in his soft flesh to bite:
That stroke the hardy Squire did sore displease,
But more that him he could not come to smite;
For by no means the high bank he could sease,
But labored long in that deep ford with vain disease.
And still the foster with his long bore-speare
Him kept from landing at his wished will;
Anon one sent out of the thicket near
Acruell shaft, headed with deadly ill,
And fethered with an unlucky quill;
The wicked steel stayed not, till it did light
In his left thigh, and deeply did it thrill:
Exceeding grief that wound in him empight,
But more that with his foes he could not come to fight.
At last through wrath and vengeance making way,
He on the bancke arrived with mickle pain,
Where the third brother him did sore assay,
And drove at him with all his might and maine
A forest bill, which both his hands did strain;
But warily he did avoid the blow,
And with his spear requited him again,
That both his sides were thrilled with the throw,
And a large stream of blood out of the wound did flow.
He tombling down, with gnashing teeth did bite
The bitter earth, and bad to let him in
Into the balefull house of endless night,
Where wicked ghosts do wail their former sin.
Tho began the battle freshly to begin;
For nathemore for that spectacle bad,
Did the other two their cruel vengeance blin,
But both attonce on both sides him bestad,
And load upon him laid, his life for to have had.
Tho when that villain he auiz'd, which late
Affrighted had the fairest Florimell,
Full of fires fury, and indignant hate,
To him he turned, and with rigor fell
Smote him so rudely on the Pannikell,
That to the chin he cleft his head in twain:
Down on the ground his carkas groueling fell;
His sinful soul with desperate disdain,
Out of her fleshly ferme fled to the place of pain.
That seeing now the only last of three,
Who with that wicked shaft him wounded had,
Trembling with horror, as that did foresee
The fearful end of his auengement sad,
Through which he follow should his brethren bad,
His bootelesse bow in feeble hand vpcaught,
And therewith shot an arrow at the lad;
Which faintly fluttring, scarce his helmet raught,
And glauncing fell to ground, but him annoyed naught.
With that he would have fled into the wood;
But Timias him lightly ouerhent,
Right as he entering was into the flood,
And struck at him with force so violent,
That headless him into the foord he sent:
The carkas with the stream was carried down,
But the head fell backward on the Continent.
So mischieffel upon the meaners crown;
They three be dead with shame, the Squire lives with renown.
He lives, but takes small joy of his renown;
For of that cruel wound he bled so sore,
That from his steed he fell in deadly swowne;
Yet still the blood forth gusht in so great store,
That he lay wallowd all in his own gore.
Now God thee keep, thou gentlest Squire alive,
Else shall thy loving Lord thee see no more,
But both of comfort him thou shall deprive,
And eke thy self of honor, which thou did atchiue.
Providence heavenly passes living thought,
And does for wretched men's relief make way;
For lo great grace or fortune thither brought
Comfort to him, that comfortless now lay.
In those same woods, ye well remember may,
How that a noble hunteresse did won,
She, that base Braggadochio did affray,
And made him fast out of the forest run;
Belphoebe was her name, as fair as Phoebus sun.
She on a day, as she pursewd the chase
Of some wild beast, which with her arrows keen
She wounded had, the same along did trace
By tract of blood, which she had freshly seen,
To have be sprinkled all the grassy green;
By the great pursue, which she there perceau'd,
Well hoped she the beast engor'd had been,
And made more have, the life to have bereaved:
But ah, her expectation greatly was deceau'd.
Shortly she came, whereas that woeful Squire
With blood deformed, lay in deadly swownd:
In whose fair eyes, like lamps of quenched fire,
The Crystal humor stood congealed rownd;
His locks, like faded leaves fallen to grownd,
Knotted with blood, in bounches rudely ran,
And his sweet lips, on which before that stownd
The bud of youth to blossom fair began,
Spoild of their rosy red, were woxen pale and wan.
Saw never living eye more heavy sight,
That could have made a rock of stone to rue,
Or riue in twain: which when that Lady bright
Besides all hope with melting eyes did view,
All suddeinly abasht she changed hew,
And with stern horror backward began to start:
But when she better him beheld, she grew
Full of soft passion and unwonted smart:
The point of pity perced through her tender heart.
Meekely she bowed down, to weete if life
Yet in his frosen members did remain,
And feeling by his pulses beating rife,
That the weak soul her seat did yet retain,
She cast to comfort him with busy pain:
His double folded neck she reard upright,
And rubd his temples, and each trembling vain;
His mayled haberieon she did vndight,
And from his head his heavy burganet did light,
Into the woods thenceforth in have she went,
To seek for herbs, that mote him remedy;
For she of herbs had great intendiment,
Taught of the Nymphe, which from her infancy
Her nourced had in true Nobility:
There, whether it divine Tobacco were,
Or Fanachaea, or Polygony,
She found, and brought it to her patient dear
Who all this while lay bleeding out his hart-bloud near.
The sovereign weed betwixt two marbles plain
She pownded small, and did in pieces bruze,
And then atweene her lilly hands twain,
Into his wound the juice thereof did scruze,
And round about, as she could well it vze,
The flesh therewith she suppled and did steep,
T'abate all spasme, and soke the swelling bruze,
And after having searched the intuse deep,
She with her scarf did bind the wound from cold to keep.
By this he had sweet life recur'd again,
And groaning inly deep, at last his eyes,
His watery eyes, drizling like deawy rain,
He up began lift toward the azure skies,
From whence descend all hopeless remedies:
Therewith he sighed, and turning him aside,
The goodly Maid full of diuinities,
And gifts of heavenly grace he by him spide,
Her bow and gilden quiver lying him beside.
Mercy dear Lord (said he) what grace is this,
That thou have showed to me sinful wight,
To send thine Angel from her bower of blis,
To comfort me in my distressed plight?
Angel, or Goddess do I call thee right?
What service may I do unto thee meet,
That have from darkness me returned to light,
And with thy heavenly salues and medicines sweet,
Have dressed my sinful wounds? I kiss thy blessed feet.
Thereat she blushing said, Ah gentle Squire,
Nor Goddess I, nor Angel, but the Maid,
And daughter of a woody Nymphe, desire
No service, but thy safety and aid;
Which if thou gain, I shall be well apayd.
We mortal wights, whose lives and fortunes be
To commun accidents still open laid,
Are bound with commun bond of frailtee,
To succor wretched wights, whom we captiued see.
By this her Damzels, which the former chase
Had undertaken after her arrived,
As did Belphoebe, in the bloody place,
And thereby deemd the beast had been deprived
Of life, whom late their Ladies arrow ryu'd:
For thy the bloody tract they follow fast,
And every one to run the swiftest stryu'd;
But two of them the rest far ouerpast,
And where their Lady was, arrived at the last.
Where when they saw that goodly boy, with blood
Defowled, and their Lady dress his wownd,
They wondered much, and shortly understood,
How him in deadly case their Lady fownd,
And reskewed out of the heavy stownd.
Eftsoons his warlike courser, which was strayd
Far in the woods, whiles that he lay in swownd,
She made those Damzels search, which being stayed,
They did him set thereon, and forthwith them conuayd.
Into that forest far they thence him led,
Where was their dwelling, in a pleasant glade,
With mountains round about environed,
And mighty woods, which did the valley shade,
And like a stately Theater it made,
Spreading it self into a spacious plain.
And in the midst a little river plaide
Emongst the pumy stones, which seemd to plain
With gentle murmr, that his course they did restrain.
Beside the same a dainty place there lay,
Planted with myrtle trees and laurels green,
In which the birds song many a lovely lay
Of gods high praise, and of their loves sweet teene,
As it an earthly Paradize had been:
In whose enclosed shadow there was pight
A fair Pauilion, scarcely to be seen,
The which was all within most richly dight,
That greatest Princes living it mote well delight.
Thither they brought that wounded Squire, and laid
In easy couch his feeble limbs to rest;
He rested him a while, and then the Maid
His ready wound with better salues new dressed;
Daily she dressed him, and did the best
His grievous hurt to garish, that she might,
That shortly she his dolor has redrest,
And his foul sore reduced to fair plight:
It she reduced, but himself destroyed quight.
O foolish Physic, and unfruitful pain,
That heales up one and makes another wound:
She his hurt thigh to him recur'd again,
But hurt his heart, the which before was sound,
Through an unwary dart, which did rebound
From her fair eyes and gracious countenance.
What boots it him from death to be unbound,
To be captiued in endless duraunce
Of sorrow and despair without aleggeaunce?
Still as his wound did gather, and grow hole,
So still his heart woxe sore, and health decayed:
Madness to save a part, and lose the whole.
Still whenas he beheld the heavenly Maid,
Whiles daily plasters to his wound she laid,
So still his Malady the more increast,
The whiles her matchless beauty him dismayed.
Ah God, what other could he do at least,
But love so fair a Lady, that his life releast?
Long while he strove in his courageous breast,
With reason dew the passion to subdew,
And love for to dislodge out of his nest:
Still when her excellencies he did view,
Her sovereign bounty, and celestial hew,
The same to love he strongly was constraind:
But when his mean estate he did renew,
He from such hardy boldness was restraind,
And of his lucklesse lot and cruel love thus plaind.
Unthankful wretch (said he) is this the meed,
With which her sovereign mercy thou do quight?
Thy life she saved by her gracious deed,
But thou do ween with villeinous despite,
To blot her honor, and her heavenly light.
Dye rather, dye, then so disloyally
Deem of her high desert, or seem so light:
Fair death it is to shonne more shame, to die:
Dye rather, die, then ever love disloyally.
But if to love disloyalty it be,
Shall I then hate her, that from deaths door
Me brought? ah far be such reproach fro me.
What can I less do, then her love therefore,
Since I her dew reward cannot restore:
Dye rather, dye, and dying do her serve,
Dying her serve, and living her adore;
Thy life she gave, thy life she does deserve:
Dye rather, dye, then ever from her service swerue.
But foolish boy, what boots thy service bace
To her, to whom the heavens do serve and sew?
Thou a mean Squire, of meek and lowly place,
She heavenly borne, and of celestial hew.
How then? of all love takes equal view:
And does not highest God vouchsafe to take
The love and service of the basest crew?
If she will not, dye meekly for her sake;
Dye rather, dye, then ever so fair love forsake.
Thus warreid he long time against his will,
Till that through weakness he was forced at last,
To yield himself unto the mighty ill:
Which as a victour proud, began ransack fast
His inward parts, and all his entrayles wast,
That neither blood in face, nor life in heart
It left, but both did quite dry up, and blast;
As percing leuin, which the inner part
Of every thing consumes, and calcineth by art.
Which seeing fair Belphoebe, began to fear,
Least that his wound were inly well not healed,
Or that the wicked steel empoysned were:
Little she weend, that love he close concealed;
Yet still he wasted, as the snow congealed,
When the bright sun his beams thereon does beat;
Yet never he his heart to her revealed,
But rather chose to dye for sorrow great,
Then with dishonorable terms her to entreat.
She gracious Lady, yet no pains did spare,
To do him ease, or do him remedy:
Many Restoratiues of virtues rare,
And costly Cordialles she did apply,
To mitigate his stubborn mallady:
But that sweet Cordial, which can restore
A loue-sick heart, she did to him envy;
To him, and to all th'vnworthy world forlore
She did envy that sovereign salve, in secret store.
That dainty Rose, the daughter of her Morn,
More dear then life she tendered, whose flower
The girlond of her honor did adorn:
Ne suffered she the Middayes scorching power,
Ne the sharp Northern wind thereon to shower,
But lapped up her silken leaves most chair,
When so the froward sky began to lowre:
But soon as calmed was the Crystal air,
She did it fair dispred, and let to flourish fair.
Eternal God in his almighty power,
To make ensample of his heavenly grace,
In Paradize whilome did plant this flower,
Whence he it fetched out of her native place,
And did in stock of earthly flesh enrace,
That mortal men her glory should admire
In gentle Ladies breast, and bounteous race
Of woman kind it fairest flower does spire,
And bears fruit of honor and all chaste desire.
Fair ympes of beauty, whose bright shining beams
Adorn the world with like to heavenly light,
And to your wills both royalties and Realms
Subdew, through conquest of your wondrous might,
With this fair flower your goodly girlonds dight,
Of chastity and virtue virginal,
That shall embellish more your beauty bright,
And crown your heads with heavenly coronall,
Such as the Angels wear before Gods tribunal.
To your fair selves a fair ensample frame,
Of this fair virgin, this Belphoebe fair,
To whom in perfect love, and spotless fame
Of chastity, none living may compaire:
Ne poysnous Envy justly can empaire
The praise of her fresh flowring Maidenhead;
For thy she stands on the highest staire
Of th'honorable stage of womanhead,
That Ladies all may follow her ensample dead.
In so great praise of steadfast chastity,
Nathlesse she was so courteous and kind,
Tempred with grace, and goodly modesty,
That seemed those two virtues strove to find
The higher place in her Heroic mind:
So striving each did other more augment,
And both encreast the praise of woman kind,
And both encreast her beauty excellent;
So all did make in her a perfect complement.
Cant. VI.
The birth of fair Belphoebe and
Of Amoret is told.
The Gardins of Adonis fraught
With pleasures manifold.
WEll may I ween, fair Ladies, all this while
Ye wonder, how this noble Damozell
So great perfections did in her compile,
Since that in saluage forests she did dwell,
So far from court and royal Citadell,
The great schoolmistresse of all curtesy:
Seems that such wild woods should far expel
All civil usage and gentility,
And gentle sprite deforme with rude rusticity.
But to this fair Belphoebe in her berth
The heavens so favorable were and free,
Looking with myld aspect upon the earth,
In the Horoscope of her natiuitee,
That all the gifts of grace and chastitee
On her they poured forth of plenteous horn;
Jove laughed on Venus from his sovereign see,
And Phoebus with fair beams did her adorn,
And all the Graces rockt her cradle being borne.
Her berth was of the womb of Morning dew,
And her conception of the joyous Prime,
And all her whole creation did her show
Pure and unspotted from all loathly crime,
That is ingenerate in fleshly slime.
So was this virgin borne, so was she bred,
So was she trained up from time to time,
In all chaste virtue, and true bounti-hed
Till to her dew perfection she was ripened.
Her mother was the fair Chrysogonee,
The daughter of Amphisa, who by race
A Faerie was, yborne of high degree,
She bore Belphaebe, she bore in like case
Fair Amoretta in the second place:
These two were twins, and twixt them two did share
The heritage of all celestial grace.
That all the rest it seemed they robbed bare
Of bounty, and of beauty, and all virtues rare.
It were a goodly story, to declare,
By what strange accident fair Chrysogone
Conceived these infants, and how them she bare,
In this wild forest wandering all alone,
After she had nine months fulfild and gone:
For not as other wemens commune brood,
They were enwombed in the sacred throne
Of her chaste body, nor with commune food,
As other wemens babes, they sucked vital blood.
But wondrously they were begot, and bred
Through influence of th'heauens fruitful ray,
As it in antique books is mentioned.
It was upon a Som^ers shynie day,
When Titan fair his beams did display,
In a fresh fountain, far from all men's view,
She bathed her breast, the boiling heat t'allay;
She bathed with roses red, and violets blew,
And all the sweetest flowers, that in the forest grew.
Till faint through irksome weariness, adowne
Upon the grassie ground her self she laid
To sleep, the whiles a gentle slombring swowne
Upon her fell all naked bare displayed;
The sunne-beames bright upon her body played,
Being through former bathing mollifide,
And pierst into her womb, where they embayd
With so sweet sense and secret power vnspide,
That in her pregnant flesh they shortly fructifide.
Miraculous may seem to him, that reads
So strange ensample of conception;
But reason teaches that the fruitful seades
Of all things living, through impression
Of the sunbeames in moist complexion,
Do life conceive and quickened are by kind:
So after Nilus inundation,
Infinite shapes of creature men do find,
Informed in the mud, on which the Sun has shynd.
Great father he of generation
Is rightly called, the author of life and light;
And his fair sister for creation
Ministers matter fit, which tempred right
With heat and humor, breeds the living wight.
So sprung these twins in womb of Chrysogone,
Yet wist she naught thereof, but sore affright,
Wondered to see her belly so vpblone,
Which still increast, till she her term had full outgone.
Whereof conceiving shame and foul disgrace,
Albe her guiltless conscience her cleard,
She sled into the wilderness a space,
Till that vnweeldy burden she had reard,
And shund dishonor, which as death she feared:
Where weary of long travel, down to rest
Her self she set, and comfortably cheard;
There a sad cloud of sleep her ouerkest,
And seized every sense with sorrow sore oppressed.
It fortuned, fair Venus having lost
Her little son, the winged god of love,
Who for some light displeasure, which him crossed,
Was from her fled, as flit as ayerie Dove,
And left her blisfull bower of joy above,
(So from her often he had fled away,
When she for ought him sharply did reprove,
And wandered in the world in strange array,
Disguised in thousand shapes, that none might him bewray.
Him for to seek, she left her heavenly house,
The house of goodly forms and fair aspects,
Whence all the world deriues the glorious
Features of beauties, and all shapes select,
With which high God his workmanship has decked;
And searched every way, through which his wings
Had borne him, or his tract she mote detect:
She promised kisses sweet, and sweeter things
Unto the man, that of him tidings to her brings.
First she him sought in Court, where most he used
Whylome to haunt, but there she found him not;
But many there she found, which sore accused
His falsehood, and with foul infamous blot
His cruel deeds and wicked wyles did spot:
Ladies and Lords she every where mote hear
Complaining, how with his empoysned shot
Their woeful hearts he wounded had whyleare,
And so had left them languishing twixt hope and fear.
She then the Cities sought from gate to gate,
And every one did ask, did he him see;
And every one her answered, that too late
He had him seen, and felt the cruelty
Of his sharp darts and whot artillery;
And every one threw forth reproaches rife
Of his mischievous deeds, and said, That he
Was the disturber of all civil life,
The enemy of peace, and author of all strife.
Then in the country she abroad him sought,
And in the rural cottages inquired,
Where also many plaints to her were brought,
How he their heedlesse hearts with love had fyred,
And his false venim through their veins inspyred;
And eke the gentle shepherd swaynes, which sat
Keeping their fleecie flocks, as they were hired,
She sweetly heard complain, both how and what
Her son had to them done; yet she did smile thereat.
But when in none of all these she him got,
She began auize, where else he mote him hyde:
At last she her bethought, that she had not
Yet sought the saluage woods and forests wide,
In which full many lovely Nymphs abide,
Among whom might be, that he did closely lie,
Or that the love of some of them him tide:
For thy she thither cast her course t'apply,
To search the secret haunts of Dianes company.
Shortly unto the wastefull woods she came,
Whereas she found the Goddess with her crew,
After late chase of their embrewed game,
Sitting beside a fountain in a rue,
Some of them washing with the liquid dew
From off their dainty limbs the dustie sweat,
And soil which did deforme their lively hew;
Others lay shaded from the scorching heat;
The rest upon her person gave attendance great.
She having hong upon a bough on high
Her bow and painted quiver, had vnlaste
Her silver buskins from her nimble thigh,
And her lancke loins ungirt, and breasts vnbraste,
After her heat the breathing cold to taste;
Her golden locks, that late in tresses bright
Embreaded were for hindering of her haste,
Now loose about her shoulders hong vndight,
And were with sweet Ambrosia all be sprinkled light.
Soon as she Venus saw behind her back,
She was ashamed to be so loose surprised
And woxe half wroth against her damzels flacke,
That had another thereof before auized,
But suffered her so carelessly disguized
Be overtaken. Soon her garments loose
Vpgath'ring, in her bosom she comprised,
Well as she might, and to the Goddess rose,
Whiles all her Nymphs did like a girlond her enclose.
Goodly she began fair Cytherea greet,
And shortly asked her, what cause her brought
Into that wilderness for her unmeet,
From her sweet bowres, and beds with pleasures fraught:
That suddein change she strange adventure thought.
To whom half weeping, she thus answered,
That she her dearest son Cupido sought,
Who in his frowardness from her was fled;
That she repented sore, to have him angered.
Thereat Diana began to smile, in scorn
Of her vain plaint, and to her scoffing said;
Great pity sure, that ye be so forlorn
Of your gay son, that gives ye so good aid
To your disports: ill mote ye been apayd.
But she was more engrieued, and replide;
Fair sister, ill beseemes it to upbraid
A doleful heart with so disdainful pride;
The like that mine, may be your pain another tide.
As you in woods and wanton wilderness
Your glory set, to chase the saluage beasts,
So my delight is all in ioyfulnesse,
In beds, in bowres, in banckets, and in feasts:
And ill becomes you with your lofty creasts,
To scorn the joy, that Jove is glad to seek;
We both are bound to follow heavens beheasts,
And tend our charges with obeisance meek:
Spare, gentle sister, with reproach my pain to eeke.
And tell me, if that ye my son have heard,
To lurk emongst your Nymphs in secret wize;
Or keep their cabins: much I am affeard,
Least he like one of them him self disguize,
And turn his arrows to their exercize:
So may he long himself full easy hide:
For he is fair and fresh in face and guize,
As any Nymph (let not it be enuyde.)
So saying every Nymph full narrowly she eyde.
But Phoebe therewith sore was angered,
And sharply said; Go Dame, go seek your boy,
Where you him lately left, in Mars his bed;
He comes not here, we scorn his foolish joy,
Ne lend we leisure to his idle toy:
But if I catch him in this company,
By Stygian lake I vow, whose sad annoy
The Gods do dread, he dearly shall abye:
I Will clip his wanton wings, that he no more shall fly.
Whom when as Venus saw so sore displeased,
She inly sorry was, and began relent,
What she had said: so her she soon appeased,
With sugared words and gentle blandishment,
From which a fountain from her sweet lips went,
And welled goodly forth, that in short space
She was well pleased, and forth her damzels sent,
Through all the woods, to search from place to place,
If any tract of him or tidings they mote trace.
To search the God of love, her Nymphs she sent
Throughout the wandering forest every where:
And after them her self eke with her went
To seek the fugitive, both far and nere,
So long they sought, till they arrived were
In that same shadie covert, whereas lay
Fair Crysogone in slombry trance whilere:
Who in her sleep (a wondrous thing to say)
Unawares had borne two babes, as fair as springing day.
Unawares she them conceived, unawares she bore:
She bore withouten pain, that she conceived
Withouten pleasure: ne her need implore
Lucinaes aid: which when they both perceived,
They were through wonder nigh of sense bereaved,
And gazing each on other, naught bespake:
At last they both agreed, her seeming grieved
Out of her heavy swowne not to awake,
But from her loving side the tender babes to take.
Up they them took, each one a babe vptooke,
And with them carried, to be fostered;
Dame Phoebe to a Nymph her babe betook,
To be vpbrought in perfect Maydenhed,
And of her self her name Belphoebe red:
But Venus hers hence far away conuayd,
To be vpbrought in goodly womanhed,
And in her little loves stead, which was strayd,
Her Amoretta called, to comfort her dismayed.
She brought her to her joyous Paradize,
Where most she wonnes, when she on earth does dwell.
So fair a place, as Nature can deuize:
Whether in Paphos, or Cytheron hill,
Or it in Gnidus be, I wot not well;
But well I wot by trial, that this same
All other pleasant places does excel,
And called is by her lost lovers name,
The Gardin of Adonis, far renowmd by fame.
In that same Gardin all the goodly flowers,
Wherewith dame Nature does her beautify,
And decks the girlonds of her paramoures,
Are fetched: there is the first seminary
Of all things, that are borne to live and die,
According to their kinds. Long work it were,
Here to account the endless pregenie
Of all the weeds, that bud and blossom there;
But so much as does need, must needs be counted here.
It sited was in fruitful soil of old,
And girt in with two walls on either side;
The one of iron, the other of bright gold,
That none might thorough break, nor ouer-stride:
And double gates it had, which opened wide,
By which both in and out men moten pas;
The One fair and fresh, the other old and dride:
Old Genius the porter of them was,
Old Genius, the which a double nature has.
He lets in, he lets out to wend,
All that to come into the world desire;
A thousand thousand naked babes attend
About him day and night, which do require,
That he with fleshly weeds would them attire:
Such as him list, such as eternal fate
Ordained has, he clothes with sinful mire,
And sends forth to live in mortal state,
Till they again return back by the hinder gate.
After that they again returned been,
They in that Gardin planted be again;
And grow a fresh, as they had never seen
Fleshly corruption, nor mortal pain.
Some thousand years so done they there remaire;
And then of him are clad with other hew,
Or sent into the chaungefull world again,
Till thither they return, where first they grew:
So like a wheel around they run from old to new.
Ne needs there Gardener to set, or sow,
To plant of prune: for of their own accord
All things, as they created were, do grow,
And yet remember well the mighty word,
Which first was spoken by The Almighty lord,
That bad them to increase and multiply:
Ne do they need with water of the ford,
Or of the clouds to moysten their roots dry;
For in themselves eternal moisture they imply.
Infinite shapes of creatures there are bred,
And uncouth forms, which none yet ever knew,
And every sort is in a sundry bed
Set by itself, and ranckt in comely rue:
Some fit for reasonable souls t'indew,
Some made for beasts, some made for birds to wear,
And all the fruitful spawne of fishes hew
In endless rancks along enraunged were,
That seemed the Ocean could not contain them there.
Daily they grow, and daily forth are sent
Into the world, it to replenish more;
Yet is the stock not lessened, nor spent,
But still remains in everlasting store,
As it at first created was of yore.
For in the wide womb of the world there lies,
In hateful darkness and in deep horrore,
An huge eternal Chaos, which supplies
The substances of natures fruitful progenyes.
All things from thence do their first being fetch,
And borrow matter, whereof they are made,
Which when as form and feature it does ketch,
Becomes a body, and does then invade
The state of life, out of the griefly shade.
That substance is eterne, and bideth so,
Ne when the life decays, and form does fade,
Does it consume, and into nothing go,
But changed is, and often altered to and fro.
The subtance is not changed, nor altered,
But the only form and outward fashion;
For every substance is conditioned
To change her hew, and sundry forms to don,
Meet for her temper and complexion:
For forms are variable and decay,
By course of kind, and by occasion;
And that fair flower of beauty fades away,
As does the lilly fresh before the sunny ray.
Great enemy to it, and to all the rest,
That in the Gardin of Adonis springs,
Is wicked Time, who with his scyth addressed,
Does mow the flowring herbs and goodly things,
And all their glory to the ground down flings,
Where they do wither, and are fowly mard:
He flies about, and with his flaggy wings
Beats down both leaves and buds without regard,
Ne ever pity may relent his malice hard.
Yet pity often did the gods relent,
To see so fair things mard, and spoiled quight:
And their great mother Venus did lament
The loss of her dear brood, her dear delight;
Her heart was pierst with pity at the sight,
When walking through the Gardin, them she spyde,
Yet no'te she find redress for such despite.
For all that lives, is subject to that law:
All things decay in time, and to their end do draw.
But were it not, that Time their troubler is,
All that in this delightful Gardin grows,
Should happy be, and have immortal blis:
For here all plenty, and all pleasure flows,
And sweet love gentle fits emongst them throws,
Without fell rancor, or fond gealosie;
Franckly each paramour his leman knows,
Each bird his mate, ne any does envy
Their goodly meriment, and gay felicity.
There is continual spring, and harvest there
Continual, both meeting at one time:
For both the boughs do laughing blossoms bear,
And with fresh colors deck the wanton Prime,
And eke attonce the heavy trees they clime,
Which seem to labor under their fruits lode:
The whiles the joyous birds make their pastime
Emongst the shadie leaves, their sweet abode,
And their true loves without suspicion tell abroad.
Right in the midst of that Paradise,
There stood a stately Mount, on whose round top
A gloomy grove of myrtle trees did rise,
Whose shadie boughs sharp steel did never lop,
Nor wicked beasts their tender buds did crop,
But like a girlond compassed the hight,
And from their fruitful sides sweet gum did drop,
That all the ground with precious deaw bedight,
Threw forth most dainty odours, and most sweet delight.
And in the thickest covert of that shade,
There was a pleasant arbor, not by art,
But of the trees own inclination made,
Which knitting their rank branches part to part,
With wanton yuie twyne entrayld athwart,
And Eglantine, and Caprifole among,
Fashiond above within their inmost part,
That nether Phoebus beams could through the^ throng,
Nor Aeolus sharp blast could work them any wrong.
And all about grew every sort of flower,
To which sad lovers were transformd of yore;
Fresh Hyacinthus, Phoebus paramoure,
Foolish Narcisse, that likes the watery shore,
Sad Amaranthus, made a slowre but late,
Sad Amaranthus, in whose purple gore
Me seems I see Amyntas wretched fate,
To whom sweet Poets verse has given endless date.
There wont fair Venus often to enjoy
Her dear Adonis joyous company,
And reap sweet pleasure of the wanton boy;
There yet, some say, in secret he does ly,
Lapped in flowers and precious spycery,
By her hid from the world, and from the skill
Of Stygian Gods, which do her love envy;
But she her self, when ever that she will,
Possesses him, and of his sweetness takes her fill.
And sooth it seems they say: for he may not
For ever die, and ever buried be
In balefull night, where all things are forgot;
All be he subject to mortality,
Yet is eterne in mutabilitie,
And by succession made perpetual,
Transformed often, and changed diversely:
For him the Father of all forms they call;
Therefore needs mote he live, that living gives to all.
There now he lives in eternal blis,
Ioying his goddess, and of her enjoyed:
Ne fears he henceforth that foe of his,
Which with his cruel tuske him deadly cloyd:
For that wild Bore, the which him once annoyd,
She firmly has emprisoned for ay,
That her sweet love his malice mote avoid,
In a strong rocky Cave, which is they say,
Hewn underneath that Mount, that none him losen may.
There now he lives in everlasting joy,
With many of the Gods in company,
Which thither haunt, and with the winged boy
Sporting himself in safe felicity:
Who when he has with spoils and cruelty
Ransackt the world, and in the woeful hearts
Of many wretches set his triumphs hye,
Thither resorts, and laying his sad darts
Aside, with fair Adonis plays his wanton parts.
And his true love fair Psyche with him plays,
Fair Psyche to him lately reconcyld,
After long troubles and unmeet vpbrayes,
With which his mother Venus her reuyld,
And eke himself her cruelly exyld:
But now in steadfast love and happy state
She with him lives, and has him borne a child,
Pleasure, that does both gods and men aggrate,
Pleasure, the daughter of Cupid and Psyche late.
Hither great Venus brought this infant fair,
The younger daughter of Chrysogonee,
And unto Psyche with great trust and care
Committed her, yfostered to be,
And trained up in true feminitee.
Who no less carefully her tendered,
Then her own daughter Pleasure, to whom she
Made her companion, and her lessoned
In all the lore of love, and goodly womanhead.
In which when she to perfect ripeness grew,
Of grace and beauty noble Paragone,
She brought her forth into the worlds view,
To be th'ensample of true love alone,
And Lodestarre of all chaste affectione,
To all fair Ladies, that do live on ground.
To Faery court she came, where many one
Admyrd her goodly haueour, and found
His feeble heart wide launched with loves cruel wound.
But she to none of them her love did cast,
Save to the noble knight Sir Scudamore,
To whom her loving heart she linked fast
In fathfull love, to abide for evermore,
And for his dearest sake endured sore,
Sore trouble of an heinous enemy;
Who her would forced have to have forlore
Her former love, and steadfast loialty,
As ye may elsewhere read that ruefull history.
But well I ween, ye first desire to learn,
What end unto that fearful Damozell,
Which fled so fast from that same foster stearne,
Whom with his brethren Timias slew, befell:
That was to weet, the goodly Florimell;
Who wandering for to seek her lover dear,
Her lover dear, her dearest Marinell,
Into misfortune fell, as ye did hear,
And from Prince Arthur fled with wings of idle fear.
Cant. VII.
The witches son loves Florimell:
she flies, he faines to die.
Satyrane saues the Squire of Dames
from Giants tyranny.
LIke as an Hynd forth singled from the heard,
That has escaped from a ravenous beast,
Yet flies away of her own feet affeard,
And every leaf, that shakes with the least
Murmr of wind, her terror has encreast;
So fled fair Florimell from her vain fear,
Long after she from peril was releast:
Each shade she saw, and each noise she did hear,
Did seem to be the same, which she escapt whyleare.
All that same evening she in flying spent,
And all that night her course continewed:
Ne did she let dull sleep once to relent,
Nor weariness to slack her have, but fled
Ever alike, as if her former dred
Were hard behind, her ready to arrest:
And her white Palfrey having conquered
The maistring raines out of her weary wrest,
Perforce her carried, where ever he thought best.
So long as breath, and hable puissance
Did native courage unto him supply,
His pace he freshly forward did advance,
And carried her beyond all ieopardy,
But naught that wants rest, can long aby.
He having through incessant travel spent
His force, at last perforce a down did ly,
Ne foot could further move: The Lady gent
Thereat was suddein struck with great astonishment.
And forced t'alight, on foot mote algates fare,
A traveler unwonted to such way:
Need teaches her this lesson hard and rare,
That fortune all in equal lance does sway,
And mortal miseries does make her play.
So long she traveled, till at length she came
To an hills side, which did to her bewray
A little valley, subject to the same,
All couerd with thick woods, that quite it overcame.
Through the tops of the high trees she did descry
A little smoke, whose vapor thin and light,
Reeking aloft, vprolled to the sky:
Which, cheerful sign did send unto her sight,
That in the same did won some living wight.
Estsoones her steps she thereunto applyde,
And came at last in weary wretched plight
Unto the place, to which her hope did guide,
To find some refuge there, and rest her weary side.
There in a gloomy hollow glen she found
A little cottage, built of sticks and reeds
In homely wize, and wald with sods around,
In which a witch did dwell, in loathly weeds,
And wilful want, all careless of her needs;
So choosing solitary to abide,
Far from all neighbors, that her deuilish deeds
And hellish arts from people she might hide,
And hurt far off unknown, whom ever she enuide.
The Damzell there arriving entered in;
Where sitting on the flore the Hag she found,
Busy (as seemed) about some wicked gin:
Who soon as she beheld that sudde in stound,
Lightly vpstarted from the dustie ground,
And with fell look and hollow deadly gaze
Stared on her awhile, as one astound,
Ne had one word to speak, for great amaze.
But showed by outward signs, that dread her sense did daze.
At last turning her fear to foolish wrath,
She asked, what devil had her thither brought,
And who she was, and what unwonted path
Had guided her, vnwelcomed, unsought?
To which the Damzell full of doubtful thought,
Her mildly answered; Beldame be not wroth
With silly Virgin by adventure brought
Unto your dwelling, ignorant and loath,
That crave but rowme to rest, while tempest ouerblo'th.
With that adowne out of her Crystal eyne
Few trickling tears she softly forth let fall,
That like two Orient pearls, did purely shine
Upon her snowy cheek; and therewithal
She sighed soft, that none so bestiall,
Nor saluage heart, but ruth of her sad plight
Would make to melt, or pitteously appall;
And that vile Hag, all were her whole delight
In mischief, was much moved at so pitteous sight.
And began recomfort her in her rude wise,
With womanish compassion of her plaint,
Wiping the tears from her suffused eyes,
And bidding her sit down, to rest her faint
And weary limbs a while. She nothing quaint
Nor s'deignfull of so homely fashion,
Since brought she was now to so hard constraint,
Sat down upon the dusty ground anon,
As glad of that small rest, as Bird of tempest gone.
Tho began she gather up her garments rent,
And her loose locks to dight in order dew,
With golden wreath and gorgeous ornament;
Whom such whenas the wicked Hag did view,
She was astonished at her heavenly hew,
And doubted her to deem an earthly wight,
But or some Goddess, or of Dianes crew,
And thought her to adore with humble spright;
To Adore thing so divine as beauty, were but right.
This wicked woman had a wicked son,
The comfort of her age and weary days,
A laesie loord, for nothing good to done,
But stretched forth in idleness always,
Ne ever cast his mind to covet praise,
Or ply him self to any honest trade,
But all the day before the sunny rays
He used to slug, or sleep in slothful shade:
Such laesinesse both lewd and poor attonce him made.
He coming home at vndertime, there found
The fairest creature, that he ever saw,
Sitting beside his mother on the ground;
The sight whereof did greatly him adaw,
And his base thought with terror and with aw
So inly smot, that as one, which had gazed
On the bright Sun unawares, does soon withdraw
His feeble eyne, with too much brightness dazed;
So stared he on her, and stood long while amazed.
Softly at last he began his mother ask,
What mister wight that was, and whence derived,
That in so strange disguizement there did mask,
And by what accident she there arrived:
But she, as one nigh of her wits deprived,
With naught but ghastly looks him answered,
Like to a ghost, that lately is revived
From Stygian shores, where late it wandered;
So both at her, and each at other wondered.
But the fair Virgin was so meek and mild,
That she to them vouchsafed to embace
Her goodly port, and to their senses vild,
Her gentle speech applide, that in short space
She grew familiare in that desert place.
During which time, the Chorle through her so kind
And curteise use conceived affection bace,
And cast to love her in his brutish mind,
No love, but brutish lust, that was so beastly tind.
Closely the wicked flame his bowels brent,
And shortly grew into outrageous fire;
Yet had he not the heart, nor hardiment,
As unto her to utter his desire;
His caytiue thought durst not so high aspire,
But with soft sighs, and lovely semblaunces,
He ween'd that his affection entire
She should aread; many resemblaunces
To her he made, and many kind remembraunces.
Often from the forest wildings he did bring,
Whose sides empurpled were with smiling red,
And often young birds, which he had taught to sing
His mistress praises, sweetly caroled,
Girlonds of flowers sometimes for her fair head
He fine would dight; sometimes the squirell wild
He brought to her in bands, as conquered
To be her thrall, his fellow servant vild;
All which, she of him took with countenance meek and mild.
But past awhile, when she fit season saw
To leave that desert mansion, she cast
In secret wize her self thence to withdraw,
For fear of mischief, which she did forecast
Might be the witch or that her son compast:
Her weary Palfrey closely, as she might,
Now well recovered after long repast,
In his proud furnitures she freshly dight,
His late miswandred ways now to remeasure right.
And early ere the dawning day appeard,
She forth issewed, and on her journey went;
She went in peril, of each noise affeard,
And of each shade, that did it self present,
For still she feared to be ouerhent,
Of that vile hag, or her uncivil son:
Who when too late awaking, well they kent,
That their fair guest was gone, they both begone
To make exceeding moan, as they had been undone.
But that lewd lover did the most lament
For her depart, that ever man did hear;
He knocked his breast with desperate intent,
And scratcht his face, and with his teeth did tear
His rugged flesh, and rent his ragged hear:
That his sad mother seeing his sore plight,
Was greatly woe begone, and began to fear,
Least his frail senses were emperisht quight,
And love to frenzy turned, since love is frantic hight.
All ways she sought, him to restore to plight,
With herbs, with charms, with counsel, and with tears,
But tears, nor charms, nor herbs, nor counsel might
Assuage the fury, which his entrails tears:
So strong is passion, that no reason hears.
Tho when all other helps she saw to fail,
She turned her self back to her wicked leares
And by her deuilish arts thought to prevail,
To bring her back again, or work her final bale.
Eftsoons out of her hidden cave she called
An hideous beast, of horrible aspect,
That could the stoutest courage have appald;
Monstrous mishapt, and all his back was spect
With thousand spots of colors queint elect,
Thereto so swift, that it all beasts did pas:
Like never yet did living eye detect;
But likest it to an Hyena was,
That feeds on women's flesh, as others feed on gras.
It forth she called, and gave it straight in charge,
Through thick and thin her to pursew apace,
Ne once to stay to rest, or breath at large,
Till her he had attaind, and brought in place,
Or quite deuourd her beauties scornful grace.
The Monster swift as word, that from her went,
Went forth in have, and did her footing trace
So sure and swiftly, through his perfect sent,
And passing speed, that shortly he her ouerhent.
Whom when the fearful Damzell nigh espide,
No need to bid her fast away to fly;
That ugly shape so sore her terrifide,
That it she shund no less, then dread to die,
And her flit Palfrey did so well apply
His nimble feet to her conceived fear,
That whilst his breath did strength to him supply,
From peril free he her away did bear:
But when his force began fail, his pace began wex areare.
Which whenas she perceived, she was dismayed
At that same last extremity full sore,
And of her safety greatly grew afraid;
And now she began approach to the sea shore,
As it befell, that she could fly no more,
But yield her self to spoil of greediness.
Lightly she leaped, as a wight forlore,
From her dull horse, in desperate distress,
And to her feet betook her doubtful sickernesse.
Not half so fast the wicked Myrrha fled
From dread of her revenging fathers hond:
Nor half so fast to save her maidenhed,
Fled fearful Daphne on the AEgaean strond,
As Florimell fled from that Monster yond,
To reach the sea, ere she of him were raught:
For in the sea to drown her self she fond,
Rather then of the tyrant to be caught:
Thereto fear gave her wings, and need her courage taught.
It fortuned (high God did so ordain)
As she arrived on the roaring shore,
In mind to leap into the mighty maine,
A little boat lay houing her before,
In which there slept a fisher old and pore,
The whiles his nets were drying on the sand:
Into the same she leapt, and with the ore
Did thrust the shallop from the floting strand:
So safety found at sea, which she found not at land.
The Monster ready on the pray to sease,
Was of his forward hope deceived quight;
Ne durst assay to wade the perlous seas,
But greedily long gaping at the sight,
At last in vain was forced to turn his flight,
And tell the idle tidings to his Dame:
Yet to avenge his deuilish despite,
He set upon her Palfrey tired lame,
And slew him cruelly, ere any reskew came.
And after having him embowelled,
To fill his bellish gorge, it chaunst a knight
To pass that way, as forth he traveled;
It was a goodly Swain, and of great might,
As ever man that bloody field did fight;
But in vain sheows, that wont young knights bewitch,
And courtly services took no delight,
But rather ioyd to be, then seemen fich:
For both to be and seem to him was labor lich.
It was to weete the good Sir Satyrane,
That raungd abroad to seek adventures wild,
As was his wont in forest, and in plain;
He was all armd in rugged steel vnfilde,
As in the smoky forge it was compilde,
And in his Scutchin bore a Satyrs head:
He coming present, where the Monster vilde
Upon that milke-white Palfreyes carkas fed,
Unto his reskew ran, and greedily him sped.
There well perceived he, that it was the horse,
Whereon fair Florimell was wont to ride,
That of that feend was rent without remorse:
Much feared he, least ought did ill betide
To that fair Maid, the flower of women's pride;
For her he dearly loved, and in all
His famous conquests highly magnifide:
Besides her golden girdle, which did fall
From her in flight, he found, that did him sore apall.
Full of sad fear, and doubtful agony,
Fiercely he flew upon that wicked feend,
And with huge strokes, and cruel battery
Him forced to leave his pray, for to attend
Him self from deadly danger to defend:
Full many wounds in his corrupted flesh
He did engraue, and muchell blood did spend,
Yet might not do him dye, but aye more fresh
And fierce he still appeard, the more he did him thresh,
He wist not, how him to despoile of life,
Ne how to win the wished victory,
Since him he saw still stronger grow through strife,
And him self weaker through infirmity;
Greatly he grew enraged, and furiously
Hurling his sword away, he lightly lept
Upon the beast, that with great cruelty
Rored, and raged to be vnder-kept:
Yet he perforce him held, and strokes upon him hept.
As he that strives to stop a suddein flood,
And in strong banckes his violence enclose,
Forces it swell above his wonted mood,
And largely ouerflow the fruitful plain,
That all the country seems to be a Maine,
And the rich furrows flote, all quite fordonne:
The woeful husbandman does loud complain,
To see his whole years labor lost so soon,
For which to God he made so many an idle boon,
So him he held, and did through might amate:
So long he held him, and him bet so long,
That at the last his fierceness began abate,
And meekely stoup unto the victour strong:
Who to avenge the implacable wrong,
Which he supposed done to Florimell,
Sought by all means his dolor to prolong,
Since dint of steel his carcas could not quell:
His maker with her charms had framed him so well.
The golden ribband, which that virgin wore
About her sclender wast, he took in hand,
And with it bound the beast, that loud did rore
For great despite of that unwonted band,
Yet dared not his victour to withstand,
But trembled like a lamb, fled from the pray,
And all the way him followd on the strand,
As he had long been learned to obey;
Yet never learned he such service, till that day.
Thus as he led the Beast along the way,
He spide far off a mighty Giauntesle,
Fast flying on a Courser dapled gray,
From a bold knight, that with great hardiness
Her hard pursewd, and sought for to suppress;
She bore before her lap a doleful Squire,
Lying athwart her horse in great distress,
Fast bounden hand and foot with cords of wire,
Whom she did mean to make the thrall of her desire.
Which whenas Satyrane beheld, in have
He left his captive Beast at liberty,
And crossed the nearest way, by which he cast
Her to encounter, ere she passed by:
But she the way shund nathemore for thy,
But forward gallopt fast; which when he spyde,
His mighty spear he couched warily,
And at her ran: she having him descryde,
Her self to fight addressed, and threw her lode aside.
Like as a Goshauke, that in foot does bear
A trembling Culuer, having spide on hight
An Egle, that with plumy wings does sheare
The subtle air, stouping with all his might,
The quarrey throws to ground with fell despite,
And to the battle does her self prepare:
So ran the Geauntesse unto the fight;
Her fiery eyes with furious sparks did stare,
And with blasphemous bannes high God in pieces tare.
She caught in hand an huge great iron mace,
Wherewith she many had of life deprived;
But ere the stroke could seize his aimed place,
His spear amids her sun-broad shield arrived;
Yet nathemore the steel a sunder riued,
All were the beam in bigness like a mast,
Ne her out of the steadfast sadle driued,
But glauncing on the tempred metal, brast
In thousand shiuers, and so forth beside her past.
Her Steed did stagger with that puissaunt struck;
But she no more was moved with that might,
Then it had lighted on an aged Oak;
Or on the marble Pillour, that is pight
Upon the top of Mount Olympus hight,
For the brave youthly Champions to assay,
With burning charet wheels it nigh to smite:
But who that smites it, mars his joyous play,
And is the spectacle of ruinous decay.
Yet there with sore enraged, with stern regard
Her dreadful weapon she to him addressed,
Which on his helmet martelled so hard,
That made him low incline his lofty crest,
And bowd his battred visour to his breast:
Wherewith he was so stund, that he n'ote ride,
But reeled to and fro from East to West:
Which when his cruel enemy espyde,
She lightly unto him adjoined side to side;
And on his collar laying puissant hand,
Out of his wavering seat him plucked perforse,
Perforse him plucked, unable to withstand,
Or help himself, and laying thwart her horse,
In loathly wise like to a carrion corse,
She bore him fast away. Which when the knight,
That her pursewed, saw with great remorse,
He near was touched in his noble spright,
And began increase his speed, as she encreast her flight.
Whom when as nigh approaching she espyde,
She threw away her burden angrily;
For she list not the battle to abide,
But made her self more light, away to fly:
Yet her the hardy knight pursewd so nigh,
That almost in the back he often her struck:
But still when him at hand she did espy,
She turned, and semblaunce of fair fight did make;
But when he stayed, to flight again she did her take.
By this good Sir Satyrane began wake
Out of his dream, that did him long entrance,
And seeing none in place, he began to make
Exceeding moan, and cursed that cruel chance,
Which reft from him so fair a cheuisaunce:
At length he spide, whereas that woeful Squire,
Whom he had reskewed from captiuaunce
Of his strong foe, lay tombled in the mire,
Unable to arise, or foot or hand to styre.
To whom approaching, well he mote perceive
In that foul plight a comely personage,
And lovely face, made fit for to deceive
Frail Ladies heart with loves consuming rage,
Now in the blossom of his freshest age:
He reard him up, and loosd his iron bands,
And after began inquire his parentage,
And how he fell into that Gyaunts hands,
And who that was, which chaced her along the lands.
Then trembling yet through fear, the Squire bespake,
That Geauntesse Argante is behight,
A daughter of the Titans which did make
War against heaven, and heaped hills on hight,
To scale the skies, and put Jove from his right:
Her sire Typhaeus was, who mad through merth,
And drunk with blood of men, slain by his might,
Through incest, her of his own mother Earth
Whilome begot, being but half twin of that berth.
For at that berth another Babe she bore,
To weet the mighty Ollyphant, that wrought
Great wreake to many errant knights of yore,
And many has to foul confusion brought.
These twins, men say, (a thing far passing thought)
Whiles in their mothers womb enclosd they were,
Ere they into the lightsome world were brought,
In fleshly lust were mingled both yfere,
And in that monstrous wise did to the world appear.
So lived they ever after in like sin,
Against natures law, and good behauioure:
But greatest shame was to that maiden twin,
Who not content so fowly to devour
Her native flesh, and strain her brothers bower,
Did wallow in all other fleshly mire,
And suffered beasts her body to deflowre:
So whot she burned in that lustful fire,
Yet all that might not slake her sensual desire.
But over all the country she did raunge,
To seek young men, to quench her flaming thurst,
And feed her fancy with delightful change:
Whom so she fittest finds to serve her lust,
Through her maine strength, in which she most does trust,
She with her brings into a secret I Will,
Where in eternal bondage dye he must,
Or be the vassal of her pleasures vile,
And in all shameful sort him self with her defile.
Me seely wretch she so at vauntage caught,
After she long in wait for me did lie,
And meant unto her prison to have brought,
Her loathsome pleasure there to satisfye;
That thousand deaths me lever were to dye,
Then break the vow, that to fair Columbell
I plighted have, and yet keep steadfastly:
As for my name, it mistreth not to tell;
Call me the Squyre of Dames that me beseems well.
But that bold knight, whom ye pursuing saw
That Geauntesse, is not such, as she seemed,
But a fair virgin, that in martial law,
And deeds of arms above all Dames is deemed,
And above many knights is eke esteemed,
For her great worth; She Palladine is hight:
She you from death, you me from dread redeemed.
Ne any may that Monster match in fight,
But she, or such as she, that is so chaste a wight.
Her well beseemes that Quest (quoth Satyrane)
But read, thou Squyre of Dames, what vow is this,
Which thou upon thy self have lately taken?
That shall I you recount (quoth he) ywis,
So be ye pleased to pardon all amiss.
That gentle Lady, whom I love and serve,
After long suit and weary seruicis,
Did ask me, how I could her love deserve,
And how she might be sure, that I would never swerue.
I glad by any means her grace to gain,
Bad her command my life to save, or spill.
Eftsoons she bad me, with incessaunt pain
To wander through the world abroad at will,
And every where, where with my power or skill
I might do service unto gentle Dames,
That I the same should faithfully fulfill,
And at the twelve months end should bring their names
And pledges; as the spoils of my victorious games.
So well I to fair Ladies service did,
And found such favor in their loving hearts,
That ere the year his course had compassid,
Three hundred pledges for my good desartes,
And thirse three hundred thanks for my good parts
I with me brought, and did to her present:
Which when she saw, more bent to eke my smartes,
Then to reward my trusty true intent,
She began for me devise a grievous punishment.
To weet, that I my travel should resume,
And with like labor walk the world around,
Ne ever to her presence should presume,
Till I so many other Dames had found,
The which, for all the suit I could propound,
Would me refuse their pledges to afford,
But did abide for ever chaste and sound.
Ah gentle Squire (quoth he) tell at one word,
How many foundst thou such to put in thy record?
In deed Sir knight (said he) one word may tell
All, that I ever found so wisely stayed;
For only three they were disposd so well,
And yet three years I now abroad have strayd,
To find them out. Mote I (then laughing said
The knight) inquire of thee, what were those three,
The which thy proffred courtesy denayd?
Or ill they seemed sure auizd to be,
Or brutishly brought up, that neu'r did fashions see.
The first which then refused me (said he)
Certes was but a common Courtisane,
Yet flat refusd to have a do with me,
Because I could not give her many a Jane.
(Thereat full heartily laughed Satyrane)
The second was an holy Nun to chose,
Which would not let me be her Chappellane,
Because she knew, she said, I would disclose
Her counsel, if she should her trust in me repose.
The third a Damzell was of low degree,
Whom I in country cottage found by chance;
Full little weened I, that chastitee
Had lodging in so mean a maintenance,
Yet was she fair, and in her countenance
Dwelt simple truth in seemly fashion.
Long thus I wooed her with dew observance,
In hope unto my pleasure to have won;
But was as far at last, as when I first begone.
Safe her, I never any woman found,
That chastity did for it self embrace,
But were for other causes firm and sound;
Either for want of handsome time and place,
Or else for fear of shame and foul disgrace.
Thus am I hopeless ever to attain
My Ladies love, in such a desperate case,
But all my days am like to wast in vain,
Seeking to match the chaste with th'vnchaste Ladies train.
Perdy, (said Satyrane) thou Squire of Dames,
Great labor fondly have thou hent in hand,
To get small thanks, and therewith many blames,
That may emongst Alcides labors stand.
Thence back returning to the former land,
Where late he left the Beast, he overcame,
He found him not; for he had broke his band,
And was returned again unto his Dame,
To tell what tidings of fair Florimell became.
Cant. VIII.
The Witch creates a snowy Lady,
like to Florimell,
Who wronged by Carle by Proteus saved,
is sought by Paridell.
SO often as I this history record,
My heart does melt with mere compassion,
To think, how causeless of her own accord
This gentle Damzell, whom I write upon,
Should plonged be in such affliction,
Without all hope of comfort or relief,
That sure I ween, the hardest heart of stone,
Would hardly find to aggrauate her grief;
For misery craves rather mercy, then repriefe.
But that accursed Hag, her hostess late,
Had so enranckled her malicious heart,
That she desyrd th'abridgement of her fate,
Or long enlargement of her painful smart.
Now when the Beast, which by her wicked art
Late forth she sent, she back returning spyde,
Tide with her broken girdle, it a part
Of her rich spoils, whom he had erst destroyed,
She weend, and wondrous gladness to her heart applyde.
And with it running hast'ly to her son,
Thought with that sight him much to have reliued;
Who thereby deeming sure the thing as done,
His former grief with fury fresh revived,
Much more then erst, and would have algates riued
The heart out of his breast: for since her ded
He surely dempt, himself he thought deprived
Quite of all hope, where with he long had fed
His foolish malady, and long time had misled.
With thought whereof, exceeding mad he grew,
And in his rage his mother would have slain,
Had she not fled into a secret mew,
Where she was wont her Sprights to entertain
The masters of her art: there was she feign
To call them all in order to her aid,
And them conjure upon eternal pain,
To counsel her so carefully dismayed,
How she might heal her son, whose senses were decayed.
By their advise, and her own wicked wit,
She there deuiz'd a wondrous work to frame,
Whose like on earth was never framed yet,
That even Nature self enuide the same,
And grudged to see the counterfeit should shame
The thing it self. In hand she boldly took
To make another like the former Dame,
Another Florimell, in shape and look
So lively and so like, that many it mistook.
The substance, whereof she the body made,
Was purest snow in massy mould congeald,
Which she had gathered in a shadie glade
Of the Riphoean hills, to her reueald
By errant Sprights, but from all men conceald:
The same she tempred with fine Mercury,
And virgin wex, that never yet was sealed,
And mingled them with perfect vermily,
That like a lively sanguine it seemed to the eye.
In stead of eyes two burning lamps she set
In silver sockets, shyning like the skies,
And a quick moving Spirit did arret
To stir and roll them, like a woman's eyes;
In stead of yellow locks she did devise,
With golden wyre to weaue her curled head;
Yet golden wyre was not so yellow thrice
As Florimells fair hair: and in the stead
Of life, she put a Spright to rule the carcass dead.
A wicked Sprightyfraught with fawning guile,
And fair resemblance above all the rest,
Which with the Prince of Darkness fell lomewhile,
From heavens bliss and everlasting rest;
Him needed not instruct, which way were best
Himself to fashion likest Florimell,
Ne how to speak, ne how to use his gest,
For he in counterfeisance did excel,
And all the wyles of wemens wits knew passing well.
Him shaped thus, she decked in garments gay,
Which Florimell had left behind her late,
That who so then her saw, would surely say,
It was her self, whom it did imitate,
Or fairer then her self, if ought algate
Might fairer be. And then she forth her brought
Unto her son, that lay in feeble state;
Who seeing her began straight vpstart, and thought
She was the Lady self, who he so long had sought.
Tho fast her clipping twixt his arms twain,
Extremely ioyed in so happy sight,
And soon forgot his former sickly pain;
But she, the more to seem such as she hight,
Coyly rebutted his embracement light;
Yet still with gentle countenant retained,
Enough to hold a fool in vain delight:
Him long she so with shadows entertained,
As her Creatresse had in charge to her ordained.
Till on a day, as he disposed was
To walk the woods with that his Idol fair,
Her to disport, and idle time to pas,
In the open freshness of the gentle air,
A knight that way there chanced to repair;
Yet knight was not, but a boastfull swain,
That deeds of arms had ever in despair,
Proud Braggadocchio, that in vaunting vain
His glory did repose, and credit did maintain.
He seeing with that Chorle so fair a wight,
Decked with many a costly ornament,
Much merueiled thereat, as well he might,
And thought that match a fowled disparagement:
His bloody spear eftsoons he boldly bent
Against the silly clown, who dead through fear,
Fell straight to ground in great astonishment;
Villein (said he) this Lady is my dear,
Die, if thou it gainesay: I will away her bear.
The fearful Chorle durst not gainesay, nor do,
But trembling stood, and yielded him the pray;
Who finding little leisure her to woo,
On Tromparts steed her mounted without stay,
And without reskew led her quite away.
Proud man himself then Braggadocchio deemed,
And next to none, after that happy day,
Being possessed of that spoil, which seemed
The fairest wight on ground, and most of men esteemed.
But when he saw himself free from poursute,
He began make gentle purpose to his Dame,
With terms of love and lewdness dissolute;
For he could well his glozing speeches frame
To such vain uses, that him best became:
But she thereto would lend but light regard,
As seeming sorry, that she ever came
Into his power, that used her so hard,
To reaue her honor, which she more then life prefard.
Thus as they two of kindness treated long,
There them by chance encountered on the way
An armed knight, upon a courser strong,
Whose trampling feet upon the hollow lay
Seemed to thunder, and did nigh affray
That Capons courage: yet he looked grim,
And feigned to cheer his Lady in dismay;
Who seemed for fear to quake in every lim,
And her to save from outrage, meekely prayed him.
Fiercely that stranger forward came, and nigh
Approaching, with bold words and bitter threat,
Bad that same boaster, as he mote, on high
To leave to him that Lady for excheat,
Or bide him battle without further treat.
That challenge did too peremptory seem,
And filled his senses with abashment great;
Yet seeing nigh him ieopardy extreme,
He it dissembled well, and light seemed to esteem.
Saying, Thou foolish knight, that weenst with words
To steal away, that I with blows have won,
And brought through points of many perilous swords:
But if thee list to see thy Courser run,
Or prove thy self, this sad encounter shonne,
And seek else without hazard of thy head.
At those proud words that other knight begone
To wexe exceeding wroth, and him ared
To turn his steed about, or sure he should be ded.
Since then (said Braggadocchio) needs thou will,
Thy days abridge, through proof of puissance,
Turn we our steedes, that both in equal tilt
May meet again, and each take happy chance.
This said, they both a furlongs mountenance
Retyrd their steeds, to run in even race:
But Braggadocchio with his bloody lance
Once having turned, no more returned his face,
But left his love to loss, and fled himself apace.
The knight him seeing fly, had no regard
Him to poursew, but to the Lady rode,
And having her from Trompart lightly reard,
Upon his Courser set the lovely lode,
And with her fled away without abode.
Well weened he, that fairest Florimell
It was, with whom in company he yode,
And so her self did always to him tell;
So made him think him self in heaven, that was in hell.
But Florimell her self was far away,
Driven to great distress by Fortune strange,
And taught the careful Mariner to play,
Since late mischaunce had her compeld to change
The land for sea, at randon there to raunge:
Yet there that cruel Queen auengeresse,
Not satisfide so far her to estraunge
From courtly bliss and wonted happiness,
Did heap on her new waves of weary wretchedness.
For being fled into the fishers bote,
For refuge from the Monsters cruelty,
Long so she on the mighty maine did flote,
And with the tide drove forward carelessly;
For the air was mild, and cleared was the sky,
And all his winds Dan Aeolus did keep,
From stirring up their stormy enmity,
As pitying to see her wail and weep;
But all the while the fisher did securely sleep.
At last when droncke with drowsinesse, he woke,
And saw his drouer drive along the stream,
He was dismayed, and thrice his breast he stroke,
For marvel of that accident extreme;
But when he saw, that blazing beauties beam,
Which with rare light his bote did beautify,
He marueild more, and thought he yet did dream
Not well awakt, or that some ecstasy
Assotted had his sense, or dazed was his eye.
But when her well auizing, he perceived
To be no vision, nor fantastic sight,
Great comfort of her presence he conceived,
And felt in his old courage new delight
To gin awake, and stir his frozen spright:
Tho rudely asked her, how she thither came.
Ah (said she) father, I note read aright,
What hard misfortune brought me to the same;
Yet am I glad that here I now in safety am.
But thou good man, since far in sea we be,
And the great waters gin apace to swell,
That now no more we can the maine-land see,
Have care, I pray, to guide the cock-bote well,
Least worse on sea then us on land befell.
Thereat the old man did naught but fondly grin,
And said, his boat the way could wisely tell:
But his deceiptfull eyes did never lin,
To look on her fair face, and mark her snowy skin.
The sight whereof in his congealed flesh,
Infixt such secret sting of greedy lust,
That the dry withered stock it began refresh,
And kindled heat, that soon in flame forth brust:
The driest wood is soonest burnt to dust.
Rudely to her he lept, and his rough hand
Where ill became him, rashly would have thrust,
But she with angry scorn him did withstond,
And shamefully reproved for his rudeness fond.
But he, that never good nor manners knew,
Her sharp rebuke full little did esteem;
Hard is to teach an old horse amble true.
The inward smoke, that did before but steeme,
Broke into open fire and rage extreme,
And now he strength began add unto his will,
Forcing to do, that did him foul misseeme:
Beastly he threw her down, ne cared to spill
Her garments gay with scales of fish, that all did fill.
The silly virgin strove him to withstand,
All that she might, and him in vain reuild:
She struggled strongly both with foot and hand,
To save her honor from that villain vild,
And cride to heaven, from humane help exild.
O ye brave knights, that boast this Ladies love,
Where be ye now, when she is nigh defild
Of filthy wretch? well may she you reprove
Of falsehood or of sloth, when most it may behoue.
But if that thou, Sir Satyran, did weete,
Or thou, Sir Peridure, her sorry state,
How soon would ye assemble many a fleet,
To fetch from sea, that ye at land lost late;
Towers, Cities, Kingdoms ye would ruinate,
In your auengement and dispiteous rage,
Ne ought your burning fury mote abate;
But if Sir Calidore could it presage,
No living creature could his cruelty assuage.
But since that none of all her knights is nigh,
See how the heavens of voluntary grace,
And sovereign favor toward chastity,
Do succor send to her distressed case:
So much high God does innocence embrace.
It fortuned, whilst thus she stiffly strove,
And the wide sea importuned long space
With shrilling shriekes, Proteus abroad did roue,
Along the fomy waves driving his finny drove.
Proteus is Shepherd of the seas of yore,
And has the charge of Neptunes mighty heard;
An aged sire with head all frowy hoar,
And sprinkled frost upon his deawy beard:
Who when those pitiful outcries he heard,
Through all the seas so ruefully resound,
His charet swift in haste he thither steard,
Which with a teeme of scaly Phocas bound
Was drawn upon the waves, that fomed him around.
And coming to that Fishers wandering bote,
That went at will, withouten card or sail,
He therein saw that yrkesome sight, which smote
Deep indignation and compassion frail
Into his heart attonce: straight did he hayle
The greedy villein from his hoped pray,
Of which he now did very little fail,
And with his staff, that drives his Heard astray,
Him bet so sore, that life and sense did much dismay.
The whiles the pitteous Lady up did rise,
Ruffled and fowly raid with filthy soil,
And blubbred face with tears of her fair eyes:
Her heart nigh broken was with weary toil,
To save her self from that outrageous spoil,
But when she looked up, to weet, what wight
Had her from so infamous fact assoyld,
For shame, but more for fear of his grim sight,
Down in her lap she hid her face, and loudly shright.
Her self not saved yet from danger dred
She thought, but chaung'd from one to other fear;
Like as a fearful Partridge, that is sled
From the sharp Hawk, which her attached near,
And falls to ground, to seek for succor theare,
Whereas the hungry Spaniels she does spy,
With greedy jaws her ready for to tear;
In such distress and sad perplexity
Was Florimell, when Proteus she did see thereby.
But he endeavored with speeches mild
Her to recomfort, and accourage bold,
Bidding her fear no more her foeman vilde,
Nor doubt himself; and who he was, her told.
Yet all that could not from affright her hold,
Ne to recomfort her at all preuayld;
For her faint heart was with the frozen cold
Benumbd so inly, that her wits nigh fayld,
And all her senses with abashment quite were quayld.
Her up betwixt his rugged hands he reard,
And with his frory lips full softly kissed,
Whiles the cold ysickles from his rough beard,
Dropped adowne upon her yuorie breast:
Yet he himself so busily addressed,
That her out of astonishment he wrought,
And out of that same fishers filthy nest
Removing her, into his charet brought,
And there with many gentle terms her fair besought.
But that old leachour, which with bold assault
That beauty durst presume to violate,
He cast to punish for his heinous fault;
Then took he him yet trembling since of late,
And tide behind his charet, to aggrate
The virgin, whom he had abusde so sore:
So dragged him through the waves in scornful state,
And after cast him up, upon the shore;
But Florimell with him unto his bower he bore.
His bower is in the bottom of the maine,
Under a mighty rock, against which do rave
The roaring billows in their proud disdain,
That with the angry working of the wave,
Therein is eaten out an hollow cave,
That seems rough Masons hand with engines keen
Had long while labored it to engraue:
There was his won, ne living wight was seen,
Save one old Nymph, hight Panope to keep it clean.
Thither he brought the sorry Florimell,
And entertained her the best he might
And Panope her entertaind eke well,
As an immortal mote a mortal wight,
To win her liking unto his delight:
With flattering words he sweetly wooed her,
And offered fair gifts t'allure her sight,
But she both offers and the offerer
Despysde, and all the fawning of the flatterer.
Daily he tempted her with this or that,
And never suffered her to be at rest:
But evermore she him refused flat,
And all his fained kindness did detest.
So firmly she had sealed up her breast.
Sometimes he boasted, that a God he hight:
But she a mortal creature loved best:
Then he would make himself a mortal wight;
But then she said she loved none, but a Faerie knight.
Then like a Faerie knight himself he dressed;
For every shape on him he could endew:
Then like a king he was to her expressed,
And offered kingdoms unto her in view,
To be his Leman and his Lady true:
But when all this he nothing saw prevail,
With harder means he cast her to subdew,
And with sharp threats her often did assail,
So thinking for to make her stubborn courage quail.
To dreadful shapes he did himself transform,
Now like a Giant, now like to a feend,
Then like a Centaure, then like to a storm,
Raging within the waves: thereby he weend
Her will to win unto his wished end.
But when with fear, nor favor, nor with all
He else could do, he saw himself esteemd,
Down in a Dongeon deep he let her fall,
And threatened there to make her his eternal thrall.
Eternal thraldom was to her more liefe,
Then loss of chastity, or change of love:
Die had she rather in tormenting grief,
Then any should of falsenesse her reprove,
Or looseness, that she lightly did remove.
Most virtuous virgin, glory be thy meed,
And crown of heavenly praise with Saints above,
Where most sweet hymmes of this thy famous deed
Are still emongst them song, that far my rymes exceed.
Fit song of Angels caroled to be;
But yet what so my feeble Muse can frame,
Shall be t'aduance thy goodly chastitee,
And to enroll thy memorable name,
In the heart of every honorable Dame,
That they thy virtuous deeds may imitate,
And be partakers of thy endless fame.
It yrkes me, leave thee in this woeful state,
To tell of Satyrane, where I him left of late.
Who having ended with that Squire of Dames
A long discourse of his adventures vain,
The which himself, then Ladies more defames,
And finding not the Hyena to be slain,
With that same Squire, returned back again
To his first way. And as they forward went,
They spyde a knight fair pricking on the plain,
As if he were on some adventure bent,
And in his port appeared manly hardiment.
Sir Satyrane him toward did address,
To weet, what wight he was, and what his quest:
And coming nigh, eftsoons he began to guess
Both by the burning heart, which on his breast
He bare, and by the colors in his crest,
That Paridell it was. Tho to him yode,
And him saluting, as beseemed best,
Began first inquire of tidings far abroad;
And afterward, on what adventure now he rode.
Who thereto answering, said; The tidings bad,
Which now in Faerie court all men do tell,
Which turned has great mirth, to mourning sad,
Is the late ruin of proud Marinell,
And suddein parture of fair Florimell,
To find him forth: and after her are gone
All the brave knights, that done in arms excel,
To sauegard her, ywandred all alone;
Emongst the rest my lot (unworthy) is to be one.
Ah gentle knight (said then Sir Satyrane)
Thy labor all is lost, I greatly dread,
That have a thanklesse service on thee taken,
And offrest sacrifice unto the dead:
For dead, I surely doubt, thou may aread
Henceforth for ever Florimell to be,
That all the noble knights of Maydenhead,
Which her adored, may sore repent with me,
And all fair Ladies may for ever sorry be.
Which words when Paridell had heard, his hew
Began greatly change, and seemed dismayed to be;
Then said, Fair Sir, how may I ween it true,
That ye do tell in such vncertaintee?
Or speak ye of report, or did ye see
Just cause of dread, that makes ye doubt so sore?
For perdie else how mote it ever be,
That ever hand should dare for to engore
Her noble blood? the heavens such cruelty abhore.
These eyes did see, that they will ever rue
To Have seen, (quoth he) when as a monstrous beast
The Palfrey, whereon she did travel, slew,
And of his bowels made his bloody feast:
Which speaking token shows at the least
Her certain loss, if not her sure decay:
Besides, that more suspicion encreast,
I found her golden girdle cast astray,
Distaynd with dirt and blood, as relic of the pray.
Aye me, (said Paridell) the signs be sad,
And but God turn the same to good soothsay,
That Ladies safety is sore to be drad:
Yet will I not forsake my forward way,
Till trial do more certain truth bewray.
Fair Sir (quoth he) well may it you succeed,
Ne long shall Satyrane behind you stay,
But to the rest, which in this Quest proceed
My labor add, and be partaker of their speed.
Ye noble knights (said then the Squire of Dames)
Well may ye speed in so praiseworthy pain:
But since the Sun now ginnes to slake his beams,
In deawy vapors of the western maine,
And lose the teme out of his weary waine,
More not mislike you also to abate
Your zealous have, till morrow next again
Both light of heaven, and strength of men relate:
Which if ye please, to yonder castle turn your gate.
That counsel pleased well; so all yfere
Forth marched to a Castle them before,
^here soon arriving, they restrained were
Of ready entrance, which ought evermore
To errant knights be commun: wondrous sore
Thereat displeasd they were, till that young Squire
Began them inform the cause, why that same door
Was shut to all, which lodging did desire:
The which to let you weet, will further time require.
Cant. IX.
Malbecco will no strange knights host,
For pecuish gealosie:
Paridell giusts with Britomart:
Both show their auncestrie.
REdoubted knights, and honorable Dames,
To whom I level all my labors end,
Right sore I fear, least with unworthy blames
This odious argument my rimes should shend,
Or ought your goodly patience offend,
Whiles of a wanton Lady I do write,
Which with her loose incontinence does blend
The shyning glory of your sovereign light,
And knighthood foul defaced by a faithless knight.
But never let th'ensample of the bad
Offend the good: for good by paragone
Of evil, may more notably be rad,
As white seems fairer, macht with black atone;
Ne all are shamed by the fault of one:
For lo in heaven, whereas all goodness is,
Emongst the Angels, a whole legione
Of wicked Sprights did fall from happy blis;
What wonder then, if one of women all did mis?
Then listen Lordings, if ye list to weet
The cause, why Satyrane and Paridell
Mote not be entertaynd, as seemed meet,
Into that Castle (as that Squire does tell.)
Therein a cancred crabbed Carle does dwell,
That has no skill of Court nor courtesy,
Ne cares, what men say of him ill or well;
For all his days he drownes in priuitie,
Yet has full large to live, and spend at liberty.
But all his mind is set on mucky pelf,
To hoord up heaps of evil gotten mass,
For which he others wrongs, and wreckes himself;
Yet is he lincked to a lovely less,
Whose beauty does her bounty far surpass,
The which to him both far unequal years,
And also far unlike conditions has;
For she does joy to play emongst her pears,
And to be free from hard restraint and gealous fears.
But he is old, and withered like hay,
Unfit fair Ladies service to supply;
The privy guilt whereof makes him always
Suspect her truth, and keep continual spy
Upon her with his other blincked eye;
Ne suffers he resort of living wight
Approach to her, ne keep her company,
But in close bower her mewes from all men's sight,
Deprived of kindly joy and natural delight.
Malbecco he, and Hellenore she hight,
Unfitly yokt together in one teeme,
That is the cause, why never any knight
It suffered here to enter, but he seem
Such, as no doubt of him he need misdeeme.
Thereat Sir Satyrane began smile, and say;
Extremely mad the man I surely deem,
That weenes with watch and hard restraint to stay
A woman's will, which is disposd to go astray.
In vain he fears that, which he cannot shonne:
For who wotes not, that woman's subtiltyes
Can guilen Argus, when she list misdonne?
It is not iron bands, nor hundred eyes,
Nor brazen walls, nor many wakefull spies,
That can withhold her wilful wandering feet;
But fast good will with gentle curtesyes,
And timely service to her pleasures meet
May her perhaps contain, that else would algates fleet.
Then is he not more mad (said Paridell)
That has himself unto such service sold,
In doleful thraldom all his days to dwell?
For sure a fool I do him firmly hold,
That loves his fetters, though they were of gold.
But why do we devise of others ill,
Whiles thus we suffer this same dotard old,
To keep us out, in scorn of his own will,
And rather do not ransack all, and him self kill?
Nay let us first (said Satyrane entreat
The man by gentle means, to let us in,
And afterward affray with cruel threat,
Ere that we to efforce it do begin:
Then if all fail, we will by force it win,
And eke reward the wretch for his mesprise,
As may be worthy of his heinous sin.
That counsel pleased: then Paridell did rise,
And to the Castle gate approcht in quiet wise.
Whereat soft knocking, entrance he desyrd.
The good man self, which then the Porter played,
Him answered, that all were now retyrd
Unto their rest, and all the keys conuayd
Unto their master, who in bed was laid,
That none him durst awake out of his dreme;
And therefore them of patience gently prayed.
Then Paridell began to change his theme,
And threatened him with force and punishment extreme.
But all in vain; for naught mote him relent,
And now so long before the wicket fast
They waited, that the night was forward spent,
And the fair welkin fowly ouercast,
Began blown up a bitter stormy blast,
With shoure and hayle so horrible and dred,
That this fair many were compeld at last,
To fly for succor to a little shed,
The which beside the gate for swine was ordered.
It fortuned, soon after they were gone,
Another knight, whom tempest thither brought,
Came to that Castle, and with earnest moan,
Like as the rest, late entrance dear besought;
But like so as the rest he prayed for naught,
For flatly he of entrance was refusd,
Sorely thereat he was displeasd, and thought
How to avenge himself so sore abusd,
And evermore the Carle of courtesy accusd.
But to avoid th'intollerable stowre,
He was compeld to seek some refuge near,
And to that shed, to shroud him from the shower,
He came, which full of guests he found why leare,
So as he was not let to enter there:
Whereat he began to wex exceeding wroth,
And swore, that he would lodge with them yfere,
Or them dislodge, all were they liefe orloth;
And defide them each, and so defide them both.
Both were full loath to leave that needful tent,
And both full loath in darkness to debate;
Yet both full liefe him lodging to have lent,
And both full liefe his boasting to abate;
But chiefly Paridell his heart did grate,
To hear him threaten so despightfully,
As if he did a dog to kenell rate,
That durst not bark; and rather had he die,
Then when he was deside, in coward cornerly.
Tho hastily remounting to his steed,
He forth issew'd; like as a boistrous wind,
Which in th'earthes hollow caves has long bin hid,
And shut up fast within her prisons blind,
Makes the huge element against her kind
To move, and tremble as it were aghast,
Until that it an issew forth may find;
Then forth it breaks, and with his furious blast
Confounds both land and seas, and skies does ouercast.
Their steel-hed spears they strongly coucht, and met
Together with impetuous rage and forse,
That with the terror of their fierce affret,
They rudely drove to ground both man and horse,
That each awhile lay like a senseless corse.
But Paridell sore bruised with the blow,
Could not arise, the counterchaunge to scorse,
Till that young Squire him reared from below;
Then drew he his bright sword, and began about him throw.
But Satyrane forth stepping, did them stay
And with fair treaty pacifide their ire,
Then when they were accorded from the fray,
Against that Castles Lord they began conspire,
To heap on him dew vengeance for his hire.
They been agreed, and to the gates they go
To burn the same with unquenchable fire,
And that discourteous Carle their commune foe
To do foul death to dye, or wrap in grievous woe.
Malbecco seeing them resolved in deed
To flame the gates, and hearing them to call
For fire in earnest, ran with fearful speed,
And to them calling from the castle wall,
Besought them humbly, him to bear with all,
As ignorant of servants bad abuse,
And slack attendaunce unto strangers call.
The knights were willing all things to excuse,
Though naught beleu'd, and entrau^ce late did not refuse.
They been ybrought into a comely bower,
And served of all things that mote needful be;
Yet secretly their host did on them lowre,
And welcomde more for fear, then charitee;
But they dissembled, what they did not see,
And welcomed themselves. Each began vndight
Their garments wet, and weary armor free,
To dry them selves by Vulcanes flaming light,
And eke their lately bruzed parts to bring in plight.
And eke that stranger knight emongst the rest;
Was for like need enforst to disaray:
Tho whenas veiled was her lofty crest,
Her golden locks, that were in tramels gay
Vpbounden, did them selves adowne display,
And raught unto her heels; like sunny beams,
That in a cloud their light did long time stay,
Their vapor vaded, show their golden gleames,
And through the persant air shoot forth their azure streams.
She also dofte her heavy haberieon,
Which the fair feature of her limbs did hyde,
And her well plighted frock, which she did won
To tucke about her short, when she did ride,
She low let fall, that flowd from her lanck side
Down to her foot, with careless modestee.
Then of them all she plainly was espyde,
To be a woman wight, vnwist to be,
The fairest woman wight, that ever eye did see.
Like as Minerua, being late returned
From slaughter of the Giaunts conquered;
Where proud Encelade, whose wide nosethrils burnd
With breathed flames, like to a furnace red,
Transfixed with the spear, down tombled ded
From top of Hemus, by him heaped hye;
Has loosd her helmet from her lofty head,
And her Gorgonian, shield gins to untie
From her left arm, to rest in glorious victory.
Which whenas they beheld, they smitten were
With great amazement of so wondrous sight,
And each on other, and they all on her
Stood gazing, as if suddein great affright
Had them surprised. At last auizing right,
Her goodly personage and glorious hew,
Which they so much mistook, they took delight
In their first error, and yet still anew
With wonder of her beauty fed their hungry view.
Yet note their hungry view be satisfide,
But seeing still the more desired to see,
And ever firmly fixed did abide
In contemplation of divinity:
But they meruaild at her cheualree,
And noble prowess, which they had approved,
That much they faynd to know, who she mote be;
Yet none of all them her thereof amoued,
Yet every one her likte, and every one her loved.
And Paridell though partly discontent
With his late fall, and foul indignity,
Yet was soon won his malice to relent,
Through gracious regard of her fair eye,
And knightly worth, which he too late did try,
Yet tried did adore. Supper was dight;
Then they Malbecco prayed of curtesy,
That of his Lady they might have the sight,
And company at meat, to do them more delight.
But he to shift their curious request,
Began causen, why she could not come in place;
Her crased health, her late recourse to rest,
And humid evening ill for sick folks case:
But none of those excuses could take place;
Ne would they eat, till she in presence came.
She came in presence with right comely grace,
And fairly them saluted, as became,
And showed her self in all a gentle courteous Dame.
They sat to meat, and Satyrane his chance
Was her before, and Paridell beside;
But he him self sat looking still askaunce,
Against Britomart, and ever closely eyde
Sir Satyrane, that glaunces might not glyde:
But his blind eye, that syded Paridell,
All his demeasnure from his sight did hyde:
On her fair face so did he feed his fill,
And sent close messages of love to her at will.
And ever and anon, when none was ware,
With speaking looks, that close embassage bore,
He rou'd at her, and told his secret care:
For all that art he learned had ofyore.
Ne was she ignorant of that lewd lore,
But in his eye his meaning wisely red,
And with the like him answered evermore:
She sent at him one fiery dart, whose head
Empoisned was with privy lust, and gealous dred.
He from that deadly throw made no defense,
But to the wound his weak heart opened wide;
The wicked engine through false influence,
Past through his eyes, and secretly did glyde
Into his heart, which it did sorely gryde.
But nothing new to him was that same pain,
Ne pain at all; for he so often had tryde
The power thereof, and loved so often in vain,
That thing of course he counted, love to entertain.
Thenceforth to her he sought to intimate
His inward grief, by means to him well known,
Now Bacchus fruit out of the silver plate
He on the table dashed, as overthrown,
Or of the fruitful liquor overflowed,
And by the dancing bubbles did divine,
Or therein write to let his love be shown;
Which well she red out of the learned line,
A sacrament profane in mystery of wine.
And when so of his hand the pledge she raught,
The guilty cup she fained to mistake,
And in her lap did shed her idle draught,
Showing desire her inward flame to slake:
By such close signs they secret way did make
Unto their wills, and one eyes watch escape;
Two eyes him needs, for to watch and wake,
Who lovers will deceive. Thus was the ape,
By their fair handling, put into Malbeccoes cape.
Now when of meats and drinks they had their fill,
Purpose was moved by that gentle Dame,
Unto those knights aduenturous, to tell
Of deeds of arms, which unto them became,
And every one his kindred, and his name.
Then Paridell, in whom a kindly pride
Of gracious speech, and skill his words to frame
Abounded, being glad of so fit tide
Him to commend to her, thus spoke, of all well eyde.
Troy, that art now naught, but an idle name,
And in thine ashes buried low do lie,
Though whilome far much greater then thy fame,
Before that angry Gods, and cruel sky
Upon thee heapt a direful destiny,
What boots it boast thy glorious descent,
And fetch from heaven thy great Genealogy,
Since all thy worthy praises being blent,
Their offspring has embaste, and later glory shent.
Most famous Worthy of the world, by whom
That war was kindled, which did Troy inflame,
And stately towers of Ilion whilome
Brought unto balefull ruin, was by name
Sir Paris far renowmd through noble fame,
Who through great prowess and bold hardiness,
From Lacedaemon fetched the fairest Dame,
That ever Greece did boast, or knight possess,
Whom Venus to him gave for meed of worthiness.
Fair Helene, flower of beauty excellent,
And girlond of the mighty Conquerours,
That made many Ladies dear lament
The heavy loss of their brave Paramours,
Which they far off beheld from Trojan toures,
And saw the fields of fair Scamander strowne
With carcases of noble warrioures,
Whose fruitless lives were under furrow sown,
And Xanthus sandy banks with blood all overflowed.
From him my lineage I derive aright,
Who long before the ten years siege of Troy,
Whiles yet on Ida he a shepherd hight,
On fair Oenone got a lovely boy,
Whom for remembrance of her passed joy,
She of his Father Parius did name;
Who, after Greeks did Priams realm destroy,
Gathred the Trojan relics saved from flame,
And with them sailing thence, to th'Isle of Paros came.
That was by him called Paros, which before
Hight Nausa, there he many years did rain,
And built Nausicle by the Pontick shore,
The which he dying left next in remain
To Paridas his son.
From whom I Paridell by kin descend;
But for fair Ladies love, and glories gain,
My native soil have left, my days to spend
In seewing deeds of arms, my lives and labors end.
When as the noble Britomart heard tell
Of Trojan wars, and Priams City sacked,
The ruefull story of Sir Paridell,
She was empassiond at that piteous act,
With zealous envy of Greeks cruel fact,
Against that nation, from whose race of old
She heard, that she was lineally extract:
For noble Britons sprung from Trojans bold,
And Troynouant was built of old Troyes ashes cold.
Then sighing soft awhile, at last she thus:
O lamentable fall of famous town,
Which raignd so many years victorious,
And of all Asie bore the sovereign crown,
In one sad night consumd, and thrown down:
What stony heart, that hears thy hapless fate,
Is not empierst with deep compassiowne,
And makes ensample of man's wretched state,
That flowers so fresh at morn, and fades at evening late?
Behold, Sir, how your pitiful complaint
Has found another partner of your pain:
For nothing may impresse so dear constraint,
As countries cause, and commune foes disdain.
But if it should not grieve you, back again
To turn your course, I would to hear desire,
What to Aeneas fell; since that men said
He was not in the Cities woeful fire
Consumed, but did him self to safety retire.
Anchyses son begot of Venus fair,
(Said he,) out of the flames for safeguard fled,
And with a remnant did to sea repair,
Where he through fatal error long was led
Full many years, and weetlesse wandered
From shore to shore, emongst the Lybicke sands,
Ere rest he found. Much there he suffered,
And many perils past in foreign lands,
To save his people sad from victours vengefull hands.
At last in Latium he did arrive,
Where he with cruel war was entertaind
Of th'inland folk, which sought him back to drive,
Till he with old Latinus was constraind,
To contract wedlock: (so the fates ordaind.)
Wedlock contract in blood, and eke in blood
Accomplished, that many dear complaind:
The rival slain, the victour through the flood
Escaped hardly, hardly praisd his wedlock good.
Yet after all, he victour did survive,
And with Latinus did the kingdom part.
But after, when both nations began to strive,
Into their names the title to conuart,
His son Iulus did from thence depart,
With all the warlike youth of Trojans blood,
And in long Alba plast his throne apart,
Where fair it flourished, and long time stoud,
Till Romulus renewing it, to Rome remoud.
There there (said Britomart) a fresh appeard
The glory of the later world to spring,
And Troy again out of her dust was reard,
To sit in second seat of sovereign king,
Of all the world under her governing.
But a third kingdom yet is to arise,
Out of the Trojans scattered offspring,
That in all glory and great enterprise,
Both first and second Troy shall dare to equalize.
It Troynouant is hight, that with the waves
Of wealthy Thamis washed is along,
Upon whose stubborn neck, whereat he raues
With roaring rage, and sore him self does throng,
That all men fear to tempt his billows strong,
She fastened has her foot, which stands so hy,
That it a wonder of the world is song
In foreign lands, and all which passen by,
Beholding it from far, do think it threats the sky.
The Trojan Brute did first that City found,
And Hygate gate made the meare thereof by West,
And Ouert gate by North: that is the bound
Toward the land; two rivers bound the rest.
So huge a scope at first him seemed best,
To be the compass of his kingdoms seat:
So huge a mind could not in lesser rest,
Ne in small meares contain his glory great,
That Albion had conquered first by warlike feat.
Ah fairest Lady knight, (said Paridell)
Pardon I pray my heedlesse oversight,
Who had forgot, that whilome I heard tell
From aged Mnemon; for my wits been light.
Indeed he said (if I remember right,)
That of the antique Trojan stock, there grew
Another plant, that raught to wondrous hight,
And far abroad his mighty branches threw,
Into the utmost Angle of the world he knew.
For that same Brute, whom much he did advance
In all his speech, was Syluius his son,
Whom having slain, through luckles arrows glau^ce
He fled for fear of that he had misdonne,
Or else for shame, so foul reproach to shonne,
And with him led to the sea an youthly train,
Where weary wandering they long time did won,
And many fortunes proved in the Ocean main,
And great adue^tures found, that now were long to said.
At last by fatal course they driven were
Into an Island spacious and broad,
The furthest North, that did to them appear:
Which after rest they seeking far abroad,
Found it the fittest soil for their abode,
Fruitful of all things fit for living food,
But wholly wast, and void of peoples trod,
Save an huge nation of the Geaunts brood,
That fed on living flesh, and druncke men's vital blood.
Whom he through weary wars and labors long,
Subdewd with loss of many Britons bold:
In which the great Goemagot of strong
Corineus, and Coulin of Debon old
Were overthrown, and laid on the earth full cold,
Which quaked under their so hideous mass,
A famous history to be enrold
In everlasting moniments of brass,
That all the antique Worthies merits far did pass.
His work great Troynouant, his work is eke
Fair Lincoln, both renowned far away,
That who from East to West will endlong seek,
Cannot two fairer Cities find this day,
Except Cleopolis: so heard I say
Old Mnemon. Therefore Sir, I greet you well
Your country kin, and you entirely pray
Of pardon for the strife, which late besell
Betwixt us both unknown. So ended Paridell.
But all the while, that he these speeches spent,
Upon his lips hong fair Dame Hellenore,
With vigilant regard, and dew attent,
Fashioning worlds of fancies evermore
In her frail wit, that now her quite forlore:
The whiles unawares away her wondering eye,
And greedy ears her weak heart from her bore:
Which he perceiving, ever privily
In speaking, many false belgardes at her let fly.
So long these knights discoursed diversely,
Of strange affairs, and noble hardiment,
Which they had past with mickle ieopardy,
That now the humid night was farforth spent,
And heavenly lamps were halfendeale ybrent:
Which the old man seeing well, who too long thought
Every discourse and every argument,
Which by the hours he measured, besought
Them go to rest. So all unto their bowres were brought.
Cant. X.
Paridell rapeth Hellenore:
Malbecco her purs^wes:
Finds emongst Satyrs, whence with him
To turn she does refuse.
THe morrow next, so soon as Phoebus Lamp
Bewrayed had the world with early light,
And fresh Aurora had the shady damp
Out of the goodly heaven amoued quight,
Fair Britomart and that same Faerie knight
Vprose, forth on their journey for to wend:
But Paridell complaynd, that his late fight
With Britomart, so sore did him offend,
That ride he could not, till his hurts he did amend.
So forth they fared, but he behind them stayed,
Maulgre his host, who grudged grievously,
To house a guest, that would be needs obayd,
And of his own him left not liberty.
Might wanting measure moves surquedry.
Two things he feared, but the third was death;
That fierce youngmans unruly maistery;
His money, which he loved as living breath;
And his fair wife, whom honest long he kept uneath.
But patience perforce he must abie,
What fortune and his fate on him will lay,
Fond is the fear, that finds no remedy;
Yet warily he watches every way,
By which he fears evil happen may:
So the evil thinks by watching to prevent;
Ne does he suffer her, nor night, nor day,
Out of his sight her self once to absent.
So does he punish her and eke himself torment.
But Paridell kept better watch, then he,
A fit occasion for his turn to find:
False love, why do men say, thou can not see,
And in their foolish fancy feign thee blind,
That with thy charms the sharpest sight do bind,
And to thy will abuse? Thou walk free,
And see every secret of the mind;
Thou see all, yet none at all sees thee;
All that is by the working of thy Deitee.
So perfect in that art was Paridell,
That he Melbeccoes halfen eye did wyle,
His halfen eye he wiled wondrous well,
And Hellenors both eyes did eke beguyle,
Both eyes and heart attonce, during the while
That he there soiourned his wounds to heal;
That Cupid self it seeing, close did smyle,
To weet how he her love away did steal,
And bad, that none their joyous treason should reveal.
The learned lover lost no time nor tide,
That least auantage mote to him afford,
Yet bore so fair a sail, that none espyde
His secret drift, till he her laid abord.
When so in open place, and commune board,
He fortuned her to meet, with commune speech
He courted her, yet bayted every word,
That his ungentle host n'ote him appeach
Of vile ungentleness, or hospitages breach.
But when apart (if ever her apart)
He found, then his false engines fast he plyde,
And all the sleights vnbosomd in his heart;
He sighed, he sobd, he swownd, he perdy did,
And cast himself on ground her fast beside:
Tho when again he him bethought to live,
He wept, and wayld, and false laments belyde,
Saying, but if she Mercy would him give
That he mote algates dye, yet did his death forgive.
And otherwhiles with amorous delights,
And pleasing toys he would her entertain,
Now singing sweetly, to surprise her sprights,
Now making lays of love and lovers pain,
Bransles, Ballads, virelayes, and verses vain;
Often purposes, often riddles he deuysd,
And thousands like, which flowed in his brain,
With which he fed her fancy, and entysd
To take to his new love, and leave her old despysd.
And every where he might, and every while
He did her service dewtifull, and sewed
At hand with humble pride, and pleasing guile,
So closely yet, that none but she it vewed,
Who well perceived all, and all indewed.
Thus finely did he his false nets dispred,
With which he many weak hearts had subdewed
Of yore, and many had ylike misled:
What wonder then, if she were likewise carried?
No fort so sensible, no walls so strong,
But that continual battery will riue,
Or daily siege through dispuruayance long,
And lack of reskewes will to parley drive;
And Peace, that unto parley ear will give,
Will shortly yield it self, and will be made
The vassal of the victors will by live:
That stratageme had oftentimes assayd
This crafty Paramoure, and now it plain displayed.
For through his trains he her intrapped has,
That she her love and heart has wholly sold
To him, without regard of gain, or scath,
Or care of credit, or of husband old,
Whom she has vowed to dub a fair Cucquold.
Naught wants but time and place, which shortly she
Deuized has, and to her lover told.
It pleased well. So well they both agree;
So ready ripe to ill, ill wemens counsels be.
Dark was the Evening, fit for lovers stealth,
When chaunst Melbecco busy be elsewhere,
She to his closet went, where all his wealth
Lay hid: thereof she countlesse sums did rear,
The which she meant away with her to bear;
The rest she fyr'd for sport, or for despite;
As Hellene, when she saw aloft appear
The Troiane flames, and reach to heavens hight
Did clap her hands, and ioyed at that doleful sight.
This second Hellene, fair Dame Hellenore,
The whiles her husband ran with sorry haste,
To quench the flames which she had tyn'd before,
Laughed at his foolish labor spent in waste;
And ran into her lovers arms right fast;
Where straight embraced, she to him did cry,
And call aloud for help, ere help were past;
For lo that Guest would bear her forcibly,
And meant to ravish her, that rather had to die.
The wretched man hearing her call for aid,
And ready seeing him with her to fly,
In his disquiet mind was much dismayed:
But when again he backward cast his eye,
And saw the wicked fire so furiously
Consume his heart, and scorch his Idols face,
He was therewith distressed diversely,
Ne wist he how to turn, nor to what place;
Was never wretched man in such a woeful case.
Ay when to him she cryde, to her he turned,
And left the fire; love money overcame:
But when he marked, how his money burnd,
He left his wife; money did love disclame:
Both was he loath to loose his loved Dame,
And loath to leave his liefest pelf behind,
Yet since he n'ote save both, he saved that same,
Which was the dearest to his donghill mind,
The God of his desire, the joy of misers blind.
Thus whilst all things in troublous uproar were,
And all men busy to suppress the flame,
The loving couple need no reskew fear,
But leisure had, and liberty to frame
Their purpost flight, free from all men's reclame;
And Night, the patroness of loue-stealth fair,
Gave them safe conduct, till to end they came:
So been they gone yfeare, a wanton pair
Of lovers loosely knit, where list them to repair.
Soon as the cruel flames yslaked were,
Malbecco seeing, how his loss did lie,
Out of the flames, which he had quenched whylere
Into huge waves of grief and gealosye
Full deep emplonged was, and drowned nigh,
Twixt inward doole and felonous despite;
He rau'd, he wept, he stamped, he loud did cry,
And all the passions, that in man may light,
Did him attonce oppress, and vex his caytiue spright.
Long thus he chawd the cud of inward grief,
And did consume his gall with anguish sore,
Still when he mused on his late mischief,
Then still the smart thereof increased more,
And seemed more grievous, then it was before:
At last when sorrow he saw booted naught,
Ne grief might not his love to him restore,
He began devise, how her he reskew might,
Ten thousand ways he cast in his confused thought.
At last resolving, like a pilgrim pore,
To seach her forth, where so she might be fond,
And bearing with him treasure in close store,
The rest he leaves in ground: So takes in hond
To seek her endlong, both by sea and land.
Long he her sought, he sought her far and nere,
And every where that he mote understand,
Of knights and ladies any meetings were,
And of eachone he met, he tidings did inquere.
But all in vain, his woman was too wise,
Ever to come into his clouch again,
And he too simple ever to surprise
The jolly Paridell, for all his pain.
One day, as he forpassed by the plain
With weary pace, he far away espide
A couple, seeming well to be his twain,
Which houed close under a forest side,
As if they lay in wait, or else themselves did hide.
Well weened he, that those the same mote be,
And as he better did their shape auize,
Him seemed more their manner did agree;
For the one was armed all in warlike wize,
Whom, to be Paridell he did deuize;
And the other all yclad in garments light,
Discolored like to womanish disguise,
He did resemble to his Lady bright;
And ever his faint heart much earned at the sight.
And ever feign he toward them would go,
But yet durst not for dread approchen nie,
But stood aloof, vnweeting what to do;
Till that pricked forth with loves extremity,
That is the father of foul gealosy,
He closely nearer crept, the truth to weet:
But, as he nigher drew, he easily
Might scerne, that it was not his sweetest sweet,
Ne yet her Belamour, the partner of his sheet.
But it was scornful Braggadocchio,
That with his servant Trompart houerd there,
Since late he fled from his too earnest foe:
Whom such when as Malbecco spyed clear,
He turned back, and would have fled arere;
Till Trompart ronning hastily, him did stay,
And bad before his sovereign Lord appear:
That was him loath, yet durst he not gainesay,
And coming him before, low louted on the lay.
The Boaster at him sternely bent his browe,
As if he could have killed him with his look,
That to the ground him meekely made to bow,
And awful terror deep into him struck,
That every member of his body quooke.
Said he, thou man of naught, what do thou here,
Unfitly furnished with thy bag and book,
Where I expected one with shield and spear,
To prove some deeds of arms upon an equal pere.
The wretched man at his imperious speech,
Was all abasht, and low prostrating, said;
Good Sir, let not my rudedesse be no breach
Unto your patience, ne be ill ypaid;
For I unawares this way by fortune straid,
A silly Pilgrim driven to distress,
That seek a Lady, There he suddein staid,
And did the rest with grievous sighs suppress,
While tears stood in his eyes, few drops of bitterness.
What Lady, man? (said Trompart) take good heart,
And tell thy grief, if any hidden lie;
Was never better time to show thy smart,
Then now, that noble succor is thee by,
That is the whole worlds commune remedy.
That cheerful word his weak heart much did cheer,
And with vain hope his spirits faint supply,
That bold he said; o most redoubted Pere,
Vouchsafe with mild regard a wretches case to hear.
Then sighing sore, It is not long (said he)
Since I enjoyed the gentlest Dame alive;
Of whom a knight, no knight at all perdee,
But shame of all, that do for honor strive,
By treacherous deceit did me deprive;
Through open outrage he her bore away,
And with foul force unto his will did drive,
Which all good knights, that arms do bear this day,
Are bound for to revenge, and punish if they may.
And you most noble Lord, that can and dare
Redress the wrong of miserable wight,
Cannot employ your most victorious spear
In better quarrel, then defense of right,
And for a Lady against a faithless knight;
So shall your glory be advanced much,
And all fair Ladies magnify your might,
And eke my self, albe I simple such,
Your worthy pain shall well reward with guerdon rich.
With that out of his bouget forth he drew
Great store of treasure, therewith him to tempt;
But he on it looked scornefully askew,
As much disdeigning to be so misdempt,
Or a war-monger to be basely nempt;
And said; thy offers base I greatly loath,
And eke thy words discourteous and unkempt;
I tread in dust thee and thy money both,
That, were it not for shame, So turned from him wroth.
But Trompart, that his masters humor knew,
In lofty looks to hide an humble mind,
Was inly tickled with that golden view,
And in his ear him grounded close behind:
Yet stoupt he not, but lay still in the wind,
Waiting advantage on the pray to sease;
Till Trompart lowly to the ground inclind,
Besought him his great courage to appease,
And pardon simple man, that rash did him displease.
Big looking like a doughtie Doucepere,
At last he thus; Thou clod of vilest clay,
I pardon yield, and with thy rudeness bear;
But weete henceforth, that all that golden pray,
And all that else the vain world vaunten may,
I loath as doung, ne deem my dew reward:
Fame is my meed, and glory virtues pray.
But minds of mortal men are muchell mard,
And moved amiss with massy mucks unmeet regard.
And more, I grant to thy great misery
Gracious respect, thy wife shall back be sent,
And that vile knight, who ever that he be,
Which has thy Lady rest, and knighthood shent,
By Sanglamort my sword, whose deadly dent
The blood has of so many thousands shed,
I swear, ere long shall dearly it repent;
Ne he twixt heaven and earth shall hide his head,
But soon he shall be found, and shortly done be ded.
The foolish man thereat woxe wondrous blithe,
As if the word so spoken, were half done,
And humbly thanked him a thousand since,
That had from death to life him newly won.
Tho forth the Boaster marching, brave begone
His stolen steed to thunder furiously,
As if he heaven and hell would ouerronne,
And all the world confound with cruelty,
That much Malbecco ioyed in his iollity.
Thus long they three together traueiled,
Through many a wood, and many an uncouth way,
To seek his wife, that was far wandered:
But those two sought naught, but the present pray,
To weete the treasure, which he did bewray,
On which their eyes and hearts were wholly set,
With purpose, how they might it best betray;
For since the hour, that first he did them let
The same behold, therewith their keen desires were whet.
It fortuned as they together fared,
They spide, where Paridell came pricking fast
Upon the plain, the which himself prepared
To giust with that brave stranger knight a cast,
As on adventure by the way he past:
Alone he rode without his Paragone;
For having filcht her bells, her up he cast
To the wide world, and let her fly alone,
He nould be clogd. So had he served many one.
The gentle Lady, loose at randon left,
The greene-wood long did walk, and wander wide
At wild adventure, like a forlorn west,
Till on a day the Satyrs her espide
Straying alone withouten groom or guide;
Her up they took, and with them home her led,
With them as housewife ever to abide,
To milk their gotes, and make them cheese and bred,
And every one as commune good her handeled.
That shortly she Malbecco has forgot,
And eke Sir Paridell, all were he dear;
Who from her went to seek another lot,
And now by fortune was arrived here,
Where those two guilers with Malbecco were:
Soon as the oldman saw Sir Paridell,
He fainted, and was almost dead with fear,
Ne word he had to speak, his grief to tell,
But to him louted low, and greeted goodly well.
And after asked him for Hellenore,
I take no keep of her (said Paridell)
She wonneth in the forest there before.
So forth he rode, as his adventure fell;
The whiles the Boaster from his lofty sell
Faynd to alight, something amiss to mend;
But the fresh Swayne would not his leisure dwell,
But went his way; whom when he passed kend,
He up remounted light, and after faindto wend.
Perdy nay (said Malbecco) shall ye not:
But let him pass as lightly, as he came:
For little good of him is to be got,
And mickle peril to be put to shame.
But let us go to seek my dearest Dame,
Whom he has left in yonder forest wyld:
For of her safety in great doubt I am,
Least saluage beasts her person have despoyld:
Then all the world is lost, and we in vain have toyld.
The all agree, and forward them addressed:
Ah but (said crafty Trompart) weete ye well,
That yonder in that wastefull wilderness
Huge monsters haunt, and many dangers dwell;
Dragons, and Minotaures, and feendes of hell,
And many wild woodmen, which rob and rend
All travelers; therefore advise ye well,
Before ye enterprise that way to wend:
One may his journey bring too soon to evil end.
Malbecco stopped in great astonishment,
And with pale eyes fast fixed on the rest,
Their counsel craved, in danger imminent.
Said Trompart, you that are the most oppressed
With burden of great treasure, I think best
Here for to stay in safety behind;
My Lord and I will search the wide forest.
That counsel pleased not Malbeccoes mind;
For he was much afraid, himself alone to find.
Then is it best (said he) that ye do leave
Your treasure here in some security,
Either fast closed in some hollow greaue,
Or buried in the ground from ieopardie,
Till we return again in safety:
As for us two, least doubt of us ye have,
Hence far away we will blindfolded lie,
Ne privy be unto your treasures grave.
It pleased: so he did, Then they march forward brave.
Now when amid the thickest woods they were,
They heard a noise of many bagpipes shrill,
And shrieking Hububs them approaching nere,
Which all the forest did with horror fill:
That dreadful sound the boasters heart did thrill,
With such amazement, that in haste he fled,
Ne ever looked back for good or ill,
And after him eke fearful Trompart sped;
The old man could not fly, but fell to ground half ded.
Yet afterward close creeping, as he might,
He in a bush did hide his fearful head,
The jolly Satyrs full of fresh delight,
Came dancing forth, and with them nimbly led
Fair Helenore, with girlonds all bespred,
Whom their May-lady they had newly made:
She proud of that new honor, which they red,
And of their lovely fellowship full glade,
Daunst lively, and her face did with a Laurel shade.
The silly man that in the thicket lay
Saw all this goodly sport, and grieved sore,
Yet durst he not against it do or say,
But did his heart with bitter thoughts engore,
To see th'vnkindnesse of his Hellenore.
All day they daunced with great lustihed,
And with their horned feet the green grass wore,
The whiles their Gotes upon the brouzes fed.
Till drouping Phoebus began to hide his golden head.
Tho up they began their merry pypes to trusse,
And all their goodly herds did gather round,
But every Satyr first did give a busse
To Hellenore: so busses did abound.
Now began the humid vapor shed the ground
With perly deaw, and th'Earthes gloomy shade
Did dim the brightness of the welkin round,
That every bird and beast awarned made,
To shroud themselves, whiles sleep their senses did invade.
Which when Melbecco saw, out of his bush
Upon his hand and feet he crept full light,
And like a Got emongst the Gotes did rush,
That through the help of his fair horns on hight,
And misty dampe of misconceiuing night,
And eke through likeness of his gotish beard,
He did the better counterfeite aright:
So home he marched emongst the horned heard,
That none of all the Satyrs him espyde or heard.
At night, when all they went to sleep, he vewd,
Whereas his lovely wife emongst them lay,
Embraced of a Satyr rough and rude,
Who all the night did mind his joyous play:
Nine times he heard him come aloft ere day,
That all his heart with gealosie did swell;
But yet that nights ensample did bewray,
That not for naught his wife them loved so well,
When one so often a night did ring his matins bell.
So closely as he could, he to them crept,
When weary of their sport to sleep they fell,
And to his wife, that now full soundly slept,
He whispered in her ear, and did her tell,
That it was he, which by her side did dwell,
And therefore prayed her wake, to hear him plain.
As one out of a dream not waked well,
She turned her, and returned back again:
Yet her for to awake he did the more constrain.
At last with irksome trouble she abrayd;
And then perceiving, that it was indeed
Her old Malbecco, which did her upbraid,
With looseness of her love, and loathly deed,
She was astonished with exceeding dreed,
And would have wakt the Satyr by her side;
But he her prayed, for mercy, or for meed,
To save his life, ne let him be descryde,
But hearken to his lore, and all his counsel hyde.
Tho began he her persuade, to leave that lewd
And loathsome life, of God and man abhord,
And home return, where all should be renewd
With perfect peace, and bands of fresh accord,
And she received again to bed and board,
As if no trespass ever had been done:
But she it all refused at one word,
And by no means would to his will be won,
But chose emongst the jolly Satyrs still to won.
He wooed her, till day springs he espyde;
But all in vain: and then turned to the heard,
Who butted him with horns on every side,
And trod down in the dirt, where his hoar beard
Was fowly dight, and he of death afeard.
Early before the heavens fairest light
Out of the ruddy East was fully reard,
The heardes out of their foldes were loosed quight,
And he emongst the rest crept forth in sorry plight.
So soon as he the Prison door did pas,
He ran as fast, as both his feet could bear,
And never looked, who behind him was,
Ne scarsely who before: like as a Bear
That creeping close, amongst the hiues to rear
An honey comb, the wakefull dogs espy,
And him assayling, sore his carcass tear,
That hardly he with life away does fly,
Ne stays, till safe himself he see from ieopardy.
Ne stayed he, till he came unto the place,
Where late his treasure he entombed had,
Where when he found it not (for Trompart bace
Had it purloyned for his master bad:)
With extreme fury he became quite mad,
And ran away, ran with himself away:
That who so straungely had him seen bestad,
With vpstart hair, and staring eyes dismay,
From Limbo lake him late escaped sure would say.
High over hills and over dales he fled,
As if the wind him on his wings had borne,
Ne banck nor bush could stay him, when he sped
His nimble feet, as treading still on thorn:
Grief, and despite, and gealosie, and scorn
Did all the way him follow hard behind,
And he himself himself loathed so forlorn,
So shamefully forlorn of womankind;
That as a Snake, still lurked in his wounded mind.
Still fled he forward, looking backward still,
Ne stayed his flight, nor fearful agony,
Till that he came unto a rockie hill,
Over the sea, suspended dreadfully,
That living creature it would terrify,
To look adowne, or upward to the hight:
From thence he threw himself dispiteously,
All desperate of his fore-damned spright,
That seemed no help for him was left in living sight.
But through long anguish, and selfe-murdring thought
He was so wasted and forpined quight,
That all his substance was consumed to naught,
And nothing left, but like an aerie Spright,
That on the rocks he fell so flit and light,
That he thereby received no hurt at all,
But chanced on a craggy cliff to light;
Whence he with crooked claws so long did crall,
That at the last he found a cave with entrance small.
Into the same he creepes, and thenceforth there
Resolved to build his balefull mansion,
In drery darkness, and continual fear
Of that rocks fall, which ever and anon
Threats with huge ruin him to fall upon,
That he dare never sleep, but that one eye
Still open he keeps for that occasion;
Ne ever rests he in tranquillity,
The roaring billows beat his bower so boystrously.
Ne ever is he wont on ought to feed,
But toades and frogs, his pasture poisonous,
Which in his cold complexion do breed
A filthy blood, or humor rancorous,
Matter of doubt and dread suspicious,
That does with curelesse care consume the heart,
Corrupts the stomach with gall vicious,
Croscuts the liver with internal smart,
And does transfixe the soul with deaths eternal dart.
Yet can he never dye, but dying lives,
And does himself with sorrow new sustain,
That death and life attonce unto him gives.
And painful pleasure turns to pleasing pain.
There dwells he ever, miserable swain,
Hateful both to him self, and every wight;
Where he through privy grief, and horror vain,
Is woxen so deformed, that he has quight
Forgot he was a man, and Gealosie is hight.
Cant. XI.
Britomart chaceth Ollyphant,
finds Scudamour distressed:
Assayes the house of Busyrane,
where Loves spoils are expressed.
O Hateful hellish Snake, what fury furst
Brought thee from balefull house of Proserpine,
Where in her bosom she thee long had nursed,
And fostred up with bitter milk of tine,
Foul Gealosie, that turnest love divine
To ioylesse dread, and make the loving heart
With hateful thoughts to languish and to pine,
And feed it self with selfe-consuming smart?
Of all the passions in the mind thou vilest art.
O let him far be banished away,
And in his stead let Love for ever dwell,
Sweet Love, that does his golding wings embay
In blessed Nectar, and pure Pleasures well,
Untroubled of vile fear, or bitter fell.
And ye fair Ladies, that your kingdoms make
In th'harts of men, them govern wisely well,
And of fair Britomart ensample take,
That was as true in love, as Turtle to her make.
Who with Sir Satyrane, as erst ye red,
Forth ryding from Malbeccoes hostlesse house,
Far off aspyde a young man, the which fled
From an huge Geaunt, that with hideous
And hateful outrage long him chaced thus;
It was that Ollyphant, the brother dear
Of that Argante vile and vicious,
From whom the Squire of Dames was rest why lere;
This all as bad as she, and worse, if worse ought were.
For as the sister did in feminine
And filthy lust exceed all woman kind,
So he surpassed his sex masculine,
In beastly use that I did ever find;
Whom when as Britomart beheld behind
The fearful boy so greedily pursew,
She was emmoued in her noble mind,
T'employ her puissaunce to his reskew,
And pricked fiercely forward, where she him did view.
Ne was Sir Satyrane her far behind,
But with like fierceness did ensew the chase:
Whom when the Gyaunt saw, he sooone resinde
His former suit, and from them fled apace;
They after both, and boldly bad him bace,
And each did strive the other to out-goe,
But he them both outran a wondrous space,
For he was long, and swift as any Roe,
And now made better speed, t'escape his feared foe.
It was not Satyrane, whom he did fear,
But Britomart the flower of chastity;
For he the power of chaste hands might not bear,
But always did their dread encounter fly:
And now so fast his feet he did apply,
That he has gotten to a forest near,
Where he is shrouded in security.
The wood they enter, and search every where,
They searched diuersely, so both divided were.
Fair Britomart so long him followed,
That she at last came to a fountain sheare,
By which there lay a knight all wallowed
Upon the grassy ground, and by him near
His haberieon, his helmet, and his spear;
A little off, his shield was rudely thrown,
On which the winged boy in colors clear
Depeincted was, full easy to be known,
And he thereby, where ever it in field was shown.
His face upon the ground did groueling ly,
As if he had been slombring in the shade,
That the brave Maid would not for courtesy,
Out of his quiet slomber him abrade,
Nor seem too suddeinly him to invade:
Still as she stood, she heard with grievous throb
Him groan, as if his heart were pieces made,
And with most painful pangs to sigh and sob,
That pity did the Virgins heart of patience rob.
At last forth breaking into bitter plaintes
He said; o sovereign Lord that sit'st on hye,
And raignst in blis emongst thy blessed Saints,
How suffrest thou such shameful cruelty,
So long vnwreaked of thine enemy?
Or have, thou Lord, of good men's cause no heed?
Or does thy justice sleep, and silent ly?
What booteth then the good and righteous deed,
If goodness find no grace, nor righteousness no meed?
If good find grace, and righteousness reward,
Why then is Amoret in caytiue band,
Since that more bounteous creature never fared
On foot, upon the face of living land?
Or if that heauely justice may withstand
The wrongful outrage of unrighteous men,
Why then is Busirane with wicked hand
Suffered, these seven months day in secret den
My Lady and my love so cruelly to pen?
My Lady and my love is cruelly pend
In doleful darkness from the view of day,
Whilst deadly torments do her chaste breast rend,
And the sharp steel does riue her heart in tway,
All for she Scudamore will not denay.
Yet thou vile man, vile Scudamore art sound,
Ne can her aid, ne can her foe dismay;
Unworthy wretch to tread upon the ground,
For whom so fair a Lady feels so sore a wound.
There an huge heap of singulfes did oppress
His struggling soul, and swelling throbs empeach
His foltring tongue with pangs of drerinesse,
Choking the remnant of his plaintiff speech,
As if his days were come to their last reach.
Which when she heard, and saw the ghastly fit,
Threatening into his life to make a breach,
Both with great ruth and terror she was smit,
Fearing least from her cage the weary soul would flit.
Tho stooping down she him amoued light;
Who therewith somewhat starting, up began look,
And seeing him behind a stranger knight,
Whereas no living creature he mistook,
With great indignaunce he that sight forsook,
And down again himself disdainefully
Abiecting the earth with his fair forhead struck:
Which the bold Virgin seeing, began apply
Fit medcine to his grief, and spoke thus courtesly.
Ah gentle knight, whose deep cenceiued grief
Well seems t'exceede the power of patience,
Yet if that heavenly grace some good relief
You send, submit you to high providence,
And ever in your noble heart prepense,
That all the sorrow in the world is less,
Then virtues might, and values confidence,
For who nill bide the burden of distress,
Must not here think to live: for life is wretchedness.
Therefore, fair Sir, do comfort to you take,
And freely read, what wicked felon so
Has outrag'd you, and thrald your gentle make.
Perhaps this hand may help to ease your woe,
And wreake your sorrow on your cruel foe,
And least it fair endeavor will apply.
Those feeling words so near the quick did go,
That up his head he reared easily,
And leaning on his elbow, these few words let fly.
What boots it plain, that cannot be redrest,
And sow vain sorrow in a fruilesse care,
Since power of hand, nor skill of learned breast,
Ne worldly price cannot redeem my dear,
Out of her thraldom and continual fear?
For he the tyrant, which her has in ward
By strong enchauntments and black Magic leare,
Has in a dungeon deep her close embard,
And many dreadful feends has pointed to her guard.
There he tormenteth her most terribly,
And day and night afflicts with mortal pain,
Because to yield him love she does deny,
Once to me yold, not to be yold again:
But yet by torture he would her constrain
Love to conceive in her disdainful breast,
Till so she do, she must in doole remain,
Ne may by living means be thence relest:
What boots it then to plain, that cannot be redrest?
With this sad hersall of his heavy stresse,
The warlike Damzell was empassiond sore,
And said; Sir knight, your cause is nothing less,
Then is your sorrow, certes if not more;
For nothing so much pity does implore,
As gentle Ladies helpless misery.
But yet, if please ye listen to my lore,
I will with proof of last extremity,
Deliver her fro thence, or with her for you die.
Ah gentlest knight alive, (said Scudamore)
What huge heroicke magnanimity
Dwells in thy bounteous breast? what could thou more,
If she were thine, and thou as now am I?
O spare thy happy days, and them apply
To better boot, but let me dye, that ought;
More is more loss: one is enough to die.
Life is not lost, (said she) for which is bought
Endless renowm, that more then death is to be sought.
Thus she at length persuaded him to rise,
And with her wend, to see what new success
Mote him befall upon new enterprise;
His arms, which he had vowed to disprofesse,
She gathered up and did about him dress,
And his for wandered steed unto him got:
So forth they both yfere make their progress,
And march not past the mountenaunce of a shot,
Till they arrived, whereas their purpose they did plot.
There they dismounting, drew their weapons bold
And stoutly came unto the Castle gate;
Whereas no gate they found, them to withhold,
Nor ward to wait at morn and evening late,
But in the Porch, that did them sore amate,
A flaming fire, ymixt with smouldry smoke,
And stinking Sulphur, that with griesly hate
And dreadful horror did all entrance choke,
Enforced them their forward footing to revoke.
Greatly thereat was Britomart dismayed,
Ne in that stownd wist, how her self to bear;
For danger vain it were, to have assayd
That cruel element, which all things fear,
Ne none can suffer to approchen near:
And turning back to Scudamour, thus said;
What monstrous enmity provoke we hear,
Foolhardy as th'Earthes children, the which made
Battle against the Gods? so we a God invade.
Danger without discretion to attempt,
Inglorious and beastlike is: therefore Sir knight,
A read what course of you is safest dempt,
And how we with our foe may come to fight.
This (quoth he) the dolorous despite,
Which erst to you I playnd: for neither may
This fire be quenched by any wit or might,
Ne yet by any means removed away,
So mighty be th'enchauntments, which the same do stay.
What is there else, but cease these fruitless pains,
And leave me to my former languishing;
Fair Amoret must dwell in wicked chains,
And Scudamore here dye with sorrowing.
Perdy not so; (said she) for shameful thing
It were t'abandon noble cheuisaunce,
For show of peril, without venturing:
Rather let try extremities of chance,
Then enterprised praise for dread to disauaunce.
Therewith resolved to prone her utmost might,
Her ample shield she threw before her face,
And her swords point directing forward right,
Assayld the flame, the which eftsoons gave place,
And did it self divide with equal space,
That throngh she passed; as a thunder bolt
Perceth the yielding air, and does displace
The soring clouds into sad showers ymolt;
So to her yold the flames, and did their force revolt.
Whom whenas Scudamour saw past the fire,
Safe and Untouched, he likewise began assay,
With greedy will, and envious desire,
And bad the stubborn flames to yield him way:
But cruel Mulciber would not obey
His threatfull pride, but did the more augment
His mighty rage, and imperious sway
Him forced (maulgre) his fierceness relent,
And back retire, all scorcht and pitifully brent.
With huge impatience he inly swelt,
More for great sorrow that he could not pas,
Then for the burning torment, which he felt,
That with fell woodnesse he effierced was,
And wilfully him throwing on the gras,
Did beat and bounse his head and breast full sore;
The whiles the Championess now entered has
The utmost rowme, and past the formest door,
The utmost rowme, abounding with all precious store,
For round about, the walls yclothed were
With goodly arras of great majesty,
Wouen with gold and silk so close and nere,
That the rich metal lurked privily,
As faining to be hid from envious eye;
Yet here, and there, and every where unawares
It showed it sfelfe, and shone unwillingly;
Like a discolourd Snake, whose hidden snares
Through the green gras his long bright burnisht back declares.
And in those Tapets weren fashioned
Many fair pourtraicts, and many a fair feate,
And all of love, and all of lusty-hed,
As seemed by their semblaunt did entreat;
And eke all Cupids wars they did repeat,
And cruel battles, which he whilome fought
Against all the Gods, to make his empire great;
Besides the huge massacres, which he wrought
On mighty kings and kesars, into thraldom brought.
Therein was writ, how often thundering Jove
Had felt the point of his hart-percing dart,
And leaving heavens kingdom, here did roue
In strange disguize, to slake his scalding smart;
Now like a Ram, fair Hell to peruart,
Now like a Bull, Europa to withdraw:
Ah, how the fearful Ladies tender heart
Did lively seem to tremble, when she saw
The huge seas under her t'obay her servant law.
Soon after that into a golden shower
Him self he chaung'd fair Danae to view,
And through the roof of her strong brazen tower
Did rain into her lap an honey dew,
The whiles her foolish guard, that little knew
Of such deceit, kept th'yron door fast bard,
And watched, that none should enter nor issew;
Vain was the watch, and bootlesse all the ward,
Whenas the God to golden hew him self transfard.
Then was he turned into a snowy Swan,
To win fair Leda to his lovely trade:
O wondrous skill, and sweet wit of the man,
That her in daffadillies sleeping made,
From scorching heat her dainty limbs to shade:
Whiles the proud Bird ruffing his feathers wide,
And brushing his fair breast, did her invade;
She slept, yet twixt her eyelids closely spyde,
How toward her he rusht, and smiled at his pride.
Then showed it, how the Thebane Semelee
Deceived of gealous Juno, did require
To see him in his sovereign maiestee,
Armd with his thunderbolts and lightning fire,
Whence dearly she with death bought her desire*
But fair Alcmena better match did make,
Ioying his love in likeness more entire;
Three nights in one, they say, that for her sake
He then did put, her pleasures longer to partake.
Twice was he seen in soaring Eagles shape,
And with wide wings to beat the buxome air,
Once, when he with Asterie did escape,
Again, when as the Troiane boy so fair
He snatched from Ida hill, and with him bare:
Wondrous delight it was, there to behold,
How the rude Shepherds after him did stare,
Trembling through fear, least down he fallen should
And often to him calling, to take surer hold.
In Satyrs shape Antiopa he snatched:
And like a fire, when he Aegin' assayd:
A shepherd, when Mnemosyne he caught:
And like a Serpent to the Thracian maid.
Whiles thus on earth great Jove these pageaunts played,
The winged boy did thrust into his throne,
And scoffing, thus unto his mother said,
Lo now the heavens obey to me alone,
And take me for their Jove, whiles Jove to earth is gone.
And thou, fair Phoebus, in thy colors bright
Wast there enwouen, and the sad distress,
In which that boy thee plonged, for despite,
That thou bewray'dst his mothers wantonness,
When she with Mars was meynt in ioyfulnesse:
For thy he thrild thee with a leaden dart,
To love fair Daphne, which thee loved less:
Less she thee loved, then was thy just desert,
Yet was thy love her death, and her death was thy smart.
So louedst thou the lusty Hyacinct,
So louedst thou the fair Coroxis dear:
Yet both are of thy hapless hand extinct,
Yet both in flowers do live, and love thee bear,
The one a Paunce, the other a sweet breare:
For grief whereof, ye mote have lively seen
The God himself rending his golden hear,
And breaking quite his gyrlond ever green,
With other signs of sorrow and impatient teene.
Both, for those two, and for his own dear son,
The son of Climene he did repent,
Who bold to guide the charet of the Sun,
Himself in thousand pieces fondly rent,
And all the world with flashing fire brent,
So like, that all the walls did seem to flame.
Yet cruel Cupid, not herewith content,
Forced him eftsoons to follow other game,
And love a Shepherds daughter for his dearest Dame.
He loved Isse for his dearest Dame,
And for her sake her cattle fed a while,
And for her sake a cowheard vile became,
The servant of Admetus cowheard vile,
Whiles that from heaven he suffered exile.
Long were to tell each other lovely fit,
Now like a Lion, hunting after spoil,
Now like a Hag, now like a faulcon flit:
All which in that fair arras was most lively writ.
Next unto him was Neptune pictured,
In his divine resemblance wondrous like:
His face was rugged, and his hoarie head
Dropped with brackish deaw; his three-forkt Pyke
He stearnly shook, and therewith fierce did stryke
The raging billows, that on every side
They trembling stood, and made a long broad dyke,
That his swift charet might have passage wide,
Which four great Hippodames did draw in temewise tide.
His sea-horses did seem to snort amayne,
And from their nosethrilles blow the brynie stream,
That made the sparckling waves to smoke again,
And flame with gold, but the white fomy cream,
Did shine with silver, and shoot forth his beam.
The God himself did pensive seem and sad,
And hong adowne his head, as he did dream:
For privy love his breast empierced had,
Ne ought but dear Bisaltis ay could make him glad.
He loved eke Iphimedia dear,
And Aeolus fair daughter Arne hight.
For whom he turned him self into a Steare,
And fed on fodder, to beguile her sight.
Also to win Deucalions daughter bright,
Her turned him self into a Dolphin fair;
And like a winged horse he took his flight,
To snaly-locke Medusa to repair,
On whom he got fair Pegasus, that flitteth in the air.
Next Saturn was, (but who would ever ween,
That sullein Saturn ever weend to love?
Yet love is sullein, and Saturnlike seen,
As he did for Erigone it prove.)
That to a Centaure did him self transmoue.
So proou'd it eke that gracious God of wine,
When for to compass Philliras hard love,
He turned himself into a fruitful vine,
And into her fair bosom made his grapes decline.
Long were to tell the amorous assayes,
And gentle pangues, with which he maked meek
The mighty Mars, to learn his wanton plays:
How often for Venus, and how often eek
For many other Nymphs he sore did shreek,
With womanish tears, and with unwarlike smarts,
Privily moystening his horrid cheek.
There was he painted full of burning darts,
And many wide wounds launched through his inner parts,
Ne did he spare (so cruel was the Elfe)
His own dear mother, (ah why should he so?
Ne did he spare sometime to prick himself,
That he might taste the sweet consuming woe,
Which he had wrought to many others more.
But to declare the mournful Trage dies,
And spoils, wherewith he all the ground did strew,
More eath to number, with how many eyes
High heaven beholds sad lovers nightly theeueryes.
Kings Queens, Lords Ladies, Knights and Damzels gent
Were heaped together with the vulgar sort,
And mingled with the rascal rablement,
Without respect of person or of port,
To show Dan Cupids power and great effort:
And round about a border was entrayld,
Of broken bows and arrows shiuered short,
And a long bloody river through them rayld,
So lively and so like, that living sense it fayld.
And at the upper end of that fair rowme,
There was an Altar built of precious stone,
Of passing value, and of great renown,
On which there stood an Image all alone,
Of massy gold, which with his own light shone;
And wings it had with sundry colors dight,
More sundry colors, then the proud Pauone
Bears in his boasted fan, or Iris bright,
When her discolourd bow she spreds through heaven bright,
Blindfold he was, and in his cruel fist
A mortal bow and arrows keen did hold,
With which he shot at randon, when him list,
Some headed with sad lead, some with pure gold;
(Ah man beware, how thou those darts behold)
A wounded Dragon under him did ly,
Whose hideous tail his left foot did ensold,
And with a shaft was shot through either eye,
That no man forth might draw, ne no man remedy.
And underneath his feet was written thus,
Unto the Victor of the Gods this be:
And all the people in that ample house
Did to that image bow their humble knee,
And often committed foul Idola tree.
That wondrous sight fair Britomart amazed,
Ne seeing could her wonder satisfy,
But evermore and more upon it gazed,
The whiles the passing brightness her frail senses dazed.
Tho as she backward cast her busy eye,
To search each secret of that goodly sted
Over the door thus written she did spy
Be hold: she often and often it ouer-red,
Yet could not find what sense it figured:
But what so were therein or writ or meant,
She was no whit thereby discouraged
From prosecuting of her first intent,
But forward with bold steps into the next room went.
Much fairer, then the former, was that room,
And richlier by many parts arayd:
For not with arras made in painful loome,
But with pure gold it all was ouerlayd,
Wrought with wild Antickes, which their follies played,
In the rich metal, as they living were:
A thousand monstrous forms therein were made,
Such as false love does often upon him wear?
For love in thousand monstrous forms does often appear.
And all about, the glistring walls were hong
With warlike spoils, and with victorious prays,
Of mighty Conquerours and Captains strong,
Which were whilome captiued in their days
To cruel love, and wrought their own decays:
Their swerds and speres were broke, and hauberques rent;
And their proud girlonds of tryumphant bays
Trodden in dust with fury insolent,
To show the victors might and merciless intent.
The warlike Maid beholding earnestly
The goodly ordinance of this rich place,
Did greatly wonder ne could satisfy
Her greedy eyes with gazing a long space,
But more she meruaild that no footings trace,
Nor wight appeared, but wastefull emptiness,
And solemn silence over all that place:
Strange thing it seemed, that none was to possess
So rich purueyance, ne them keep with carfulness.
And as she looked about, she did behold,
How over that same door was likewise writ,
Be bold, be bold, and every where Be bold,
That much she muz'd, yet could not construe it
By any ridling skill, or commune wit.
At last she spyde at that rooms upper end,
Another iron door, on which was writ,
Be not too bold; whereto though she did bend
Her earnest mind, yet wist not what it might intend.
Thus she there waited until euentyde,
Yet living creature none she saw appear:
And now sad shadows began the world to hyde,
From mortal view, and wrap in darkness dreare;
Yet nould she d'off her weary arms, for fear
Of secret danger, ne let sleep oppress
Her heavy eyes with natures burdein dear,
But drew her self aside in sickernesse,
And her welpointed weapons did about her dress.
Cant. XII.
The mask of Cupid, and th'enchaunted
Chamber are displayed,
Whence Britomart redeemes fair
Amoret, through charms decayed.
THo when as chearelesse Night ycouered had
Fair heaven with an universal cloud,
That every wight dismayed with darkness sad,
In silence and in sleep themselves did shroud,
She heard a shrilling Trompet sound aloud,
Sign of nigh battle, or got victory;
Naught therewith daunted was her courage proud,
But rather stird to cruel enmity,
Expecting cuer, when some foe she might descry.
With that, an hideous storm of wind arose,
With dreadful thunder and lightning atwixt,
And an earthquake, as if it straight would lose
The worlds foundations from his center fixed;
A direful stench of smoke and sulphur mixed
Ensewd, whose noyance filled the fearful sted,
From the fourth hour of night until the sixth;
Yet the bold Britonesse was naught ydred,
Though much emmou'd, but steadfast still perseuered.
All suddenly a stormy whirlwind blew
Throughout the house, that clapped every door,
With which that iron wicket open flew,
As it with mighty leuers had been tore:
And forth issewd, as on the ready flore
Of some Theater, a grave personage,
That in his hand a branch of laurel bore,
With comely haueour and countenance sage,
Yclad in costly garments, fit for tragic Stage.
Proceeding to the midst, he still did stand,
As if in mind he somewhat had to say,
And to the vulgar beckning with his hand,
In sign of silence, as to hear a play,
By lively actions he began bewray
Some argument of matter passioned;
Which done, he back retired soft away,
And passing by, his name discovered,
Ease, on his robe in golden letters cyphered.
The noble Maid, still standing all this vewd,
And merueild at his strange intendiment;
With that a joyous fellowship issewd
Of Minstrals, making goodly meriment,
With wanton Bardes, and Rymers impudent,
All which together sungfull chearefully
A lay of loves delight, with sweet consent:
After whom marched a jolly company,
In manner of a mask, enranged orderly.
The whiles a most delitious harmony,
In full strange notes was sweetly heard to sound,
That the rare sweetness of the melody
The feeble senses wholly did confound,
And the frail soul in deep delight nigh dround:
And when it ceast, shrill trompets loud did bray,
That their report did far away rebound,
And when they ceast, it began again to play,
The whiles the maskers marched forth in trim array.
The first was Fancy, like a lovely boy,
Of rare aspect, and beauty without pear;
Matchable either to that ympe of Troy,
Whom Jove did love, and chose his cup to bear,
Or that same dainty lad, which was so dear
To great Alcides, that when as he did,
He wailed womanlike with many a tear,
And every wood, and every valley wide
He filled with Hylas name; the Nymphs eke Hylas cryde.
His garment neither was of silk nor say,
But painted plumes, in goodly order dight,
Like as the sunburnt Indians do array
Their tawney bodies, in their proudest plight:
As those same plumes, so seemd he vain and light,
That by his gate might easily appear;
For still he fared as dancing in delight,
And in his hand a windy fan did bear,
That in the idle air he moved still here and there.
And him beside marched amorous Desire,
Who seemd of riper years, then the other Swain,
Yet was that others swayne this elders sire,
And gave him being, commune to them twain:
His garment was disguised very vain,
And his embrodered Bonet sat awry;
Twixt both his hands few sparks he close did strain,
Which still he blew, and kindled busily,
That soon they life conceiud, and forth in flames did fly.
Next after him went Doubt, who was yclad
In a discolored cote, of strange disguyse,
That at his back a broad Capuccio had,
And sleeves dependant Albanese-wyse:
He looked askew with his mistrustfull eyes,
And nicely trod, as thorns lay in his way,
Or that the flore to shrink he did auyse,
And on a broken reed he still did stay
His feeble steps, which shrunk, when hard thereon he lay.
With him went Danger, cloth' in ragged weed,
Made of Bears skin, that him more dreadful made,
Yet his own face was dreadful, ne did need
Strange horror, to deforme his griesly shade;
A net in the one hand, and a rustie blade
In the other was, this Mischief, that Mishap;
With the one his foes he threatened to invade,
With the other he his friends meant to enwrap:
For whom he could not kill, he practizd to entrap.
Next him was Fear, all armed from top to toe,
Yet thought himself not safe enough thereby,
But feared each shadow moving to and fro,
And his own arms when glittering he did spy,
Or clashing heard, he fast away did fly,
As ashes pale of hew, and wingyheeld;
And evermore on danger fixed his eye,
Against whom he always bent a brazen shield,
Which his right hand unarmed fearfully did wield.
With him went Hope in rank, a handsome Maid,
Of cheerful look and lovely to behold;
In silken samite she was light arayd,
And her fair locks were wouen up in gold;
She always smyld, and in her hand did hold
An holy water Sprinckle, dipped in deowe,
With which she sprinkled favors manifold,
On whom she list, and did great liking sheowe,
Great liking unto many, but true love to feowe.
And after them Dissemblance, and Suspect
Marched in one rank, yet an unequal pair:
For she was gentle, and of mild aspect,
Courteous to all, and seeming debonaire,
Goodly adorned, and exceeding fair:
Yet was that all but painted, and purloynd,
And her bright brows were decked with borrowed hair:
Her deeds were forged, and her words false coynd,
And always in her hand two clewes of silk she twynd.
But he was foul, ill favored, and grim,
Under his eyebrowes looking still askaunce;
And ever as Dissemblance laughed on him,
He lowrd on her with dangerous eyeglaunce;
Showing his nature in his countenance;
His rolling eyes did never rest in place,
But walked each where, for fear of hid mischaunce,
Holding a lattice still before his face,
Through which he still did peep, as forward he did pace.
Next him went Grief, and Fury matched yfere;
Grief all in sable sorrowfully clad,
Down hanging his dull head, with heavy chere,
Yet inly being more, then seeming sad:
A pair of Pincers in his hand he had,
With which he pinched people to the heart,
That from thenceforth a wretched life they lad,
In wilful languor and consuming smart,
Dying each day with inward wounds of dolours dart.
But Fury was full ill appareiled
In rags, that naked nigh she did appear,
With ghastly looks and dreadful drerihed;
For from her back her garments she did tear,
And from her head often rent her snarled hear:
In her right hand a firebrand she did toss
About her head, still roming here and there;
As a dismayed Dear in chase embost,
Forgetful of his safety, has his right way lost.
After them went Displeasure and Pleasance,
He looking lompish and full sullein sad,
And hanging down his heavy countenance;
She cheerful fresh and full of ioyance glad,
As if no sorrow she ne felt ne drad;
That evil matched pair they seemd to be:
An angry Waspe the one in a vial had
The Other in hers an hony-lady Be;
Thus marched these six couples forth in fair degree.
After all these there marched a most fair Dame,
Led of two grysie villeins, the one Despite,
The other cleped Cruelty by name:
She doleful Lady, like a dreary Spright,
Called by strong charms out of eternal night,
Had deaths own image figurd in her face,
Full of sad signs, fearful to living sight;
Yet in that horror showed a seemly grace,
And with her feeble feet did move a comely pace.
Her breast all naked, as net iuory,
Without adorn of gold or silver bright,
Wherewith the Craftesman wonts it beautify,
Of her dew honor was despoyled quight,
And a wide wound therein (O ruefull sight)
Entrenched deep with knife accursed keen,
Yet freshly bleeding forth her fainting spright,
(The work of cruel hand) was to be seen,
That did in sanguine red her skin all snowy cleene.
At that wide orisice her trembling heart
Was drawn forth, and in silver basin laid,
Quite through transfixed with a deadly dart,
And in her blood yet steeming fresh embayd:
And those two villeins, which her steps vpstayd,
When her weak feet could scarcely her sustain,
And fading vital powers began to fade,
Her forward still with torture did constrain,
And evermore increased her consuming pain.
Next after her the winged God himself
Came riding on a Lion ravenous,
Taught to obey the menage of that Elfe,
That man and beast with power imperious
Subdeweth to his knigdome tyrannous:
His blindfold eyes he bad a while unbind,
That his proud spoil of that same dolorous
Fair Dame he might behold in perfect kind;
Which seen, he much rejoiced in his cruel mind.
Of which full proud, himself up rearing hye,
He looked round about with stern disdain;
And did suruay his goodly company:
And marshalling the evil ordered train,
With that the darts which his right did strain,
Full dreadfully he shook that all did quake,
And clapped on hie his coulourd wings twain,
That all his many it affraide did make:
Tho blinding him again, his way he forth did take.
Behind him was Reproach, Repentance, Shame;
Reproach the first, Shame next, Repent behind:
Repentance feeble, sorrowful, and lame:
Reproach despightfull, careless, and unkind;
Shame most ill favored, bestiall, and blind:
Shame lowrd, Repentance sighed, Reproach did scould;
Reproach sharp stings, Repentance whips entwind,
Shame burning brond-yrons in her hand did hold:
All three to each unlike, yet all made in one mould.
And after them a rude confused rout
Of persons flockt, whose names is hard to read:
Emongst them was stern Strife, and Anger stout,
Unquiet Care, and fond Vnthriftihead,
Lewd Loss of Time, and Sorrow seeming dead,
Inconstant Change, and false Disloyalty,
Consuming Riotise, and guilty Dread
Of heavenly vengeance, faint Infirmity,
Vile Poverty, and lastly Death with infamy.
There were full many more like maladies,
Whose names and natures I note readen well;
So many more, as there be fantasies
In wavering wemens wit, that none can tell,
Or pains in love, or punishments in hell;
And which disguized marched in masking wise,
About the chamber with that Damozell,
And then returned, having marched thrice,
Into the inner room, from whence they first did rise.
So soon as they were in, the door straight way
Fast locked, driven with that stormy blast,
Which first it opened; and bore all away
Then the brave Maid, which all this while was plast,
In secret shade, and saw both first and last,
Issewed forth, and went unto the door,
To enter in, but found it locked fast:
It vain she thought with rigorous uproar
For to efforce, when charms had closed it before.
Where force might not avail, their sleights and art
She cast to use, both fit for hard emprize;
For thy from that same room not to depart
Till morrow next, she did her self auize,
When that same Mask again should forth arize.
The morrow next appeard with joyous cheer,
Calling men to their daily exercize,
Then she, as morrow fresh, her self did rear
Out of her secret stand, that day for to out wear.
All that day she outwore in wandering,
And gazing on that Chambers ornament,
Till that again the second evening
Her covered with her sable vestiment,
Wherewith the worlds fair beauty she has blent:
Then when the second watch was almost past,
That brazen door flew open, and in went
Bold Britomart, as she had late forecast,
Neither of idle shows, nor of false charms aghast.
So soon as she was entered, round about
She cast her eyes, to see what was become
Of all those persons, which she saw without:
But lo, they straight were vanished all and some,
Ne living wight she saw in all that room,
Save that same woeful Lady, both whose hands
Were bounden fast, that did her ill become,
And her small wast girt round with iron bands,
Unto a brazen pillour, by the which she stands.
And her before the vile Enchaunter sat,
Figuring strange characters of his art,
With living blood he those characters wrate,
Dreadfully dropping from her dying heart,
Seeming transfixed with a cruel dart,
And all perforce to make her him to love.
Ah who can love the worker of her smart?
A thousand charms he formerly did prove;
Yet thousand charms could not her steadfast heart remove.
Soon as that virgin knight he saw in place,
His wicked books in have he overthrew,
Not caring his long labors to deface,
And fiercely ronning to that Lady true,
A murdrous knife out of his pocket drew,
The which he thought, for villeinous despite,
In her tormented body to embrew:
But the stout Damzell to him leaping light,
His cursed hand withheld, and maistered his might.
From her, to whom his fury first he meant,
The wicked weapon rashly he did wrest,
And turning to her self his fell intent,
Unawares it struck into her snowie chest,
That little drops empurpled her fair breast.
Exceeding wroth therewith the virgin grew,
Albe the wound were nothing deep impressed,
And fiercely forth her mortal blade she drew,
To give him the reward for such vile outrage dew.
So mightily she smote him, that to ground
He fell half dead; next stroke him should have slain,
Had not the Lady, which by him stood bound,
Dernely unto him called to abstain,
From doing him to die. For else her pain
Should be remediless, since none but he,
Which wrought it, could the same recure again.
Therewith she stayed her hand, loath stayed to be;
For life she him enuyde, and longed revenge to see.
And to him said, Thou wicked man, whose meed
For so huge mischief, and vile villainy
Is death, or if that ought do death exceed,
Be sure, that naught may save thee from to die,
But if that thou this Dame do presently
Restore unto her health, and former state;
This do and line, else die undoubtedly.
He glad of life, that looked for death but late,
Did yield himself right willing to prolong his date.
And rising up, began straight to ouerlooke
Those cursed leaves, his charms back to reuerse;
Full dreadful things out of that balefull book
He red, and measured many a sad verse,
That horror began the virgins heart to perse,
And her fair locks up stared stiff on end,
Hearing him those same bloody lines rehearse;
And all the while he red, she did extend
Her sword high over him, if ought he did offend.
Anon she began perceive the house to quake,
And all the doors to rattle round about;
Yet all that did not her dismayed make,
Nor slack her threatfull hand for dangers dout,
But still with steadfast eye and courage stout
Abode, to weet what end would come of all.
At last that mighty chain, which round about
Her tender waste was wound, adowne began fall,
And that great brazen pillour broke in pieces small.
The cruel steel, which thrild her dying heart,
Fell softly forth, as of his own accord,
And the wide wound, which lately did dispart
Her bleeding breast, and riuen bowels gored,
Was closed up, as it had not been bored,
And every part to safety full sound,
As she were never hurt, was soon restored:
Tho when she felt her self to be unbound,
And perfect hole, prostrate she fell unto the ground.
Before fair Britomart, she fell prostrate,
Saying, Ah noble knight, what worthy meed
Can wretched Lady, quit from woeful state,
Yield you in liew of this your gracious deed?
Your virtue self her own reward shall breed,
Even immortal praise, and glory wide,
Which I your vassal, by your prowess freed,
Shall through the world make to be notifyde,
And goodly well advance, that goodly well was tryde.
But Britomart vprearing her from ground,
Said, Gentle Dame, reward enough I ween
For many labors more, then I have found,
This, that in safety now I have you seen,
And mean of your deliverance have been:
Henceforth fair Lady comfort to you take,
And put away remembrance of late teene;
In stead thereof know, that your loving Make,
Has no less grief endured for your gentle sake.
She much was cheard to hear him mentiond,
Whom of all living wights she loved best.
Then laid the noble Championess strong hond
Upon th'enchaunter, which had her distressed
So sore, and with foul outrages oppressed:
With that great chain, wherewith not long ygo
He bound that pitteous Lady prisoner, now relest,
Himself she bound, more worthy to be so,
And captive with her led to wretchedness and woe.
Returning back, those goodly rooms, which erst
She saw so rich and royally arayd,
Now vanished utterly, and clean subuerst
She found, and all their glory quite decayed,
That sight of such a change her much dismayed.
Thence forth descending to that perlous Porch,
Those dreadful flames she also found delayed,
And quenched quite, like a consumed torch,
That erst all entrers wont so cruelly to scorch.
More easy issew now, then entrance late
She found: for now that fained dreadful flame,
Which chokt the porch of that enchaunted gate,
And passage bard to all, that thither came,
Was vanished quite, as it were not the same,
And gave her leave at pleasure forth to pass.
Th'Enchaunter self, which all that fraud did frame,
To have efforst the love of that fair less,
Seeing his work now wasted deep engrieued was.
But when the victoresse arrived there,
Where late she left the pensife Scudamore,
With her own trusty Squire, both full of fear,
Neither of them she found where she them lore:
There at her noble heart was stonisht sore;
But most fair Amoret, whose gentle spright
Now began to feed on hope, which she before
Conceived had, to see her own dear knight,
Being thereof beguyld was filled with new affright.
But he sad man, when he had long in dread
Awayted there for Britomarts return,
Yet saw her not nor sign of her good speed,
His expectation to despair did turn,
Misdeeming sure that her those flames did burn;
And therefore began aduize with her old Squire,
Who her dear nourslings loss no less did mourn,
Thence to depart for further aid t'enquire:
Where let them wend at will, whilst here I do respire.
A Vision upon this conceit of the Faery Queen.
ME thought I saw the grave, where Laura lay,
Within that Temple, where the vestall flame
Was wont to burn, and passing by that way,
To see that buried dust of living fame,
Whose tomb fair love, and fairer virtue kept,
All suddenly I saw the Faery Queen:
At whose approach the soul of Petrarke wept,
And from thenceforth those graces were not seen.
For they this Queen attended, in whose steed
Oblivion laid him down on Lauras hearse:
Hereat the hardest stones were seen to bleed,
And groans of buried ghostes the heavens did perse.
Where Homers spright did tremble all for grief,
And cursed th'accesse of that celestial theife.
Another of the same.
THe praise of meaner wits this work like profit brings,
As does the Cuckoes song delight when Philumena sings.
If thou have formed right true virtues face herein:
Virtue her self can best discern, to whom they written bin.
If thou have beauty praysd, let her sole looks divine
Judge if ought therein be amiss, and mend it by her eine.
If Chastity want ought, or Temperance her dew,
Behold her Princely mind aright, and write thy, Queen anew.
Mean while she shall perceive, how far her virtues sore
Above the reach of all that live, or such as wrote of yore:
And thereby will excuse and favor thy good will:
Whose virtue can not be expressed, but by an Angels quill.
Of me no lines are loved, nor letters are of price,
Of all which speak our English tongue, but those of thy device.
W.R.

To the learned Shepherd
COllyn I see by thy new taken task,
some sacred fury has enricht thy brains,
That leads thy muse in haughty verse to mask,
and loath the lays that longs to lowly swaynes.
That lifts thy notes from Shepheardes unto kings,
So like the lively Lark that mounting sings.
Thy lovely Rosolinde seems now forlorn,
and all thy gentle flocks forgotten quight,
Thy changed heart now holds thy pypes in scorn,
those pretty pypes that did thy mates delight.
Those trusty mates, that loved thee so well,
Whom thou gave mirth: as they gave thee the bell.
Yet as thou erst with thy sweet roundelayes,
did stir to glee our laddes in homely bowers:
So moughtst thou now in these refyned lays,
delight the dainty ears of higher powers.
And so might they in their deep skanning skill
Allow and grace our Collyns flowing quill.
And fare befall that Faerie Queen of thine,
in whose fair eyes love linckt with virtue sits:
Enfusing by those bewties fires divine,
Such high conceits into thy humble wits,
As raised has poor pastors oaten reed,
From rusticke tunes, to chaunt heroique deeds.
So might thy Redcrosse knight with happy hand
victorious be in that fair Hands right:
Which thou do veil in Type of Faery land
Elyzas blessed field, that Albion hight.
That shieldes her friends, and wars her mighty foes,
Yet still with people, peace, and plenty flows.
But (jolly Shepherd) though with pleasing style,
thou feast the humor of the Courtly train:
Let not conceit thy settled sense beguile,
ne daunted be through envy or disdain.
Subject thy dome to her Empyring spright,
From whence thy Muse, and all the world takes light.
Hobynoll.

THE SECOND PART OF THE FAERIE QVEENE.

Containing THE FOVRTH, FIFTH, AND SIXTH BOOKS.

By Ed. Spenser.

ANCHORA SPEI

printer's or publisher's device

Imprinted at London for William Ponsonby. 1596.

THE FOVRTH BOOK OF THE FAERIE QVEENE. Containing The Legend of CAMBEL and
TELAMOND, OR OF FRIENDSHIP.
THe rugged forhead that with grave foresight
Welds kingdoms causes, and affairs of state,
My looser rimes (I wot) does sharply wite,
For praising love, as I have done of late,
And magnifying lovers dear debate;
By which frail youth is often to folly led,
Through false allurement of that pleasing bait,
That better were in virtues discipled,
Then with vain poemes weeds to have their fancies fed.
Such ones ill judge of love, that cannot love,
Ne in their frosen hearts feel kindly flame:
For thy they ought not thing unknown reprove,
Ne natural affection faultlesse blame,
For fault of few that have abusd the same.
For it of honor and all virtue is
The root, and brings forth glorious flowers of fame,
That crown true lovers with immortal blis,
The meed of them that love, and do not live amiss.
Which who so list look back to former ages,
And call to count the things that then were done,
Shall find, that all the works of those wise sages,
And brave exploits which great Heroes won,
In love were either ended or begun:
Witness the father of Philosophy,
Which to his Critias, shaded often from sun,
Of love full many lessons did apply,
The which these Stoicke censours cannot well deny.
To such therefore I do not sing at all,
But to that sacred Saint my sovereign Queen,
In whose chaste breast all bounty natural,
And treasures of true love enlocked been,
Boue all her sex that ever yet was seen;
To her I sing of love, that loves best,
And best is loved of all alive I ween:
To her this song most fitly is addressed,
The Queen of love, and Prince of peace from heaven blessed.
Which that she may the better deigne to hear,
Do thou dred infant, Venus dearling dove,
From her high spirit chase imperious fear,
And use of awful Majesty remove:
In sted thereof with drops of melting love,
Deawd with ambrosiall kisses, by thee gotten
From thy sweet smyling mother from above,
Sprinckle her heart, and haughty courage soften,
That she may hark to love, and read this lesson often.
Cant. I.
Fair Britomart saues Amoret,
Duessa discord breeds
Twixt Scudamour and Blandamour:
Their fight and warlike deeds.
OF lovers sad calamities of old,
Full many piteous stories do remain,
But none more piteous ever was ytold,
Then that of Amorets hart-binding chain,
And this of Florimels unworthy pain:
The dear compassion of whose bitter fit
My softened heart so sorely does constrain,
That I with tears full often do pity it,
And oftentimes do wish it never had been writ.
For from the time that Scudamour her bought
In perilous fight, she never ioyed day,
A perilous fight when he with force her brought
From twenty Knights, that did him all assay:
Yet fairly well he did them all dismay:
And with great glory both the shield of love,
And eke the Lady self he brought away,
Whom having wedded as did him behoue,
A new unknown mischief did from him remove.
For that same vile Enchauntour Busyran,
The very self same day that she was wedded,
Amidst the bridale feast, whilst every man
Surcharged with wine, were heedlesse and ill hedded,
All bent to mirth before the bride was bedded,
Brought in that mask of love which late was showen:
And there the Lady ill of friends bestedded,
By way of sport, as often in maskes is known,
Conveyed quite away to living wight unknown.
Seven months he so her kept in bitter smart,
Because his sinful lust she would not serve,
Until such time as noble Britomart
Released her, that else was like to sterue,
Through cruel knife that her dear heart did kerue.
And now she is with her upon the way,
Marching in lovely wise, that could deserve
No spot of blame, though spite did often assay
To blot her with dishonor of so fair a pray.
Yet should it be a pleasant tale, to tell
The diverse usage and demeanure daint,
That each to other made, as often befell.
For Amoret right fearful was and faint,
Lest she with blame her honor should attaint,
That every word did tremble as she spoke,
And every look was coy, and wondrous quaint,
And every limb that touched her did quake:
Yet could she not but courteous countenance to her make.
For well she wist, as true it was indeed,
That her lives Lord and patron of her health
Right well deserved as his duefull meed,
Her love, her service, and her utmost wealth.
All is his justly, that all freely dealth:
Nathlesse her honor dearer then her life,
She sought to save, as thing reserved from stealth;
Die had she lever with Enchanters knife,
Then to be false in love, professed a virgin wife.
Thereto her fear was made so much the greater
Through fine abusion of that Briton maid:
Who for to hide her fained sex the better,
And mask her wounded mind, both did and said
Full many things so doubtful to be wayd,
That well she wist not what by them to guess,
For other whiles to her she purpos made
Of love, and otherwhiles of lustfulnesse,
That much she feared his mind would grow to some excess
His will she feared; for him she surely thought
To be a man, such as indeed he seemed,
And much the more, by that he lately wrought,
When her from deadly thraldom he redeemed,
For which no service she too much esteemed,
Yet dread of shame, and doubt of foul dishonor
Made her not yield so much, as due she deemed.
Yet Britomart attended duly on her,
As well became a knight, and did to her all honor.
It so befell one evening, that they came
Unto a Castle, lodged there to be,
Where many a knight, and many a lovely Dame
Was then assembled, deeds of arms to see:
Amongst all which was none more fair then she,
That many of them moved to eye her sore.
The custom of that place was such, that he
Which had no love nor lemman there in store,
Should either win him one, or lie without the door.
Amongst the rest there was a jolly knight,
Who being asked for his love, auow'd
That fairest Amoret was his by right,
And offered that to justify alowd.
The warlike virgin seeing his so proud
And boastfull challenge, wexed inlie wroth,
But for the present did her anger shroud;
And said, her love to lose she was full loath,
But either he should neither of them have, or both.
So forth they went, and both together giusted;
But that same younker soon was overthrown,
And made repent, that he had rashly lusted
For thing unlawful, that was not his own:
Yet since he seemed valiant, though unknown,
She that no less was courteous then stout,
Cast how to salve, that both the custom shown
Were kept, and yet that Knight not locked out,
That seemed full hard t'accord two things so far in dout.
The Seneschall was called to deem the right,
Whom she required, that first fair Amoret
Might be to her allowed, as to a Knight,
That did her win and free from challenge set:
Which straight to her was yielded without let.
Then since that strange Knights love from him was quitted,
She claimed that to her self, as Ladies det
He as a Knight might justly be admitted;
So none should be out shut, since all of loves were fitted.
With that her glistring helmet she unlaced;
Which doft, her golden locks, that were up bound
Still in a knot, unto her heels down traced,
And like a silken veil in compass round
About her back and all her body wound:
Like as the shining sky in summers night,
What time the days with scorching heat abound,
Is creasted all with lines of fiery light,
That it prodigious seems in common peoples sight.
Such when those Knights and Ladies all about
Beheld her, all were with amazement smit,
And every one began grow in secret dout
Of this and that, according to each wit:
Some thought that some enchantment faygned it;
Some, that Bellona in that warlike wise
To them appeared, with shield and armor fit;
Some, that it was a mask of strange disguise:
So diuersely each one did sundry doubts devise.
But that young Knight, which through her gentle deed
Was to that goodly fellowship restored,
Ten thousand thanks did yield her for her meed,
And doubly ouercommen, her adored:
So did they all their former strife accord;
And eke fair Amoret now freed from fear,
More frank affection did to her afford,
And to her bed, which she was wont forbear,
Now freely drew, and found right safe assurance theare.
Where all that night they of their loves did treat,
And hard adventures twixt themselves alone,
That each the other began with passion great,
And griefull pity privately bemone.
The morrow next so soon as Titan shone,
They both vprose, and to their ways them dight:
Long wandered they, yet never met with none,
That to their wills could them direct aright,
Or to them tidings tell, that mote their hearts delight.
Lo thus they rode, till at the last they spide
Two armed Knights, that toward them did pace,
And each of them had ryding by his side
A Lady, seeming in so far a space,
But Ladies none they were, albee in face
And outward show fair semblance they did bear;
For under mask of beauty and good grace,
Vile treason and foul falsehood hidden were,
That mote to none but to the wary wise appear.
The one of them the false Duessa hight,
That now had changed her former wonted hew:
For she could d'on so many shapes in sight,
As ever could Cameleon colors new;
So could she forge all colors, save the true.
The other no whit better was then she,
But that such as she was, she plain did show;
Yet otherwise much worse, if worse might be,
And daily more offensive unto each degree.
Her name was Ate, mother of debate,
And all dissension, which does daily grow
Amongst frail men, that many a public state
And many a private often does overthrow.
Her false Duessa who full well did know,
To be most fit to trouble noble knights,
Which hunt for honor, raised from below,
Out of the dwellings of the damned sprights,
Where she in darkness wastes her cursed days and nights.
Hard by the gates of hell her dwelling is,
There whereas all the plagues and harms abound,
Which punish wicked men, that walk amiss,
It is a darksome delue far under ground,
With thorns and barren brakes enuirond round,
That none the same may easily out win;
Yet many ways to enter may be found,
But none to issue forth when one is in:
For discord harder is to end then to begin.
And all within the riuen walls were hung
With ragged monuments of times forepast,
All which the sad effects of discord sung:
There were rent robes, and broken scepters plast,
Altars defyl'd, and holy things defast,
Disshiuered spears, and shields ytorne in twain,
Great cities ransackt, and strong castles rast,
Nations captiued, and huge armies slain:
Of all which ruins there some relics did remain.
There was the sign of antique Babylon,
Of fatal Thebes, of Rome that reigned long,
Of sacred Salem, and sad Ilion,
For memory of which on high there hong
The golden Apple, cause of all their wrong,
For which the three fair Goddesses did strive:
There also was the name of Nimrod strong,
Of Alexander, and his Princes five,
Which shared to them the spoils that he had got alive.
And there the relics of the drunken fray,
The which amongst the Lapithees befell,
And of the bloody feast, which sent away
So many Centaures drunken souls to hell,
That under great Alcides fury fell:
And of the dreadful discord, which did drive
The noble Argonauts to outrage fell,
That each of life sought others to deprive,
All mindlesse of the Golden fleece, which made them strive.
And eke of private persons many more,
That were too long a work to count them all;
Some of sworn friends, that did their faith forgo;
Some of borne brethren, proved unnatural;
Some of dear lovers, foes perpetual:
Witness their broken bands there to be seen,
Their girlonds rent, their bowres despoyled all;
The moniments whereof there byding been,
As plain as at the first, when they were fresh and green.
Such was her house within; but all without,
The barren ground was full of wicked weeds,
Which she her self had sown all about,
Now grown great, at first of little seeds,
The seeds of evil words, and factious deeds;
Which when to ripeness due they grown arre,
Bring forth an infinite increase, that breeds
Tumultuous trouble and contentious jar,
The which most often end in bloodshed and in war.
And those same cursed seeds do also serve
To her for bread, and yield her living food:
For life it is to her, when others sterue
Through mischievous debate, and deadly feood,
That she may suck their life, and drink their blood,
With which she from her childhood had been fed.
For she at first was borne of hellish brood,
And by infernal furies nourished,
That by her monstrous shape might easily be red.
Her face most foul and filthy was to see,
With squinted eyes contrary ways intended,
And loathly mouth, unmeet a mouth to be,
That naught but gall and venim comprehended,
And wicked words that God and man offended:
Her lying tongue was in two parts divided,
And both the parts did speak, and both contended;
And as her tongue, so was her heart discided,
That never thought one thing, but doubly still was guided.
Als as she double spoke, so heard she double,
With matchless ears deformed and distort,
Filled with false rumors and seditios trouble,
Bred in assemblies of the vulgar sort,
That still are led with every light report.
And as her ears so eke her feet were odd,
And much unlike, the one long, the other short,
And both misplast; that when the one forward yode,
The other back retired, and contrary trod.
Likewise unequal were her hands twain,
That one did reach, the other pusht away,
That one did make, the other mard again,
And sought to bring all things unto decay;
Whereby great riches gathered many a day,
She in short space did often bring to naught,
And their possessours often did dismay.
For all her study was and all her thought,
How she might overthrow the things that Concord wrought.
So much her malice did her might surpas,
That even The Almighty self she did malign,
Because to man so merciful he was,
And unto all his creatures so benign,
Since she her self was of his grace indigne:
For all this worlds fair workmanship she tried,
Unto his last confusion to bring,
And that great golden chain quite to divide,
With which it blessed Concord has together tide.
Such was that hag, which with Duessa road,
And serving her in her malicious use,
To hurt good knights, was as it were her baude,
To sell her borrowed beauty to abuse.
For though like withered tree, that wants juice,
She old and crooked were, yet now of late,
As fresh and fragrant as the flower deluce
She was become, by change of her estate,
And made full goodly ioyance to her new found mate.
Her mate he was a iollie youthful knight,
That bore great sway in arms and chivalry,
And was indeed a man of mickle might:
His name was Blandamour, that did descrie
His fickle mind full of inconstancy.
And now himself he fitted had right well,
With two companions of like quality,
Faithless Duessa, and false Paridell,
That whether were more false, full hard it is to tell.
Now when this gallant with his goodly crew,
From far espide the famous Britomart,
Like knight aduenturous in outward view,
With his fair paragon, his conquests part,
Approaching nigh, eftsoons his wanton heart
Was tickled with delight, and jesting said;
Lo there Sir Paridel, for your desert,
Good luck presents you with yond lovely maid,
For pity that ye want a fellow for your aid.
By that the lovely pair drew nigh to hond:
Whom when as Paridel more plain beheld,
Albee in heart he like affection fond,
Yet mindful how he late by one was feld,
That did those arms and that same scutchion weld,
He had small lust to buy his love so dear,
But answered, Sir him wise I never held,
That having once escaped peril near,
Would afterward afresh the sleeping evil rear.
This knight too late his manhood and his might,
I did assay, that me right dearly cost,
Ne list I for revenge provoke new fight,
Ne for light Ladies love, that soon is lost.
The hot-spurre youth so scorning to be crossed,
Take then to you this Dame of mine (quoth he)
And I without your peril or your cost,
Will challenge yond same other for my fee:
So forth he fiercely pricked, that one him scare could see.
The warlike Britonesse her soon addressed,
And with such uncouth welcome did receive
Her feigned Paramour, her forced guest,
That being forced his saddle soon to leave,
Him self he did of his new love deceive:
And made him self then sample of his folly.
Which done, she passed forth not taking leave,
And left him now as sad, as whilome iollie,
Well warned to beware with whom he dared to dally.
Which when his other company beheld,
They to his succor ran with ready aid:
And finding him unable once to weld,
They reared him on horse back, and vpstayd,
Till on his way they had him forth conuayd:
And all the way with wondrous grief of mind,
And shame, he showed him self to be dismayed,
More for the love which he had left behynd,
Then that which he had to Sir Paridel resynd.
Nathlesse he forth did march well as he might,
And made good semblance to his company,
Dissembling his disease and evil plight;
Till that ere long they chanced to epsy
Two other knights, that toward them did ply.
With speedy course, as bent to charge them new.
Whom when as Blandamour approaching nie,
Perceived to be such as they seemd in view,
He was full woe, and began his former grief renew.
For the one of them he perfectly descride,
To be Sir Scudamour, by that he bore
The God of love, with wings displayed wide,
Whom mortally he hated evermore,
Both for his worth, that all men did adore,
And eke because his love he won by right:
Which when he thought, it grieved him full sore,
That through the bruses of his former fight,
He now unable was to wreake his old despite.
For thy he thus to Paridel bespake,
Fair Sir, offriendship let me now you pray,
That as I late adventured for your sake,
The hurts whereof me now from battle stay,
Ye will me now with like good turn repay,
And justify my cause on yonder knight.
Ah Sir (said Paridel) do not dismay
Your self for this, my self will for you fight,
As ye have done for me: the left hand rubs the right.
With that he put his spurs unto his steed,
With spear in rest, and toward him did fare,
Like shaft out of a bow preventing speed.
But Scudamour was shortly well aware
Of his approach, and began him self prepare
Him to receive with entertainment meet.
So furiously they met, that either bare
The other down under their horses feet,
That what of them became, themselves did scarsly weete.
As when two billows in the Irish sowndes,
Forcibly driven with contrary tides
Do meet together, each abacke rebowndes
With roaring rage; and dashing on all sides,
That fills all the sea with some, diuydes
The doubtful current into diverse ways:
So fell those two in spite of both their prydes,
But Scudamour himself did soon vprayse,
And mounting light his foe for lying long vpbrayes.
Who rolled on an heap lay still in swound,
All careless of his taunt and bitter rail,
Till that the rest him seeing lie on ground,
Ran hastily, to weete what did him ayle.
Where finding that the breath began him to fail,
With busy care they strove him to awake,
And doft his helmet, and undid his mayle:
So much they did, that at the last they brake
His slomber, yet so mazed, that he nothing spoke.
Which when as Blandamour beheld, he said,
False faitour Scudamour, that have by slight
And foul advantage this good Knight dismayed,
A Knight much better then thy self behight,
Well falls it thee that I am not in plight
This day, to wreake the damage by thee done:
Such is thy wont, that still when any Knight
Is weakened, then thou do him ouerronne:
So have thou to thy self false honor often won.
He little answered, but in manly heart
His mighty indignation did forbear,
Which was not yet so secret, but some part
Thereof did in his frouning face appear:
Like as a gloomie cloud, the which does bear
An hideous storm, is by the Northern blast
Quite ouerblowne, yet does not pass so clear,
But that it all the sky does ouercast
With darkness dred, and threatens all the world to wast.
Ah gentle knight then false Duessa said,
Why do ye strive for Ladies love so sore,
Whose chief desire is love and friendly aid
Among gentle Knights to nourish evermore?
Ne be ye wroth Sir Scudamour therefore,
That she your love list love another knight,
Ne do your self dislike a whit the more;
For Love is free, and led with self delight,
Ne will enforced be with maisterdome or might.
So false Duessa, but vile Ate thus;
Both foolish knights, I can but laugh at both,
That strive and storm with stir outrageous,
For her that each of you alike does loath,
And loves another, with whom now she goth
In lovely wise, and sleeps, and sports, and plays;
Whilst both you here with many a cursed oath,
Swear she is yours, and stir up bloody frayes,
To win a willow bough, whilst other wears the bays.
Vile hag (said Scudamour) why do thou lie?
And falsely seekst a virtuous wight to shame?
Fond knight (said she) the thing that with this eye
I saw, why should I doubt to tell the same?
Then tell (quoth Blandamour) and fear no blame,
Tell what thou saw, maulgre who so it hears.
I saw (quoth she) a stranger knight, whose name
I wot not well, but in his shield he bears
(That well I wot) the heads of many broken spears.
I saw him have your Amoret at will,
I saw him kiss, I saw him her embrace,
I saw him sleep with her all night his fill,
All many nights, and many by in place,
That present were to testify the case.
Which when as Scudamour did hear, his heart
Was thrild with inward grief, as when in chase
The Parthian strikes a stag with shiuering dart,
The beast astonished stands in midst of his smart.
So stood Sir Scudamour, when this he heard,
Ne word he had to speak for great dismay,
But looked on Glauce grim, who woxe afeard
Of outrage for the words, which she heard say,
Albee untrue she wist them by assay.
But Blandamour, whenas he did epsy
His change of cheer, that anguish did bewray,
He woxe full blithe, as he had got thereby,
And began thereat to triumph without victory.
Lo recreant (said he) the fruitless end
Of thy vain boast, and spoil of love misgotten,
Whereby the name of knighthood thou do shend,
And all true lovers with dishonor blotten,
All things not rooted well, will soon be rotten,
Fie fie false knight (then false Duessa cryde)
Unworthy life that love with guile have gotten,
Be thou, where ever thou do go or ride,
Loathed of ladies all, and of all knights defyde.
But Scudamour for passing great despite
Staid not to answer, scarcely did refrain,
But that in all those knights and ladies sight,
He for revenge had guiltless Glauce slain:
But being past, he thus began amain;
False traitor squire, false squire, of falsest knight,
Why does mine hand from thine avenge abstain,
Whose Lord has done my love this soul despite?
Why do I not it wreake, on thee now in my might?
Discourteous, disloyal Britomart,
Untrue to God, and unto man unjust,
What vengeance due can equal thy desert,
That have with shameful spot of sinful lust
Defiled the pledge committed to thy trust?
Let ugly shame and endless infamy
Color thy name with foul reproaches rust.
Yet thou false Squire his fault shall dear aby,
And with thy punishment his penance shall supply.
The aged Dame him seeing so enraged,
Was dead with fear, nathlesse as need required,
His flaming fury sought to have assuaged
With sober words, that sufferance desired,
Till time the trial of her truth expyred:
And evermore sought Britomart to clear.
But he the more with furious rage was fyred,
And thrice his hand to kill her did vpreare,
And thrice he drew it back: so did at last forbear.
Cant. II.
Blandamour winnes false Florimell,
Paridell for her strives,
They are accorded: Agape
does lengthen her sons lives.
FIrebrand of hell first tynd in Phlegeton,
By thousand furies, and from thence out thrown
Into this world, to work confusion,
And set it all on fire by force unknown,
Is wicked discord, whose small sparks once blown
None but a God or godlike man can slake;
Such as was Orpheus, that when strife was grown
Amongst those famous ympes of Greece, did take
His silver Harp in hand, and shortly friends them make.
Or such as that celestial Psalmist was,
That when the wicked feend his Lord tormented,
With heavenly notes, that did all other pas,
The outrage of his furious sit relented.
Such Music is wise words with time concented,
To moderate stiff minds, disposd to strive:
Such as that prudent Roman well invented,
What time his people into parts did ruie,
Them reconcyld again, and to their homes did drive.
Such used wise Glauce to that wrathful knight,
To calm the tempest of his troubled thought:
Yet Blandamour with terms of foul despite,
And Paridell her scornd, and set at naught,
As old and crooked and not good for ought.
Both they unwise, and warelesse of the evil,
That by themselves unto themselves is wrought,
Through that false witch, and that foul aged dreuill,
The one a feend, the other an incarnate devil.
With whom as they thus rode accompanide,
They were encountered of a lusty Knight,
That had a goodly Lady by his side,
To whom he made great dalliance and delight.
It was to weete the bold Sir Ferraugh hight,
He that from Braggadocchio whilome reft
The snowy Florimell, whose beauty bright
Made him seem happy for so glorious theft;
Yet was it in due trial but a wandering weft.
Which when as Blandamour, whose fancy light
Was always flitting as the wavering wind,
After each beauty, that appeard in sight,
Beheld, eft soones it pricked his wanton mind
With sting of lust, that reasons eye did blind,
That to Sir Paridell these words he sent;
Sir knight why ride ye dumpish thus behind,
Since so good fortune does to you present
So fair a spoil, to make you joyous meriment?
But Paridell that had too late a trial
Of the bad issue of his counsel vain,
List not to hark, but made this fair denial;
Last turn was mine, well proved to my pain,
This now be yours, God send you better gain.
Whose scoffed words he taking half in scorn,
Fiercely forth pricked his steed as in disdain,
Against that Knight, ere he him well could torn
By means whereof he has him lightly ouerborne.
Who with the sudden stroke astonished sore,
Upon the ground a while in slomber lay;
The whiles his love away the other bore,
And showing her, did Paridell vpbray;
Lo sluggish Knight the victors happy pray:
So fortune friends the bold: whom Paridell
Seeing so fair indeed, as he did say,
His heart with secret envy began to swell,
And inly grudge at him, that he had sped so well.
Nathlesse proud man himself the other deemed,
Having so peerless paragon ygot:
For sure the fairest Florimell him seemed,
To him was fallen for his happy lot,
Whose like alive on earth he weened not:
Therefore he her did court, did serve, did woo,
With humblest suit that he imagine mot,
And all things did devise, and all things do,
That might her love prepare, and liking win theretoo.
She in regard thereof him recompenst
With golden words, and goodly countenance,
And such fond favors sparingly dispenst:
Sometimes him blessing with alight eye-glance,
And coy looks tempring with loose dalliance;
Sometimes estranging him in sterner wise,
That having cast him in a foolish trance,
He seemed brought to bed in Paradise,
And proved himself most fool, in what he seemed most wise.
So great a mistress of her art she was,
And perfectly practiced in woman's craft,
That though therein himself he thought to pas,
And by his false allurements wily draft,
Had thousand women of their love beraft,
Yet now he was surpised: for that false spright,
Which that same witch had in this form engraft,
Was so expert in every subtle slight,
That it could ouerreach the wisest earthly wight.
Yet he to her did daily service more,
And daily more deceived was thereby;
Yet Paridell him envied therefore,
As seeming plast in sole felicity:
So blind is lust, false colors to descry.
But Ate soon discovering his desire,
And finding now fit opportunity
To stir up strife, twixt love and spite and ire,
Did privily put coals unto his secret fire.
By sundry means thereto she pricked him forth,
Now with remembrance of those spightfull speeches,
Now with opinion of his own more worth,
Now with recounting of like former breaches
Made in their friendship, as that Hag him teaches:
And ever when his passion is allayd,
She it reuiues and new occasion reaches:
That on a time as they together way'd,
He made him open challenge, and thus boldly said.
Too boastfull Blandamour, too long I bear
The open wrongs, thou do me day by day,
Well know thou, when we friendship first did swear,
The covenant was, that every spoil or pray
Should equally be shard betwixt us tway:
Where is my part then of this Lady bright,
Whom to thy self thou take quite away?
Render therefore therein to me my right,
Or answer for thy wrong, as shall fall out in fight.
Exceeding wroth thereat was Blandamour,
And began this bitter answer to him make;
Too foolish Paridell, that fairest flower
Would gather feign, and yet no pains would take:
But not so easy will I her forsake;
This hand her won, this hand shall her defend.
With that they began their shiuering spears to shake,
And deadly points at eithers breast to bend,
Forgetful each to have been ever others friend.
Their fiery Steedes with so untamed forse
Did bear them both to fell auenges end,
That both their spears with pitilesse remorse,
Through shield and mayle, and haberieon did wend,
And in their flesh a griesly passage rend,
That with the fury of their own affret,
Each other horse and man to ground did send;
Where lying still a while, both did forget
The perilous present stownd, in which their lives were set.
As when two warlike Brigandines at sea,
With murdrous weapons armed to cruel fight,
Do meet together on the watery lea,
They stem each other with so fell despite,
That with the shocke of their own heedlesse might,
Their wooden ribs are shaken nigh a sonder;
They which from shore behold the dreadful sight
Of flashing fire, and hear the ordenance thonder,
Do greatly stand amazed at such unwonted wonder.
At length they both vpstarted in amaze;
As men awaked rashly out of dreme,
And round about themselves a while did gaze,
Till seeing her, that Florimell did seem,
In doubt to whom she victory should deem,
Therewith their dulled sprights they edgd a new,
And drawing both their swords with rage extreme,
Like two mad mastiffes each on other flew,
And shields did share, and mailes did rash, and helmes did hew.
So furiously each other did assail,
As if their souls they would attonce have rent
Out of their breasts, that streams of blood did rail
Adowne, as if their springs of life were spent;
That all the ground with purple blood was sprent,
And all their armours staynd with bloody gore,
Yet scarcely once to breath would they relent,
So mortal was their malice and so sore,
Become of feigned friendship which they vowed before.
And that which is for Ladies most besitting,
To stint all strife, and foster friendly peace,
Was from those Dames so far and so unfitting,
As that in stead of praying them surcease,
They did much more their cruelty increase;
Bidding them fight for honor of their love,
And rather die then Ladies cause release.
With which vain terms so much they did the^ move,
That both resolved the last extremities to prove.
There they I ween would fight until this day,
Had not a Squire, even he the Squire of Dames,
By great adventure traveled that way;
Who seeing both bent to so bloody games,
And both of old well knowing by their names,
Drew nigh, to weete the cause of their debate:
And first laid on those Ladies thousand blames,
That did not fseke to appease their deadly hate,
But gazed on their harms, not pitying their estate.
And then those Knights he humbly did beseech,
To stay their hands, till he a while had spoken:
Who looked a little up at that his speech,
Yet would not let their battle so be broken,
Both greedy fires on other to be wroken.
Yet he to them so earnestly did call,
And them coniur'd by some well known token,
That they at last their wrothfull hands let fall,
Content to hear him speak, and glad to rest withal.
First he desired their cause of strife to see:
They said, it was for love of Florimell,
Ah gentle knights (quoth he) how may that be,
And she so far astray, as none can tell,
Fond Squire, full angry then said Paridell,
See not the Lady there before thy face?
He looked back, and her aduizing well,
Weend as he said, by that her outward grace,
That fairest Florimell was present there in place.
Glad man was he to see that joyous sight,
For none alive but joyed in Florimell,
And lowly to her lowting thus behight;
Fairest of fair, that fairness do excel,
This happy day I have to greet you well,
In which you safe I see, whom thousand late,
Misdoubted lost through mischief that befell;
Long may you live in health and happy state,
She little answered him, but lightly did aggrate.
Then turning to those Knights, he began a new;
And you Sir Blandamour and Paridell,
That for this Lady present in your view,
Have raised this cruel war and outrage fell,
Certes me seems been not advised well,
But rather ought in friendship for her sake
To join your force, their forces to repel,
That seek perforce her from you both to take,
And of your gotten spoil their own triumph to make.
Thereat Sir Blandamour with countenance stern,
All full of wrath, thus fiercely him bespake;
A read thou Squire, that I the man may learn,
That dare fro me think Florimell to take.
Not one (quoth he) but many do partake
Herein, as thus. It lately so befell,
That Satyran a girdle did vptake,
Well known to appertain to Florimell,
Which for her sake he wore, as him beseemed well.
But when as she her self was lost and gone,
Full many knights, that loved her like dear,
Thereat did greatly grudge, that he alone
That lost fair Ladies ornament should wear,
And began therefore close spite to him to bear:
Which he to shun, and stop vile enuies sting,
Has lately caused to be proclaimed each where
A solemn feast, with public turneying,
To which all knights with them their Ladies are to bring.
And of them all she that is fairest found,
Shall have that golden girdle for reward,
And of those Knights who is most stout on ground,
Shall to that fairest Lady be prefard.
Since therefore she her self is now your ward,
To you that ornament of hers pertaines,
Against all those, that challenge it to guard,
And save her honor with your ventrous pains;
That shall you win more glory, then ye here find gains.
When they the reason of his words had hard,
They began abate the rancour of their rage,
And with their honors and their loves regard,
The furious flames of malice to assuage.
Tho each to other did his faith engage,
Like faithful friends thenceforth to join in one
With all their force, and battle strong to wage
Against all those knights, as their professed fone,
That chaleng'd ought in Florimell, save they alone.
So well accorded forth they rode together
In friendly sort, that lasted but a while;
And of all old dislikes they made fair weather,
Yet all was forged and spread with golden foil,
That under it hid hate and hollow guyle.
Ne certes can that friendship long endure,
How ever gay and goodly be the style,
That does ill cause or evil end enure:
For virtue is the band, that binds hearts most sure.
Thus as they marched all in close disguise,
Of feigned love, they chaunst to overtake
Two knights, that lincked rode in lovely wise,
As if they secret counsels did partake;
And each not far behind him had his make,
To weete, two Ladies of most goodly hew,
That twixt themselves did gentle purpose make,
Unmindful both of that discordfull crew,
The which with speedy pace did after them pursew.
Who as they now approached nigh at hand,
Deeming them doughtie as they did apeare,
They sent that Squire before, to understand,
What mote they be: who viewing them more near
Returned ready news, that those same wear
Two of the prowest Knights in Faery land;
And those two Ladies their two lovers dear,
Courageous Cambell, and stout Triamond,
With Canacee and Cambine linckt in lovely bond.
Whylome as antique stories tellen us,
Those two were foes the fellonest on ground,
And battle made the dreddest dangerous,
That ever shrilling trumpet did resound;
Though now their acts be no where to be found,
As that renowned Poet them compyled,
With warlike numbers and Heroicke sound,
Dan Chaucer, well of English undefiled.
On Fames eternal beadroll worthy to be fyled.
But wicked Time that all good thoughts does waste,
And works of noblest wits to naught out wear,
That famous moniment has quite defaste,
And robbed the world of threasure endless dear,
The which mote have enriched all us hear.
O cursed Eld the cankerworme of writs,
How may these rimes, so rude as does appear,
Hope to endure, since works of heavenly wits
Are quite deuourd, and brought to naught by little bits?
Then pardon, O most sacred happy spirit,
That I thy labors lost may thus revive,
And steal from thee the meede of thy due merit,
That none durst ever whilst thou wast alive,
And being dead in vain yet many strive:
Ne dare I like, but through infusion sweet
Of thine own spirit, which does in me surviue,
I follow here the footing of thy feet,
That with thy meaning so I may the rather meet.
Cambelloes sister was fair Canacee,
That was the learned Lady in her days,
Well seen in every science that mote be,
And every secret work of natures ways,
In witty riddles, and in wise soothsayes,
In power of herbs, and tunes of beasts and burds;
And, that augmented all her other praise,
She modest was in all her deeds and words,
And wondrous chaste of life, yet loved of Knights and Lords.
Full many Lords, and many Knights her loved,
Yet she to none of them her liking lent,
Ne ever was with fond affection moved,
But ruled her thoughts with goodly government,
For dread of blame and honors blemishment;
And eke unto her looks a law she made,
That none of them once out of order went,
But like to wary Centonels well stayed,
Still watched on every side, of secret foes affrayd.
So much die more as she refusd to love,
So much the more she loved was and sought,
That oftentimes unquiet strife did move
Amongst her lovers, and great quarrels wrought,
That often for her in bloody arms they fought.
Which whenas Cambell, that was stout and wise,
Perceived would breed great mischief, he bethought
How to prevent the peril that mote rise,
And turn both him and her to honor in this wise.
One day, when all that troop of warlike wooers
Assembled were, to weet whose she should be,
All mighty men and dreadful derring dooers,
(The harder it to make them well agree)
Amongst them all this end he did decree;
That of them all, which love to her did make,
They by consent should chose the stoutest three,
That with himself should combat for her sake,
And of them all the victour should his sister take.
Bold was the challenge, as himself was bold,
And courage full of haughty hardiment,
Approved often in perils manifold,
Which he atchieu'd to his great ornament:
But yet his sisters skill unto him lent
Most confidence and hope of happy speed,
Conceived by a ring, which she him sent,
That among the many virtues, which we reed,
Had power to staunch al wounds, that mortally did bleed.
Well was that rings great virtue known to all,
That dread thereof, and his redoubted might
Did all that youthly rout so much appall,
That none of them durst undertake the fight;
More wise they weend to make of love delight,
Then life to hazard for fair Ladies look,
And yet uncertain by such outward sight,
Though for her sake they all that peril took,
Whether she would them love, or in her liking brook.
Amongst those knights there were three brethren bold,
Three bolder brethren never were yborne,
Borne of one mother in one happy mold,
Borne at one burden in one happy morn,
Thrice happy mother, and thrice happy morn,
That bore three such, three such not to be fond;
Her name was Agape whose children werne
All three as one, the first hight Priamond,
The second Dyamond, the youngest Triamond.
Stout Priamond, but not so strong to strike,
Strong Diamond, but not so stout a knight,
But Triamond was stout and strong alike:
On horseback used Triamond to fight,
And Priamond on foot had more delight,
But horse and foot knew Diamond to wield:
With curtaxe used Diamond to smite,
And Triamond to handle spear and shield,
But spear and curtaxe both vsd Priamond in field.
These three did love each other dearly well,
And with so firm affection were allyde,
As if but one soul in them all did dwell,
Which did her power into three parts diuyde;
Like three fair branches budding far and wide,
That from one root derived their vital sap:
And like that root that does her life divide,
Their mother was, and had full blessed hap,
These three so noble babes to bring forth at one clap.
Their mother was a Fay, and had the skill
Of secret things, and all the powers of nature,
Which she by art could use unto her will,
And to her service bind each living creature:
Through secret understanding of their feature.
Thereto she was right fair, when so her face
She list discover, and of goodly stature;
But she as Fayes are wont, in privy place
Did spend her days, and loved in forests wyld to space.
There on a day a noble youthly knight
Seeking adventures in the saluage wood,
Did by great fortune get of her the sight;
As she sat careless by a cristall flood,
Combing her golden locks, as seemd her good:
And unawares upon her laying hold,
That strove in vain him long to have withstood,
Oppressed her, and there (as it is told)
Got these three lovely babes, that proved three cha^pions bold.
Which she with her long fostred in that wood,
Till that to ripeness of man's state they grew:
Then showing forth signs of their fathers blood,
They loved arms, and knighthood did ensew,
Seeking adventures, where they any knew.
Which when their mother saw, she began to dout
Their safety, least by searching dangers new,
And rash provoking perils all about,
Their days mote be abridged through their courage stout
Therefore desirous the end of all their days
To know, and them t'enlarge with long extent,
By wondrous skill, and many hidden ways,
To the three fatal sisters house she went,
Far under ground from tract of living went,
Down in the bottom of the deep Abyss,
Where Demogorgon in dull darkness pent,
Far from the view of Gods and heavens blis,
The hideous Chaos keeps, their dreadful dwelling is.
There she them found, all sitting round about
The direful distaffe standing in the mid,
And with unwearied fingers drawing out
The lines of life, from living knowledge hid.
Sad Clotho held the rock, the whiles the third
By griesly Lachesis was spun with pain,
That cruel Atropos eftsoons undid,
With cursed knife cutting the twist in twain:
Most wretched men, whose days depend on thrids so vain.
She them saluting, there by them sat still,
Beholding how the thrids of life they span:
And when at last she had beheld her fill,
Trembling in heart, and looking pale and wan,
Her cause of coming she to tell began.
To whom fierce Atropos, Bold Fay, that durst
Come see the secret of the life of man,
Well worthy thou to be of Jove accursed,
And eke thy childrens thrids to be a sunder burst.
Whereat she sore affrayd, yet her besought
To grant her boon, and rigor to abate,
That she might see her childre^s thrids forth brought,
And know the measure of their utmost date,
To them ordained by eternal fate.
Which Clotho granting, showed her the same:
That when she saw, it did her much amate,
To see their thrids so thin, as spiders frame,
And eke so short, that seemd their ends out shortly came
She then began them humbly to entreat,
To draw them longer out, and better twine,
That so their lives might be prolonged late.
But Lachesis thereat began to repine,
And said, fond dame that deem'st of things divine
As of humane, that they may altered be,
And chaung'd at pleasure for those impes of thine.
Not so; for what the Fates do once decree,
Not all the gods can change, nor Jove him self can free.
Then since (quoth she) the term of each man's life
For naught may lessened nor enlarged be,
Grant this, that when ye shred with fatal knife
His line, which is the eldest of the three,
Which is of them the shortest, as I see,
Eftsoons his life may pass into the next;
And when the next shall likewise ended be,
That both their lives may likewise be annexed
Unto the third, that his may so be trebly wext.
They granted it; and then that careful Fay
Departed thence with full contented mind;
And coming home, in warlike fresh array
Them found all three according to their kind.
But unto them what destiny was assynd,,
Or how their lives were eekt, she did not tell;
But evermore, when she fit time could find,
She warned them to tend their safeties well,
And love each other dear, what ever them befell.
So did they surely during all their days,
And never discord did amongst them fall;
Which much augmented all their other praise.
And now to increase affection natural,
In love of Canacee they joined all:
Upon which ground this same great battle grew,
Great matter growing of beginning small;
The which for length I will not here pursew,
But rather will reserve it for a Canto new.
Cant. III.
The battle twixt three brethren with
Cambell for Canacee
Cambina with true friendships bond
does their long strife agree.
O Why do wretched men so much desire,
To draw their days unto the utmost date,
And do not rather wish them soon expire,
Knowing the misery of their estate,
And thousand perils which them still awate,
Tossing them like a boat amid the main,
That every hour they knock at deaths gate?
And he that happy seems and least in pain,
Yet is as nigh his end, as he that most does plain.
Therefore this Fay I hold but fond and vain,
The which in seeking for her children three
Long life, thereby did more prolong their pain.
Yet whilst they lived none did euersee
More happy creatures, then they seemed to be,
Nor more ennobled for their courtesy,
That made them dearly loved of each degree;
Ne more renowned for their cheualrie,
That made them dreaded much of all men far and nie.
These three that hardy challenge took in hand,
For Canacee with Cambell for to fight:
The day was set, that all might understand,
And pledges pawnd the same to keep a right,
That day, the dreddest day that living wight
Did ever see upon this world to shine,
So soon as heavens window showed light,
These warlike Champions all in armor shine,
Assembled were in field, the challenge to define.
The field with listes was all about enclosed,
To bar the prease of people far away;
And at the one side six judges were disposed,
To view and deem the deeds of arms that day;
And on the other side in fresh array,
Fair Canacee upon a stately stage
Was set, to see the fortnne of that fray,
And to be seen, as his most worthy wage,
That could her purchase with his lives aduentur'd gage.
Then entered Cambell first into the list,
With stately steps, and fearelesse countenance,
As if the conquest his he surely wist.
Soon after did the brethren three advance,
In brave array and goodly amenance,
With scutchins gilt and banners broad displayed:
And marching thrice in warlike ordinance,
Thrice lowted lowly to the noble Maid,
The whiles shril trompets and loud clarions sweetly played.
Which done the doughty chalenger came forth,
All armed to point his challenge to abet:
Against whom Sir Priamond with equal worth:
And equal arms himself did forward set.
A trompet blew; they both together met,
With dreadful force, and furious intent,
Careless of peril in their fires affret,
As if that life to loss they had forelent,
And cared not to spare, that should be shortly spent.
Right practicke was Sir Priamond in fight,
And thoroughly skild in use of shield and spear;
Ne less approved was Cambelloes might,
Ne less his sill in weapons did appear,
That hard it was to ween which harder were.
Full many mighty strokes on either side
Were sent, that seemed death in them to bear,
But they were both so watchful and well eyde,
That they avoided were, and vainly by did slide.
Yet one of many was so strongly bent
By Priamond, that with unlucky glaunce
Through Cambels shoulder it unawarely went,
That forced him his shield to disaduaunce,
Much was he grieved with that graceless chance,
Yet from the wound no drop of blood there fell,
But wondrous pain, that did the more enhaunce
His haughty courage to aduengement fell:
Smart daunts not mighty hearts, but makes them more to swell.
With that his poynant spear he fierce auentred,
With doubled force close underneath his shield,
That through the mayles into his thigh it entered;
And there arresting, ready way did yield,
For blood to gush forth on the grassie field;
That he for pain himself not right vpreare,
But too and fro in great amazement reeled,
Like an old Oak whose pith and sap is sear,
At puff of every storm does stagger here and theare.
Whom so dismayed when Cambell had espide,
Again he drove at him with double might,
That naught mote stay the steel, till in his side
The mortal point most cruelly empight:
Where fast infixed, whilst he sought by slight
It forth to wrest, the staff a sunder brake,
And left the head behind: with which despite
He all enraged, his shiuering spear did shake,
And charging him a fresh thus felly him bespake.
Lo faitour there thy meede unto thee take,
The meede of thy mischalenge and abet:
Not for thine own, but for thy sisters sake,
Have I thus long thy life unto thee let:
But to forbear does not forgive the det.
The wicked weapon heard his wrathful vow,
And passing forth with furious affret,
Pierst through his beuer quite into his brow,
That with the force it backward forced him to bow.
Therewith a sunder in the midst it brast,
And in his hand naught but the troncheon left,
The other half behind yet sticking fast,
Out of his headpeece Cambell fiercely rest,
And with such fury back at him it heft,
That making way unto his dearest life,
His weasand pipe it through his gorget cleft:
Thence streams of purple blood issuing rife,
Let forth his weary ghost and made an end of strife.
His weary ghost assoyld from fleshly band,
Did not as others wont, directly fly
Unto her rest in Plutoes griesly land,
Ne into air did vanish presently,
Ne changed was into a star in sky:
But through traduction was eftsoons derived,
Like as his mother prayed the Destiny,
Into his other brethren, that suruiued,
In whom he lived a new, of former life deprived.
Whom when on ground his brother next beheld,
Though sad and sorry for so heavy sight,
Yet leave unto his sorrow did not yield,
But rather stird to vengeance and despite,
Through secret feeling of his generous spright,
Rusht fiercely forth, the battle to renew,
As in reuersion of his brothers right;
And chalenging the Virgin as his dew.
His foe was soon addressed: the trompets freshly blew.
With that they both together fiercely met,
As if that each meant other to devour;
And with their axes both so sorely bet,
That neither plate nor mayle, whereas their power
They felt, could once sustain the hideous stowre,
But riued were like rotten wood a sunder,
Whilst through their rifts the ruddie blood did shower
And fire did flash, like lightning after thunder,
That filled the lookers on attonce with ruth and wonder.
As when two Tigers pricked with hungers rage,
Have by good fortune found some beasts fresh spoil,
On which they ween their famine to assuage,
And gain a feastfull guerdon of their toil,
Both falling out do stir up strifefull broyle,
And cruel battle twixt themselves do make,
Whiles neither lets the other touch the soil,
But either sdeignes with other to partake:
So cruelly these Knights strove for that Ladies sake.
Full many strokes, that mortally were meant,
The whiles were enterchaunged twixt them two;
Yet they were all with so good wariment
Or warded, or avoided and let go,
That still the life stood fearelesse of her foe:
Till Diamond disdeigning long delay
Of doubtful fortune wavering to and fro,
Resolved to end it one or other way;
And heau'd his murdrous axe at him with mighty sway.
The dreadful stroke in case it had arrived,
Where it was meant, (so deadly it was meant)
The soul had sure out of his body riued,
And stinted all the strife incontinent.
But Cambels fate that fortune did prevent:
For seeing it at hand, he swaru'd aside,
And so gave way unto his fell intent:
Who missing of the mark which he had eyde,
Was with the force nigh feld whilst his right foot did slide.
As when a Vulture greedy of his pray,
Through hunger long, that heart to him does lend,
Strikes at an Heron with all his bodies sway,
That from his force seems naught may it defend;
The wary foul that spies him toward bend
His dreadful souse, auoydes it shunning light,
And makes him his wing in vain to spend;
That with the weight of his own weeldlesse might,
He falls nigh to ground, and scarce recouereth flight.
Which fair adventure when Cambello spide,
Full lightly, ere himself he could recower,
From dangers dread to ward his naked side,
He can let drive at him with all his power,
And with his axe him smote in evil hour,
That from his shoulders quite his head he rest:
The headless tronke, as heedlesse of that stower,
Stood still a while, and his fast footing kept,
Till feeling life to fail, it fell, and deadly slept.
They which that piteous spectacle beheld,
Were much amazed the headless tronke to see
Stand up so long, and weapon vain to weld,
Vnweeting of the Fates divine decree,
For life's succession in those brethren three.
For notwithstanding that one soul was reft,
Yet, had the body not dismembered be,
It would have lived, and revived eft;
But finding no fit seat, the lifelesse corse it left.
It left; but that same soul, which therein dwelt,
Straight entering into Triamond, him filled
With double life, and grief, which when he felt,
As one whose inner parts had been ythrild
With point of steel, that close his hartbloud spild,
He lightly lept out of his place of rest,
And rushing forth into the empty field,
Against Cambello fiercely him addressed;
Who him affronting soon to fight was ready pressed.
Well mote ye wonder how that noble Knight,
After he had so often wounded been,
Could stand on foot, now to renew the fight.
But had ye then him forth aduauncing seen,
Some newborn wight ye would him surely ween:
So fresh he seemed and so fierce in sight;
Like as a Snake, whom weary winters teene,
Has worn to naught, now feeling summers might,
Casts off his ragged skin and freshly does him dight.
All was through virtue of the ring he wore,
The which not only did not from him let
One drop of blood to fall, but did restore
His weakened powers, and dulled spirits whet,
Through working of the stone therein yset.
Else how could one of equal might with most,
Against so many no less mighty met,
Once think to match three such on equal cost,
Three such as able were to match a puissant host.
Yet naught thereof was Triamond adredde,
Ne desperate of glorious victory,
But sharply him assayld, and sore bestedde,
With heaps of strokes, which he at him let fly,
As thick as hayle forth poured from the sky:
He stroke, he soust, he foynd, he hewd, he lasht,
And did his iron brond so fast apply,
That from the same the fiery sparkles flasht,
As fast as water-sprinkles against a rock are dashed.
Much was Cambello daunted with his blows,
So thick they fell, and forcibly were sent,
That he was forced from danger of the throws
Back to retire, and somewhat to relent,
Till th'heat of his fierce fury he had spent:
Which when for want of breath began to abate,
He then afresh with new encouragement
Did him assail, and mightily amate,
As fast as forward erst, now backward to retrate.
Like as the tide that comes fro The Ocean main,
Flows up the Shenan with contrary forse,
And ouerruling him in his own rain,
Drives back the current of his kindly course,
And makes it seem to have some other sourse:
But when the flood is spent, then back again
His borrowed waters forced to redisbourse,
He sends the sea his own with double gain,
And tribute eke withal, as to his Sovereign.
Thus did the battle vary to and fro,
With diverse fortune doubtful to be deemed:
Now this the better had, now had his fo;
Then he half vanquished, then the other seemed,
Yet victors both them selves always esteemed.
And all the while the disentrayled blood
Adowne their sides like little rivers stremed,
That with the wasting of his vital flood,
Sir Triamond at last full faint and feeble stood.
But Cambell still more strong and greater grew,
Ne felt his blood to wast, ne powers emperisht,
Through that rings virtue, that with vigor new,
Still when as he enfeebled was, him cherisht,
And all his wounds, and all his bruses guarisht,
Like as a withered tree through husbands toil
Is often seen full freshly to have florisht,
And fruitful apples to have borne awhile,
As fresh as when it first was planted in the soil.
Through which advantage, in his strength he rose,
And smote the other with so wondrous might,
That through die seame, which did his hauberk close,
Into his throat and life it pierced quight,
That down he fell as dead in all men's sight:
Yet dead he was not, yet he sure did die,
As all men do, that lose the living spright:
So did one soul out of his body fly
Unto her native home from mortal misery.
But nathelesse whilst all the lookers on
Him dead behight, as he to all appeard,
All unawares he started up anon,
As one that had out of a dream been reard,
And fresh assayld his foe, who half affeard
Of th'vncouth sight, as he some ghost had seen,
Stood still amazed, holding his idle sweard;
Till having often by him stricken been,
He forced was to strike, and save him self from teene.
Yet from thenceforth more warily he fought,
As one in fear the Stygian gods to offend,
Ne followd on so fast, but rather sought
Him self to save, and danger to defend,
Then life and labor both in vain to spend.
Which Triamond perceiving, weened sure
He began to faint, toward the battles end,
And that he should not long on foot endure,
A sign which did to him the victory assure.
Whereof full blithe, eftsoons his mighty hand
He heaved on high, in mind with that same blow
To make an end of all that did withstand:
Which Cambell seeing come, was nothing slow
Him self to save from that so deadly throw;
And at that instant reaching forth his sweard
Close underneath his shield, that scarce did show,
Stroke him, as he his hand to strike vpreard,
In th'arm-pit full, that through both sides the wound appeard.
Yet still that direful stroke kept on his way,
And falling heavy on Cambelloes crest,
Struck him so hugely, that in swowne he lay,
And in his head an hideous wound impressed:
And sure had it not happily found rest
Upon the brim of his broad plated shield,
It would have cleft his brain down to his breast.
So both at once fell dead upon the field,
And each to other seemd the victory to yield.
Which when as all the lookers on beheld,
They weened sure the war was at an end,
And Judges rose, and Marshals of the field
Broke up the listes, their arms away to rend;
And Canacee began wayle her dearest friend.
All suddenly they both vpstarted light,
The one out of the swownd, which him did blend,
The other breathing now another spright,
And fiercely each assayling, began afresh to fight.
Long while they then continued in that wize,
As if but then the battle had begone:
Strokes, wounds, wards, weapons, all they did despise,
Ne either cared to ward, or peril shonne,
Desirous both to have the battle done;
Ne either cared life to save or spill,
Ne which of them did win, ne which were won.
So weary both of fighting had their fill,
That life it self seemd loathsome, and long safety ill.
Whilst thus the case in doubtful balance hong,
Unsure to whether side it would incline,
And all men's eyes and hearts, which there among
Stood gazing, filled were with rufull tine,
And secret fear, to see their fatal fine,
All suddenly they heard a troublous noyes,
That seemd some perilous tumult to desine,
Confusd with women's cries, and shouts of boys,
Such as the troubled Theaters oftimes annoyes.
Thereat the Champions both stood still a space,
To weeten what that sudden clamor meant;
Lo where they spyde with speedy whirling pace,
One in a charet of strange furniment,
Toward them driving like a storm out sent.
The charet decked was in wondrous wize,
With gold and many a gorgeous ornament,
After the Persian Monarks antique guize,
Such as the maker self could best by art deuize.
And drawn it was (that wonder is to tell)
Of two grim lions, taken from the wood,
In which their power all others did excel;
Now made forget their former cruel mood,
To Obey their riders hest, as seemed good.
And therein sat a Lady passing fair
And bright, that seemed borne of Angels brood,
And with her beauty bounty did compare,
Whether of them in her should have the greater share.
Thereto she learned was in Magic leare,
And all the arts, that subtle wits discover,
Having therein been trained many a year,
And well instructed by the Fay her mother,
That in the same she far excelled all other.
Who understanding by her mighty art,
Of the evil plight, in which her dearest brother
Now stood, came forth in have to take his part,
And pacify the strife, which causd so deadly smart.
And as she passed through th'vnruly preace
Of people, thronging thick her to behold,
Her angry teame breaking their bonds of peace,
Great heaps of them, like sheep in narrow fold,
For have did overrun, in dust enrould,
That thorough rude confusion of the rout,
Some fearing shriekt, some being harmed hold,
Some laughed for sport, some did for wonder shout,
And some that would seem wise, their wonder turned to dout.
In her right hand a rod of peace she bore,
About the which two Serpents weren wound,
Entrayled mutually in lovely lore,
And by the tails together firmly bound,
And both were with one olive garland crowned,
Like to the rod which Maias son does wield,
Wherewith the hellishfiends he does confound.
And in her other hand a cup she hild,
The which was with Nepenthe to the brim vpfild.
Nepenthe is a drinck of sovereign grace,
Deuized by the Gods, for to assuage
Hearts grief, and bitter gall away to chase,
Which stirs up anguish and contentious rage:
In stead thereof sweet peace and quiet age
It does establish in the troubled mind.
Few men, but such as sober are and sage,
Are by the Gods to drinck thereof assynd;
But such as drinck, eternal happiness do find.
Such famous men, such worthies of the earth,
As love will have advanced to the sky,
And there made gods, though borne of mortal berth,
For their high merits and great dignity,
Are wont, before they may to heaven fly,
To drink hereof, whereby all cares forepast
Are washed away quite from their memory.
So did those old Heroes hereof taste,
Before that they in bliss amongst the Gods were plaste.
Much more of price and of more gracious power
Is this, then that same water of Ardenne,
The which Rinaldo drunck in happy hour,
Described by that famous Tuscane pen:
(...) With whom he ledd a long and happy life;
And Cambel took Cambina to his fere,
The which as life were each to other liefe.
So all alike did love, and loved were,
That since their days such lovers were not found elswere.
Cant. IIII.
Satyrane makes a Turneyment
For love of Florimell:
Britomart winnes the prize from all,
And Artegall does quell.
IT often falls, (as here it erst befell)
That mortal foes do turn to faithful friends,
And friends professed are chaungd to foemen fell:
The cause of both, of both their minds depends.
And the end of both likewise of both their ends.
For enmity, that of no ill proceeds,
But of occasion, with the occasion ends;
And friendship, which a faint affection breeds
Without regard of good, dies like ill grounded seeds.
That well (me seems) appears, by that oflate
Twixt Camhell and Sir Triamond befell,
As else by this, that now a new debate
Stird up twixt Scudamour and Paridell,
The which by course befalls me here to tell:
Who having those two other Knights espide
Marching before, as ye remember well,
Sent forth their Squire to have them both descride,
And eke those masked Ladies riding them beside.
Who back returning, told as he had seen,
That they were doughtie knights of dreaded name;
And those two Ladies, their two loves unseen;
And therefore wished them without blot or blame,
To let them pass at will, for dread of shame.
But Blandamour full of vainglorious spright,
And rather stird by his discordfull Dame,
Upon them gladly would have proved his might,
But that he yet was sore of his late lucklesse fight.
Yet nigh approaching, he them foul bespake,
Disgracing them, him self thereby to grace,
As was his wont, so weening way to make
To Ladies love, where so he came in place,
And with lewd terms their lovers to deface.
Whose sharp prouokement them incenst so sore,
That both were bent t'auenge his usage base,
And began their shields address them selves before:
For evil deeds may better then bad words be bore.
But fair Cambina with persuasions myld,
Did mitigate the fierceness of their mode,
That for the present they were reconcyld,
And began to treat of deeds of arms abroad,
And strange adventures, all the way they rode:
Amongst the which they told, as then befell,
Of that great turney, which was blazed broad,
For that rich girdle of fair Florimell,
The prize of her, which did in beauty most excel.
To which folke-mote they all with one consent,
Since each of them his Lady had him by,
Whose beauty each of them thought excellent,
Agreed to travel, and their fortunes try.
So as they passed forth, they did espy
One in bright arms, with ready spear in rest,
That toward them his course seemed to apply,
Against whom Sir Paridell himself addressed,
Him weening, ere he nigh approcht to have represt.
Which the other seeing, began his course relent,
And vaunted spear eftsoons to disaduaunce,
As if he naught but peace and pleasure meant,
Now fallen into their fellowship by chance,
Whereat they showed courteous countenance.
So as he rode with them accompanide,
His rouing eye did on the Lady glaunce,
Which Blandamour had riding by his side:
Who^ sure he weend, that he some where tofore had eide.
It was to weete that snowy Florimell,
Which Ferrat late from Braggadochio won,
Whom he now seeing, her remembered well,
How having reft her from the witches son,
He soon her lost: wherefore he now begun
To challenge her anew, as his own prize,
Whom formerly he had in battle won,
And proffer made by force her to reprize,
Which scornful offer, Blandamour began soon despize.
And said, Sir Knight, since ye this Lady clame,
Whom he that has, were loath to lose so light,
(For so to lose a Lady, were great shame)
Ye shall her win, as I have done in fight:
And lo she shall be placed here in sight.
Together with this Hag beside her set,
That who so winnes her, may her have by right:
But he shall have the Hag that is ybet,
And with her always ride, till he another get.
That offer pleased all the company,
So Florimell with Ate forth was brought,
At which they all began laugh full merrily:
But Braggadochio said, he never thought
For such an Hag, that seemed worst then naught,
His person to emperill so in fight.
But if to match that Lady they had sought
Another like, that were like fair and bright,
His life he then would spend to justify his right.
At which his vain excuse they all began smile,
As scorning his unmanly cowardice:
And Florimell him fowly began revile,
That for her sake refused to enterprise
The battle, offered in so knightly wize.
And Ate eke prouokt him privily,
With love of her, and shame of such mesprize.
But naught he cared for friend or enemy,
For in base mind nor friendship dwells nor enmity.
But Cambell thus did shut up all in jest,
Brave Knights and Ladies, certes ye do wrong
To stir up strife, when most us needs rest,
That we may us reserve both fresh and strong,
Against the Turneiment which is not long.
When who so list to fight, may fight his fill,
Till then your challenges ye may prolong;
And then it shall be tried, if ye will,
Whether shall have the Hag, or hold the Lady still.
They all agreed, so turning all to game,
And pleasant board, they past forth on their way,
And all that while, where so they rode or came,
That masked Mock-knight was their sport and play.
Till that at length upon the appointed day,
Unto the place of turneyment they came;
Where they before them found in fresh array
Many a brave knight, and many a dainty dame
Assembled, for to get the honor of that game.
There this fair crewe arriving, did divide
Them selves asunder: Blandamour with those
Of his, on the one; the rest on the other side.
But boastfull Braggadocchio rather chose,
For glory vain their fellowship to lose,
That men on him the more might gaze alone.
The rest them selves in troops did else dispose,
Like as it seemed best to every one;
The knights in couples marched, with ladies linckt atone.
Then first of all forth came Sir Satyrane,
Bearing that precious relicke in an arc
Of gold, that bad eyes might it not profane:
Which drawing softly forth out of the dark,
He open showed, that all men it mote mark.
A gorgeous girdle, curiously embost
With pearl and precious stone, worth many a mark;
Yet did the workmanship far pass the cost:
It was the same, which lately Florimel had lost.
That same aloft he hong in open view,
To be the prize of beauty and of might;
The which eftsoons discovered, to it drew
The eyes of all, allured with close delight,
And hearts quite robbed with so glorious sight,
That all men threw out vows and wishes vain.
Thrice happy Lady, and thrice happy knight,
Them seemd that could so goodly riches gain,
So worthy of the peril, worthy of the pain.
Then took the bold Sir Satyrane in hand
An huge great spear, such as he wont to wield,
And vauncing forth from all the other band
Of knights, addressed his maiden-headed shield,
Showing him self all ready for the field.
Against whom there singled from the other side
A Painim knight, that well in arms was skild,
And had in many a battle often been tried,
Hight Bruncheual the bold, who fiersly forth did ride.
So furiously they both together met,
That neither could the others force sustain;
As two fierce Bulls, that strive the rule to get
Of all the heard, meet with so hideous maine,
That both rebutted, tumble on the plain:
So these two champions to the ground were feld,
Where in a maze they both did long remain,
And in their hands their idle troncheons held,
Which neither able were to wag, or once to weld.
Which when the noble Ferramont espide,
He pricked forth in aid of Satyran;
And him against Sir Blandamour did ride
With all the strength and stiffness that he can.
But the more strong and stiffely that he ran,
So much more sorely to the ground he fell,
That on an heap were tumbled horse and man.
Unto whose rescue forth rode Paridell;
But him likewise with that same spear he eke did quell.
Which Braggadocchio seeing, had no will
To hasten greatly to his parties aid,
Albee his turn were next; but stood there still,
As one that seemed doubtful or dismayed.
But Triamond half wroth to see him staid,
Sternly stepped forth, and raught away his spear,
With which so sore he Ferramont assaid,
That horse and man to ground he quite did bear,
That neither could in have themselves again vpreare.
Which to avenge, Sir Deuon him did dight,
But with no better fortune then the rest:
For him likewise he quickly down did smight,
And after him Sir Douglas him addressed,
And after him Sir Faliumord forth pressed,
But none of them against his strokes could stand,
But all the more, the more his praise increst.
For either they were left upon the land,
Or went away sore wounded of his hapless hand.
And now by this, Sir Satyrane abraid,
Out of the swowne, in which too long he lay;
And looking round about, like one dismayed,
When as he saw the merciless affray.
Which doughty Triamond had wrought that day,
Unto the noble Knights of Maidenhead.
His mighty heart did almost rend in tway,
For very gall, that rather wholly dead
Himself he wished have been, then in so bad a stead.
Eftsoons he began to gather up around
His weapons, which lay scattered all abroad,
And as it fell, his steed he ready found.
On whom remounting, fiercely forth he rode,
Like spark of fire that from the anduile glode.
There where he saw the valiant Triamond
Chasing, and laying on them heavy lode.
That none his force were able to withstond,
So dreadful were his strokes, so deadly was his hond.
With that at him his brauelike spear he aimed,
And thereto all his power and might applide:
The wicked steel for mischief first ordained,
And having now misfortune got for guide.
Staid not, till it arrived in his side.
And therein made a very griesly wound,
That streams of blood his armor all bedide.
Much was he daunted with that direful stound,
That scarce he him vpheld from falling in a sound.
Yet as he might, himself he soft withdrew
Out of the field, that none perceived it plain,
Then began the part of Chalengers anew
To range the field, and victorlike to rain,
That none against them battle durst maintain.
By that the gloomy evening on them fell,
That forced them from fighting to refrain,
And trumpets sound to cease did them compel,
So Satyrane that day was judged to bear the bell.
The morrow next the Turney began anew,
And with the first the hardy Satyrane
Appeared in place, with all his noble crew,
On the other side, full many a warlike swain,
Assembled were, that glorious prize to gain.
But among them all, was not Sir Triamond,
Unable he new battle to darraine,
Through grieuaunce of his late received wound,
That doubly did him grieve, when so himself he found.
Which Cambell seeing, though he could not salve,
Ne done undo, yet for to salve his name,
And purchase honor in his friends behalue.
This goodly counterfesaunce he did frame.
The shield and arms well known to be the same,
Which Triamond had worn, unawares to wight,
And to his friend vnwist, for doubt of blame,
If he misdid; he on himself did dight,
That none could him discern, and so went forth to fight
There Satyrane Lord of the field he found,
Triumphing in great joy and iolity;
Against whom none able was to stand on ground;
That much he began his glory to envy,
And cast t'auenge his friends indignity.
A mighty spear eftsoons at him he bent;
Who seeing him come on so furiously,
Met him midway with equal hardiment,
That forcibly to ground they both together went.
They up again them selves can lightly rear,
And to their tried swords them selves betake;
With which they wrought such wondrous maruels there,
That all the rest it did amazed make,
Ne any dared their peril to partake;
Now cuffling close, now chacing to and fro,
Now hurtling round advantage for to take:
As two wild Boares together grapling go,
Chaufing and foming choler each against his fo.
So as they courst, and turneyd here and theare,
It chaunst Sir Satyrane his steed at last,
Whether through foundring or through sodein fear
To stumble, that his rider nigh he cast;
Which vauntage Cambell did pursue so fast,
That ere him self he had recovered well,
So sore he sowst him on the compast creast,
That forced him to leave his lofty sell,
And rudely tumbling down under his horse feet fell.
Lightly Cambello leapt down from his steed,
For to have rent his shield and arms away,
That whylome wont to be the victors meed;
When all unawares he felt an hideous sway
Of many swords, that lode on him did lay.
An hundred knights had him enclosed round,
To rescue Satyrane out of his pray;
All which at once huge strokes on him did pound,
In hope to take him prisoner, where he stood on ground.
He with their multitude was naught dismayed,
But with stout courage turned upon them all,
And with his brondiron round about him laid;
Of which he dealt large alms, as did befall:
Like as a Lion that by chance does fall
Into the hunters toil, does rage and rore,
In royal heart disdaining to be thrall.
But all in vain: for what might one do more?
They have him taken captive, though it grieve him sore.
Whereof when news to Triamond was brought,
There as he lay, his wound he soon forgot,
And starting up, straight for his armor sought:
In vain he sought; for there he found it not;
Cambello it away before had got:
Cambelloes arms therefore he on him threw,
And lightly issewd forth to take his lot.
There he in troop found all that warlike crew,
Leading his friend away, full sorry to his view.
Into the thickest of that knightly preasse
He thrust, and smote down all that was between,
Carried with fervent zeal, ne did he cease,
Till that he came, where he had Cambell seen,
Like captive thral two other Knights atweene,
There he amongst them cruel havoc makes.
That they which lead him, soon enforced been
To let him loose, to save their proper stakes,
Who being freed, from one a weapon fiercely takes.
With that he drives at them with dreadful might,
Both in remembrance of his friends late harm,
And in reuengement of his own despite,
So both together give a new alarm,
As if but now the battle wexed warm.
As when two greedy Wolves do break by force
Into an heard, far from the husband farm,
They spoil and rauine without all remorse,
So did these two through all the field their foes enforce.
Fiercely they followd on their bold emprize,
Till trumpets sound did warn them all to rest;
Then all with one consent did yield the prize
To Triamond and Cambell as the best.
But Triamond to Cambell it relest.
And Cambell it to Triamond transferd;
Each laboring t'aduance the others gest,
And make his praise before his own preferred:
So that the doom was to another day differd.
The last day came, when all those knights again
Assembled were their deeds of arms to show.
Full many deeds that day were showed plain:
But Satyrane boue all the other crew,
His wondrous worth declared in all men's view.
For from the first he to the last endured,
And though some while Fortune from him withdrew,
Yet evermore his honor he recured,
And with unwearied power his party still assured.
Ne was there Knight that ever thought of arms,
But that his utmost prowess there made known,
That by their many wounds, and careless harms,
By shiuered spears, and swords all under strowen,
By scattered shields was easy to be showen.
There might ye see loose steeds at randon run,
Whose luckelesse riders late were overthrown;
And squiers make have to help their Lords fordonne,
But still the Knights of Maidenhead the better won.
Till that there entered on the other side,
A stranger knight, from whence no man could reed,
In quyent disguise, full hard to be descride.
For all his armor was like saluage weed,
With woody moss bedight, and all his steed
With oaken leaves attrapt, that seemed fit
For saluage wight, and thereto well agreed
His word, which on his ragged shield was writ,
Saluagesse sans finesse, showing secret wit.
He at his first incomming, charged his spear
At him, that first appeared in his sight:
That was to weet, the stout Sir Sangliere,
Who well was known to be a valiant Knight,
Approved often in many a perlous fight.
Him at the first encounter down he smote,
And ouerbore beyond his crouper quight,
And after him another Knight, that hot
Sir Brianor, so sore, that none him life behote.
Then ere his hand he reard, he overthrew
Seven Knights one after other as they came:
And when his spear was brust, his sword he drew,
The instrument of wrath, and with the same
Fared like a lion in his bloody game,
Hewing, and slashing shields, and helmets bright,
And beating down, what ever nigh him came,
That every one began shun his dreadful sight,
No less then death it self, in dangerous affright.
Much wondered all men, what, or whence he came,
That did amongst the troops so tyrannize;
And each of other began inquire his name.
But when they could not learn it by no wize,
Most answerable to his wyld disguize
It seemed, him to term the saluage knight.
But certes his right name was otherwize,
Though known to few, that Arthegall he hight,
The doughtiest knight that lived that day, and most of might.
Thus was Sir Satyrane with all his band
By his fool manhood and atchieuement stout
Dismayed, that none of them in field durst stand,
But beaten were, and chased all about.
So he continued all that day throughout,
Till evening, that the Sun began downward bend.
Then rushed forth out of the thickest rout
A stranger knight, that did his glory shend:
So naught maybe esteemed happy till the end.
He at his entrance charged his powrefull spear
At Artegall, in midst of his pride,
And therewith smote him on his Vmbriere
So sore, that tombling back, he down did slide
Over his horses tail above a stryde;
Whence little lust he had to rise again.
Which Cambell seeing, much the same enuyde,
And ran at him with all his might and maine;
But shortly was likewise seen lying on the plain.
Whereat full inly wroth was Triamond,
And cast t'euenge the shame done to his friend:
But by his friend himself eke soon he fond,
In no less need of help, then him he weend.
All which when Blandamour from end to end
Beheld, he woxe therewith displeased sore,
And thought in mind it shortly to amend:
His spear he feutred, and at him it bore;
But with no better fortune, then the rest before.
Full many others at him likewise ran:
But all of them likewise dismounted were,
Ne certes wonder; for no power of man
Could bide the force of that enchaunted spear,
The which this famous Britomart did bear;
With which she wondrous deeds of arms achieved,
And overthrew, what ever came her near,
That all those stranger knights full sore agrieued,
And that late weaker band of chalengers relieved.
Like as in summers day when raging heat
Does burn the earth, and boiled rivers dry,
That all brute beasts forced to refrain fro meat,
Do hunt for shade, where shrouded they may lie,
And missing it, feign from themselves to fly;
All travelers tormented are with pain:
A watery cloud does ouercast the sky,
And pours forth a sudden shoure of rain,
That all the wretched world recomforteth again.
So did the warlike Britomart restore
The prize, to knights of Maydenhead that day,
Which else was like to have been lost, and bore
The praise of prowess from them all away.
Then shrilling trompets loudly began to bray,
And bad them leave their labors and long toil,
To joyous feast and other gentle play,
Where beauties prize should win that precious spoil:
Where I with sound of trompe will also rest a while.
Cant. V.
The Ladies for the girdle siriue
of famous Florimell:
Scudumour coming to Cares house,
does sleep from him expel.
IT has been through all ages ever seen,
That with the praise of arms and cheualrie,
The prize of beauty still has joined been;
And that for reasons special priuitie:
For either does on other much rely.
For he me seems most fit the fair to serve,
That can her best defend from villenie;
And she most fit his service does deserve,
That fairest is and from her faith will never swerue.
So fitly now here comes next in place,
After the proof of prowess ended well,
The controuerse of beauties sovereign grace;
In which to her that does the most excel,
Shall fall the girdle of fair Florimell:
That many wish to win for glory vain,
And not for virtuous use, which some do tell
That glorious belt did in it self contain,
Which Ladies ought to love, and seek for to obtain.
That girdle gave the virtue of chaste love,
And wiuehood true, to all that did it bear;
But whosoever contrary does prove,
Might not the same about her middle wear,
But it would loose, or else a sunder tear.
Whilome it was (as Faeries wont report)
Dame Venus girdle, by her steemed dear,
What time she vsd to live in wiuely sort;
But laid aside, when so she vsd her looser sport.
Her husband Vulcan whylome for her sake,
When first he loved her with heart entire,
This precious ornament they say did make,
And wrought in Lemno with unquenched fire:
And afterward did for her loves first hire,
Give it to her, for ever to remain,
Therewith to bind lascivious desire,
And loose affections straightly to restrain;
Which virtue it for ever after did retain.
The same one day, when she her self disposd
To visit her beloved Paramoure,
The God of war, she from her middle loosd,
And left behind her in her secret bower,
On Aridalian mount, where many an hour
She with the pleasant Graces wont to play.
There Florimell in her first ages flower
Was fostered by those Graces, (as they say)
And brought with her from thence that goodly belt away.
That goodly belt was Cestas hight by name,
And as her life by her esteemed dear.
No wonder then, if that to win the same
So many Ladies sought, as shall appear;
For pearelesse she was thought, that did it bear.
And now by this their feast all being ended,
The judges which thereto selected were,
Into the Martian field adowne descended,
To deem this doutfull case, for which they all co^tended.
But first was question made, which of those Knights
That lately turneyd, had the wager won:
There was it judged by those worthy wights,
That Satyrane the first day best had done:
For he last ended, having first begone.
The second was to Triamond behight,
For that he saved the victour from fordonne:
For Cambell victour was in all men's sight,
Till by mishap he in his foemens hand did light.
The third days prize unto that stranger Knight,
Whom all men termed Knight of the Hebene spear,
To Britomart was given by good right;
For that with puissant stroke she down did bear
The Saluage Knight, that victour was whileare,
And all the rest, which had the best before,
And to the last unconquered did appear;
For last is deemed best. To her therefore
The fairest Lady was adiudgd for Paramore.
But thereat greatly grudged Arthegall,
And much repynd, that both of victors meede,
And eke of honor she did him forestall.
Yet mote he not withstand, what was decreede;
But inly thought of that despightfull deed
Fit time t'awaite avenged for to be.
This being ended thus, and all agreed,
Then next ensew'd the Paragon to see
Of beauties praise, and yield the fairest her due fee.
Then first Cambello brought unto their view
His fair Cambina, covered with a veale;
Which being once withdrawn, most perfect hew
And passing beauty did eftsoons reveal,
That able was weak hearts away to steal.
Next did Sir Triamond unto their sight
The face of his dear Canacee vnheale;
Whose beauties beam eftsoons did shine so bright,
That daz'd the eyes of all, as with exceeding light.
And after her did Paridell produce
His false Duessa, that she might be seen,
Who with her forged beauty did seduce
The hearts of some, that fairest her did ween;
As diverse wits affected diverse been.
Then did Sir Ferramont unto them show
His Lucida, that was full fair and sheene,
And after these an hundred Ladies more
Appeared in place, the which each other did outgoe.
All which who so dare think for to enchace,
Him needs sure a golden pen I ween,
To tell the feature of each goodly face.
For since the day that they created been,
So many heavenly faces were not seen
Assembled in one place: ne he that thought
For Chian folk to pourtraict beauties Queen,
By view of all the fairest to him brought,
So many fair did see, as here he might have sought.
At last the most redoubted Britonesse,
Her lovely Amoret did open show;
Whose face discovered, plainly did express
The heavenly pourtraict of bright Angels hew.
Well weened all, which her that time did view,
That she should surely bear the bell away,
Till Blandamour, who thought he had the true
And very Florimell, did her display:
The sight of whom once seen did all the rest dismay.
For all before that seemed fair and bright,
Now base and contemptible did appear,
Compared to her, that shone as Phebes light,
Amongst the lesser stars in evening clear.
All that her saw with wonder ravished wear,
And weend no mortal creature she should be,
But some celestial shape, that flesh did bear:
Yet all were glad there Florimell to see;
Yet thought that Florimell was not so fair as she.
As guilefull Goldsmith that by secret skill,
With golden foil does finely over spread
Some baser metal, which commend he will
Unto the vulgar for good gold insted,
He much more goodly gloss thereon does shed,
To hide his falsehood, then if it were true:
So hard, this Idol was to be ared,
That Florimell her self in all men's view
She seemed to pass: so forged things do fairest show.
Then was that golden belt by doom of all
Granted to her, as to the fairest Dame.
Which being brought, about her middle small
They thought to gird, as best it her became;
But by no means they could it thereto frame.
For ever as they fastened it, it loosed
And fell away, as feeling secret blame.
Full often about her wast she it enclosed;
And it as often was from about her wast disclosed.
That all men wondered at the uncouth sight,
And each one thought, as to their fancies came.
But she her self did think it done for spite,
And touched was with secret wrath and shame
Therewith, as thing deuiz'd her to defame.
Then many other Ladies likewise tried,
About their tender loins to knit the same;
But it would not on none of them abide,
But when they thought it fast, eftsoons it was untied.
Which when that scornful Squire of Dames did view,
He lowdly began to laugh, and thus to jest;
Alas for pity that so fair a crew,
As like can not be seen from East to West,
Cannot find one this girdle to inuest.
Fie on the man, that did it first invent,
To shame us all with this, Ungirt unblessed.
Let never Lady to his love assent,
That has this day so many so unmanly shent.
Thereat all Knights began laugh, and Ladies lowre:
Till that at last the gentle Amoret
Likewise assayd, to prove that girdles power;
And having it about her middle set,
Did find it fit, withouten breach or let.
Whereat the rest began greatly to envy:
But Florimell exceedingly did fret,
And snatching from her hand half angrily
The belt again, about her body began it tie.
Yet nathemore would it her body fit;
Yet nathelesse to her, as her dew right,
It yielded was by them, that judged it:
And she her self adjudged to the Knight,
That bore the Hebene spear, as won in fight.
But Britomart would not thereto assent,
Ne her own Amoret forgo so light
For that strange Dame, whose beauties wonderment
She less esteemed, then the others virtuous government.
Whom when the rest did see her to refuse,
They were full glad, in hope themselves to get her:
Yet at her choice they all did greatly muse.
But after that the Judges did arret her
Unto the second best, that loved her better;
That was the Saluage Knight: but he was gone
In great displeasure, that he could not get her.
Then was she judged Triamond his one;
But Triamond loved Canacee, and other none.
Tho unto Satyran she was adjudged,
Who was right glad to gain so goodly meed:
But Blandamour thereat full greatly grudged,
And little praised his labors evil speed,
That for to win the saddle, lost the steed.
Ne less thereat did Paridell complain,
And thought t'appeale from that, which was decreed,
To single combat with Sir Satyrane.
Thereto him Ate stird, new discord to maintain.
And eke with these, full many other Knights
She through her wicked working did incense,
Her to demand, and challenge as their rights,
Deserved for their perils recompense.
Amongst the rest with boastfull vain pretense
Stepped Braggadochio forth, and as his thrall
Her claym'd, by him in battle won long sens:
Whereto her self he did to witness call;
Who being asked, accordingly confessed all.
Thereat exceeding wroth was Satyran;
And wroth with Satyran was Blandamour;
And wroth with Blandamour was Eriuan;
And at them both Sir Paridell did loure.
So all together stird up strifull stoure,
And ready were new battle to darraine.
Each one professed to be her paramoure,
And vowed with spear and shield it to maintain;
Ne Judges power, ne reasons rule mote them restrain.
Which troublous stir when Satyrane auiz'd:
He began to cast how to appease the same,
And to accord them all, this means deuiz'd:
First in the midst to set that fairest Dame,
To whom each once his challenge should disclame,
And he himself his right would eke releasse:
Then look to whom she voluntary came,
He should without disturbance her possess:
Sweet is the love that comes alone with willingness.
They all agreed, and then that snowy Maid
Was in the midst plast among them all;
All on her gazing wished, and vowed, and prayed,
And to the Queen of beauty close did call,
That she unto their portion might befall.
Then when she long had looked upon each one,
As though she wished to have pleased them all,
At last to Braggadochio self alone
She came of her accord, in spite of all his fone.
Which when they all beheld they chaft and raged,
And woxe nigh mad for very hearts despite,
That from revenge their wills they scarce asswag'd:
Some thought from him her to have reft by might;
Some proffer made with him for her to fight.
But he naught cared for all that they could say:
For he their words as wind esteemed light.
Yet not fit place he thought it there to stay,
But secretly from thence that night her bore away.
They which remaynd, so soon as they perceived,
That she was gone, departed thence with speed,
And followed them, in mind her to have reau'd
From wight unworthy of so noble meed.
In which poursuit how each one did succeed,
Shall else be told in order, as it fell.
But now of Britomart it here does need,
The hard adventures and strange haps to tell;
Since with the rest she went not after Florimell.
For soon as she them saw to discord set,
Her list no longer in that place abide;
But taking with her lovely Amoret,
Upon her first adventure forth did ride,
To seek her loved, making blind love her guide.
Unlucky Maid to seek her enemy,
Unlucky Maid to seek him far and wide,
Whom, when he was unto her self most nie,
She through his late disguizeme^t could him not descrie.
So much the more her grief, the more her toil:
Yet neither toil nor grief she once did spare,
In seeking him, that should her pain assoyle;
Whereto great comfort in her sad misfare
Was Amoret, companion of her care:
Who likewise sought her lover long miswent,
The gentle Scudamour, whose heart whileare
That stryfull hag with gealous discontent
Had filled, that he to fell reueng was fully bent.
Bent to revenge on blameless Britomart
The crime, which cursed Ate kindled erst,
The which like thorns did prick her gealous heart,
And through his soul like poysned arrow perst,
That by no reason it might be reuerst,
For ought that Glauce could or do or say.
For aye the more that she the same reherst,
The more it gauld, and grieved him night and day,
That naught but dire revenge his anger mote defray.
So as they traveled, the drouping night
Covered with cloudie storm and bitter shower,
That dreadful seemed to every living wight,
Upon them fell, before her timely hour;
That forced them to seek some covert bower,
Where they might hide their heads in quiet rest,
And shroud their persons from that stormy stowre.
Not far away, not meet for any guest
They spide a little cottage, like some poor man's nest.
Under a steep hills side it placed was,
There where the mouldred earth had cav'd the bank;
And fast beside a little brook did pas
Of muddie water, that like puddle stanke,
By which few crooked sallowes grew in rank:
Whereto approaching nigh, they heard the sound
Of many iron hammers beating rank,
And answering their weary turns around,
That seemed some blacksmith dwelt in that desert ground.
There entering in, they found the goodman self
Full busily unto his work ybent;
Who was to weet a wretched wearish elfe,
With hollow eyes and rawbone cheeks forspent,
As if he had in prison long been pent:
Full black and griesly did his face appear,
Besmeard with smoke that nigh his eyesight blent;
With rugged beard, and hoarie shagged hear,
The which he never wont to comb, or comely sheare.
Rude was his garment, and to rags all rent,
Ne better had he, ne for better cared:
With blistred hands emongst the cinders brent,
And fingers filthy, with long nails vnpared,
Right fit to rend the food, on which he fared.
His name was Care; a blacksmith by his trade,
That neither day nor night, from working spared,
But to small purpose iron wedges made;
Those be unquiet thoughts, that careful minds invade.
In which his work he had six servants pressed,
About the Andvile standing evermore,
With huge great hammers, that did never rest
From heaping strokes, which thereon soused sore:
All six strong grooms, but one then other more;
For by degrees they all were disagreed;
So likewise did the hammers which they bore,
Like belles in greatness orderly succeed,
That he which was the last, the first did far exceed.
He like a monstrous Giant seemed in sight,
Far passing Bronteus, or Pynacmon great,
The which in Lipari do day and night
Frame thunderbolts for Jove's auengefull threate.
So dreadfully he did the anduile beat,
That seemed to dust he shortly would it drive:
So huge his ham mer and so fierce his heat,
That seemed a rock of Diamond it could riue,
And rend a sunder quite, if he thereto list strive.
Sit Scudamour there entering, much admired
The manner of their work and weary pain;
And having long beheld, at last enquired
The cause and end thereof: but all in vain;
For they for naught would from their work refrain,
Ne let his speeches come unto their ear.
And eke the breathfull bellows blew amain,
Like to the Northren wind, that none could hear,
Those Pensifenesse did move; and Sighs the bellows wear.
Which when that warrior saw, he said no more,
But in his armor laid him down to rest:
To rest he laid him down upon the flore,
(Whylome for ventrous Knights the bedding best)
And thought his weary limbs to have redrest.
And that old aged Dame, his faithful Squire,
Her feeble joints laid eke a down to rest;
That needed much her weak age to desire,
After so long a travel, which them both did tire.
There lay Sir Scudamour long while expecting,
When gentle sleep his heavy eyes would close;
Often changing sides, and often new place electing,
Where better seemed he mote himself repose;
And often in wrath he thence again vprose;
And often in wrath he laid him down again.
But wheresoever he did himself dispose,
He by no means could wished ease obtain:
So every place seemed painful, and each changing vain.
And evermore, when he to sleep did think,
The hammers sound his senses did molest;
And evermore, when he began to wink,
The bellows noise disturbed his quiet rest,
Ne suffered sleep to settle in his breast.
And all the night the dogs did bark and howl
About the house, at sent of stranger guest:
And now the crowing Cock, and now the Owl
Loud shriking him afflicted to the very soul.
And if by fortune any little nap
Upon his heavy eyelids chaunst to fall,
Eftsoons one of those villeins him did rap
Upon his headpeece with his iron mall;
That he was soon awaked therewithal,
And lightly started up as one affrayd;
Or as if one him suddenly did call.
So oftentimes he out of sleep abrayd,
And then lay musing long, on that him ill apayd.
So long he muzed, and so long he lay,
That at the last his weary sprite oppressed
With fleshly weakness, which no creature may
Long time resist, gave place to kindly rest,
That all his senses did full soon arrest:
Yet in his soundest sleep, his daily fear
His idle brain began busily molest,
And made him dream those two disloyal were:
The things that day most minds, at night do most appear.
With that, the wicked carle the master Smith
A pair of redwhot iron tongs did take
Out of the burning cinders, and therewith,
Under his side him nipt, that forced to wake,
He felt his heart for very pain to quake,
And started up avenged for to be
On him, the which his quiet slomber brake:
Yet looking round about him none could see;
Yet did the smart remain, though he himself did flee.
In such disquiet and hartfretting pain,
He all that night, that too long night did pass.
And now the day out of the Ocean main
Began to peep above this earthly mass,
With pearly dew sprinkling the morning grass:
Then up he rose like heavy lump of lead,
That in his face, as in a looking glass,
The signs of anguish one mote plainly read,
And guess the man to be dismayed with gealous dread.
Unto his lofty steed he clombe anon,
And forth upon his former voyage fared,
And with him eke that aged Squire atone;
Who whatsoever peril was prepared,
Both equal pains and equal peril shared:
The end whereof and dangerous event
Shall for another canticle be spared.
But here my weary teeme nigh over spent
Shall breath it self awhile, after so long a went.
Cant. VI.
Both Scadamour and Arthegall
Do fight with Britomart,
He sees her face; does fall in love,
and soon from her depart.
WHat equal torment to the grief of mind,
And pyning anguish hid in gentle heart,
That inly feeds it self with thoughts unkind,
And nourishes her own consuming smart?
What medicine can any Leaches art
Yield such a sore, that does her grieuance hide,
And will to none her malady impart?
Such was the wound that Scudamour did gride;
For which Dan Phoebus self cannot a salve provide.
Who having left that restless house of Care,
The next day, as he on his way did ride,
Full of melancholy and sad misfare,
Through misconceipt; all unawares espide
An armed Knight under a forest side,
Sitting in shade beside his grazing steed;
Who soon as them approaching he descride,
Began toward them to prick with eger speed,
That seemed he was full bent to some mischievous deed.
Which Scudamour perceiving, forth issewed
To have rencountred him in equal race;
But soon as the other nigh approaching, vewed
The arms he bore, his spear he began abase,
And void his course: at which so sudden case
He wondered much. But the other thus can say;
Ah gentle Scudamour, unto your grace
I me submit, and you of pardon pray,
That almost had against you trespassed this day.
Whereto thus Scudamour, Small harm it were
For any knight, upon a ventrous knight
Without displeasance for to prove his spear.
But read you Sir, since ye my name have hight,
What is your own, that I mote you requite.
Certes (said he) ye mote as now excuse
Me from discovering you my name aright:
For time yet serves that I the same refuse,
But call ye me the Saluage Knight, as others use.
Then this, Sir Saluage Knight (quoth he) areede;
Or do you here within this forest won,
That seems well to answer to your weed?
Or have ye it for some occasion done?
That rather seems, since known arms ye shonne.
This other day (said he) a stranger knight
Shame and dishonor has unto me done;
On whom I wait to wreake that foul despite,
When ever he this way shall pass by day or night.
Shame be his meede (quoth he) that means shame.
But what is he, by whom ye shamed were?
A stranger knight, said he, unknown by name,
But known by fame, and by an Hebene spear,
With which he all that met him, down did bear.
He in an open Turney lately held,
Fro me the honor of that game did rear;
And having me all weary erst, down feld,
The fairest Lady reft, and ever since withheld.
When Scudamour heard mention of that spear,
He wist right well, that it was Britomart,
The which from him his fairest love did bear.
Tho began he swell in every inner part,
For fell despite, and gnaw his gealous heart,
That thus he sharply said; Now by my head,
Yet is not this the first vnknightly part,
Which that same knight, whom by his lance I read,
Has done to noble knights, that many makes him dread.
For lately he my love has fro me rest,
And eke defiled with foul villainy
The sacred pledge, which in his faith was left,
In shame of knighthood and fidelity;
The which ere long full dear he shall abie.
And if to that avenge by you decreed
This hand may help, or succor ought supply,
It shall not fail, when so ye shall it need.
So both to wreake their wrathes on Britomart agreed.
Whiles thus they communed, lo far away
A Knight soft ryding toward them they spyde,
Attyr'd in foreign arms and strange array:
Who^ when they nigh approcht, they plain descryde
To be the same, for whom they did abide.
Said then Sir Scudamour, Sir Saluage knight
Let me this crave, since first I was defyde,
That first I may that wrong to him requite:
And if I hap to fail, you shall recure my right.
Which being yielded, he his threatfull spear
Began fewter, and against her fiercely ran.
Who soon as she him saw approaching near
With so fell rage, her self she lightly began
To dight, to welcome him, well as she can:
But entertaind him in so rude a wise,
That to the ground she smote both horse and man;
Whence neither greatly hasted to arise,
But on their common harms together did devise.
But Artegall beholding his mischaunce,
New matter added to his former fire;
And eft auentring his steeleheaded lance,
Against her rode, full of despiteous ire,
That naught but spoil and vengeance did require,
But to himself his felonous intent
Returning, disappointed his desire,
Whiles unawares his saddle he forwent,
And found himself on ground in great amazement.
Lightly he started up out of that stound,
And snatching forth his direful deadly blade,
Did leap to her, as does an eger hound
Thrust to an Hynd within some covert glade,
Whom without peril he cannot invade.
With such fell greedines he her assailed,
That though she mounted were, yet he her made
To give him ground, (so much his force prevailed)
And shun his mighty strokes, against which no arms auayled.
So as they coursed here and there, it chaunst
That in her wheeling round, behind her crest
So sorely he her struck, that thence it glaunst
Adowne her back, the which it fairly blessed
From foul mischance; ne did it ever rest,
Till on her horses hinder parts it fell;
Where biting deep, so deadly it impressed,
That quite it chynd his back behind the sell,
And to alight on foot her algates did compel.
Like as the lightning brond from riuen sky,
Thrown out by angry Jove in his vengeance,
With dreadful force falls on some steeple hie;
Which battring, down it on the church does glance,
And tears it all with terrible mischance.
Yet she no whit dismayed, her steed forsook,
And casting from her that enchaunted lance,
Unto her sword and shield her soon betook;
And therewithal at him right furiously she struck.
So furiously she struck in her first heat,
Whiles with long fight on foot he breathless was,
That she him forced backward to retreat,
And yield unto her weapon way to pas:
Whose raging rigor neither steel nor bras
Could stay, but to the tender flesh it went,
And poured the purple blood forth on the gras;
That all his mayle yriv'd, and plates yrent,
Showed all his body bare unto the cruel dent.
At length when as he saw her hasty heat
Abate, and panting breath begin to fail,
He through long suffera^ce growing now more great,
Rose in his strength, and began her fresh assail,
Heaping huge strokes, as thick as shower of hayle,
And lashing dreadfully at every part,
As if he thought her soul to disentrayle.
Ah cruel hand, and thrice more cruel heart,
That workst such wrecke on her, to whom thou dearest art.
What iron courage ever could endure,
To work such outrage on so fair a creature?
And in his madness think with hands impure
To spoil so goodly workmanship of nature,
The maker self resembling in her feature?
Certes some hellish fury, or some feend
This mischief framd, for their first loves defeature,
To bath their hands in blood of dearest friend,
Thereby to make their loves beginning, their lines end.
Thus long they traced, and trauerst to and fro,
Sometimes pursewing, and sometimes pursewed,
Still as advantage they espyde thereto:
But toward the end Sir Arthegall renewed
His strength still more, but she still more decrewed.
At last his lucklesse hand he heau'd on hie,
Having his forces all in one accrewed,
And therewith stroke at her so hideouslie,
That seemed naught but death mote be her destiny.
The wicked stroke upon her helmet chaunst,
And with the force, which in it self it bore,
Her ventayle shard away, and thence forth glaunst
A down in vain, ne harmed her any more.
With that her angels face, unseen before,
Like to the ruddie morn appeard in sight,
Deawed with silver drops, through sweating sore,
But somewhat redder, then beseem'd aright,
Through toylesome heat and labor of her weary fight.
And round about the same, her yellow hear
Having through stirring loosd their wonted band,
Like to a golden border did appear,
Framed in goldsmithes forge with cunning hand:
Yet goldsmithes cunning could not understand
To frame such subtle wire, so shinie clear.
For it did glister like the golden sand,
The which Pactolus with his waters shere,
Throws forth upon the riuage round about him nere.
And as his hand he up again did rear,
Thinking to work on her his utmost wrack,
His powrelesse arm benumbd with secret fear
From his reuengefull purpose shronke abacke,
And cruel sword out of his fingers slack
Fell down to ground, as if the steel had sense,
And felt some ruth, or sense his hand did lack,
Or both of them did think, obedience
To do to so divine a beauties excellence.
And he himself long gazing thereupon,
At last fell humbly down upon his knee,
And of his wonder made religion,
Weening some heavenly goddess he did see,
Or else vnweeting, what it else might be;
And pardon her besought his error frail,
That had done outrage in so high degree:
Whilst trembling horror did his sense assail,
And made each member quake, and manly heart to quayle.
Nathelesse she full of wrath for that late stroke,
All that long while vpheld her wrathful hand,
With fell intent, on him to been ywroke,
And looking stern, still over him did stand,
Threatening to strike, unless he would withstand:
And bad him rise, or surely he should die.
But die or live for naught he would vpstand
But her of pardon prayed more earnestly,
Or wreake on him her will for so great injury.
Which when as Scudamour, who now abrayd,
Beheld, whereas he stood not far aside,
He was therewith right wondrously dismayed,
And drawing nigh, when as he plain descride
That peerless pattern of Dame natures pride,
And heavenly image of perfection,
He blessed himself, as one sore terrifide,
And turning his fear to faint devotion,
Did worship her as some celestial vision.
But Glauce, seeing all that chanced there,
Well weeting how their error to assoyle,
Full glad of so good end, to them drew nere,
And her salewd with seemly belaccoyle,
Joyous to see her safe after long toil.
Then her besought, as she to her was dear,
To grant unto those warriors truce a while;
Which yielded, they their beuers up did rear,
And showed themselves to her, such as indeed they were.
When Britomart with sharp auizefull eye
Beheld the lovely face of Artegall,
Tempred with sternesse and stout majesty,
She began eftsoons it to her mind to call,
To be the same which in her fathers hall
Long since in that enchaunted glass she saw.
Therewith her wrathful courage began appall,
And haughty spirits meekely to adaw,
That her enhaunced hand she down can soft withdraw.
Yet she it forced to have again vpheld,
As fayning choler, which was turned to cold:
But ever when his visage she beheld,
Her hand fell down, and would no longer hold
The wrathful weapon against his countnance bold:
But when in vain to fight she often assayd,
She armed her tongue, and thought at him to scold;
Nathlesse her tongue not to her will obayd,
But brought forth speeches myld, when she would have missayd.
But Scudamour now woxen inly glad,
That all his gealous fear he false had found,
And how that Hag his love abused had
With breach of faith and loyalty unsound,
The which long time his grieved heart did wound,
Her thus bespake; certes Sir Artegall,
I joy to see you lout so low on ground,
And now become to live a Ladies thrall,
That whylome in your mind wont to despise them all.
Soon as she heard the name of Artegall,
Her heart did leap, and all her hart-strings tremble,
For sudden joy, and secret fear withal,
And all her vital powers with motion nimble,
To succor it, themselves began there assemble,
That by the swift recourse of flushing blood
Right plain appeard, though she it would dissemble,
And feigned still her former angry mood,
Thinking to hide the depth by troubling of the flood.
When Glauce thus began wisely all vpknit;
Ye gentle Knights, whom fortune here has brought,
To be spectators of this uncouth fit,
Which secret fate has in this Lady wrought,
Against the course of kind, ne marvel naught,
Ne thenceforth fear the thing that hethertoo
Has troubled both your minds with idle thought,
Fearing least she your loves away should woo,
Feared in vain, since means ye see there wants theretoo.
And you Sir Artegall, the saluage knight,
Henceforth may not disdain, that woman's hand
Has conquered you anew in second fight:
For whylome they have conquered sea and land,
And heaven it self, that naught may them withstand
Ne henceforth be rebellious unto love,
That is the crown of knighthood, and the band
Of noble minds derived from above,
Which being knit with virtue, never will remove.
And you fair Lady knight, my dearest Dame,
Relent the rigor of your wrathful will,
Whose fire were better turned to other flame;
And wiping out remembrance of all ill,
Grant him your grace, but so that he fulfill
The penance, which ye shall to him empart:
For lovers heaven must pass by sorrows hell.
Thereat full inly blushed Britomart;
But Artegall close smyling joyed in secret heart.
Yet durst he not make love so suddenly,
Ne think the affection of her heart to draw
From one to other so quite contrary:
Besides her modest countenance he saw
So goodly grave, and full of princely aw,
That it his ranging fancy did refrain,
And looser thoughts to lawful bounds withdraw;
Whereby the passion grew more fierce and feign,
Like to a stubborn steed whom strong hand would restrain.
But Scudamour whose heart twixt doubtful fear
And feeble hope hung all this while suspense,
Desiring of his Amoret to hear
Some gladfull news and sure intelligence,
Her thus bespake; But Sir without offense
Mote I request you tidings of my love,
My Amoret, since you her freed fro thence,
Where she captiued long, great woes did prove;
That where ye left, I may her seek, as does behoue.
To whom thus Britomart, certes Sir knight,
What is of her become, or whether rest,
I can not unto you aread a right.
For from that time I from enchaunters theft
Her freed, in which ye her all hopeless left,
I her preserved from peril and from fear,
And evermore from villenie her kept:
Ne ever was there wight to me more dear
Then she, ne unto whom I more true love did bear.
Till on a day as through a desert wyld
We traveled, both weary of the way
We did alight, and sat in shadow myld;
Where fearelesse I to sleep me down did lay.
But when as I did out of sleep abray,
I found her not, where I her left whyleare,
But thought she wandered was, or gone astray.
I called her loud, I so ught her far and near;
But no where could her find, nor tidings of her hear.
When Scudamour those heavy tidings heard,
His heart was thrild with point of deadly fear;
Ne in his face or blood or life appeard,
But senseless stood, like to a mazed steare,
That yet of mortal stroke the stound does bear.
Till Glauce thus; Fair Sir, be naught dismayed
With needelesse dread, till certainty ye hear:
For yet she may be safe though somewhat strayd;
Its best to hope the best, though of the worst affrayd.
Nathlesse he hardly of her cheerful speech
Did comfort take, or in his troubled sight
Showed change of better cheer: so sore a breach
That sudden news had made into his spright;
Till Britomart him fairly thus behight;
Great cause of sorrow certes Sir ye have:
But comfort take: for by this heavens light
I vow, you dead or living not to leave,
Till I her find, and wreake on him that her did reaue.
Therewith he rested, and well pleased was.
So peace being confirmed amongst them all,
They took their steeds, and forward thence did pas
Unto some resting place, which mote befall,
All being guided by Sir Artegall.
Where goodly solace was unto them made,
And daily feasting both in bower and hall,
Until that they their wounds well healed had,
And weary limbs recur'd after late usage bad.
In all which time, Sir Artegall made way
Unto the love of noble Britomart,
And with meek service and much suit did lay
Continual siege unto her gentle heart,
Which being whylome launcht with lovely dart,
More eath was new impression to receive,
How ever she her paynd with womanish art
To hide her wound, that none might it pereciue:
Vain is the art that seeks it self for to deceive.
So well he wooed her, and so well he wrought her,
With fair entreatie and sweet blandishment,
That at the length unto a bay he brought her,
So as she to his speeches was content
To lend an ear, and softly to relent.
At last through many vows which forth he poured,
And many oaths, she yielded her consent
To be his love, and take him for her Lord,
Till they with marriage meet might finish that accord.
Tho when they had long time there taken rest,
Sir Artegall, who all this while was bound
Upon an hard adventure yet in quest,
Fit time for him thence to depart it found,
To follow that, which he did long propound;
And unto her his congee came to take.
But her therewith full sore displeasd he found,
And loath to leave her late betrothed make,
Her dearest love full loath so shortly to forsake.
Yet he with strong persuasions her assuaged,
And won her will to suffer him depart;
For which his faith with her he fast engaged,
And thousand vows from bottom of his heart,
That all so soon as he by wit or art
Could that atchieue, whereto he did aspire,
He unto her would speedily reuert:
No longer space thereto he did desire,
But till the horned moon three courses did expire.
With which she for the present was appeased,
And yielded leave, how ever malcontent
She inly were, and in her mind displeased.
So early in the morrow next he went
Forth on his way, to which he was ybent.
Ne wight him to attend, or way to guide,
As whylome was the custom ancient
Among Knights, when on adventures they did ride,
Save that she algates him a while accompanide.
And by the way she sundry purpose found
Of this or that, the time for to delay,
And of the perils whereto he was bound,
The fear whereof seemed much her to affray:
But all she did was but to wear out day.
Full oftentimes she leave of him did take;
And eft again deuiz'd some what to say,
Which she forgot, whereby excuse to make:
So loath she was his company for to forsake.
At last when all her speeches she had spent,
And new occasion fayld her more to find,
She left him to his fortunes government,
And back returned with right heavy mind.
To Scudamour, who she had left behind,
With whom she went to seek fair Amoret,
Her second care, though in another kind;
For virtues only sake, which does beget
True love and faithful friendship, she by her did set.
Back to that desert forest they retired,
Where sorry Britomart had lost her late;
There they her sought, and every where inquired,
Where they might tidings get of her estate;
Yet found they none. But by what hapless fate,
Or hard misfortune she was thence conuayd,
And stolen away from her beloved mate,
Were long to tell; therefore I here will stay
Until another tide, that I it finish may.
Cant. VII.
Amoret rapt by greedy lust
Belphebe saues from dread,
The Squire her loves, and being blamed
his days in dole does lead.
GReat God of love, that with thy cruel dart
Do conquer greatest conquerors on ground,
And setst thy kingdom in the captive hearts
Of Kings and Keasars, to thy service bound,
What glory, or what guerdon have thou found
In feeble Ladies tyranning so sore;
And adding anguish to the bitter wound,
With which their lives thou lanchedst long before,
By heaping storms of trouble on them daily more?
So whylome did thou to fair Florimell;
And so and so to noble Britomart:
So do thou now to her, of whom I tell,
The lovely Amoret, whose gentle heart
Thou martyrest with sorrow and with smart,
In saluage forests, and in deserts wide,
With Bears and Tigers taking heavy part,
Withouten comfort, and withouten guide,
That pity is to hear the perils, which she tried.
So soon as she with that brave Britonesse
Had left that Turneyment for beauties prise,
They trauel'd long, that now for weariness,
Both of the way, and warlike exercise,
Both through a forest ryding did devise
T'alight, and rest their weary limbs awhile.
There heavy sleep the eyelids did surprise
Of Britomart after long tedious toil,
That did her passed pains in quiet rest assoyle.
The whiles fair Amoret, of naught affeard,
Walked through the wood, for pleasure, or for need;
When suddenly behind her back she heard
One rushing forth out of the thickest weed,
That ere she back could turn to taken heed,
Had unawares her snatched up from ground.
Feebly she shriekt, but so feebly indeed,
That Britomart heard not the shrilling sound,
There where through weary travel she lay sleeping sound.
It was to weet a wild and saluage man,
Yet was no man, but only like in shape,
And eke in stature higher by a span,
All over grown with hair, that could awhape
An hardy heart, and his wide mouth did gape
With huge great teeth, like to a Bore:
For he lived all on rauin and on rape
Of men and beasts; and fed on fleshly gore,
The sign whereof yet stained his bloody lips before.
His nether lip was not like man nor beast,
But like a wide deep poke, down hanging low,
In which he wont the relickes of his feast,
And cruel spoil, which he had spard, to stow:
And over it his huge great nose did grow,
Full dreadfully empurpled all with blood;
And down both sides two wide long ears did glow,
And raught down to his waste, when up he stood,
More great then the ears of Elephants by Indus flood.
His wast was with a wreath of yuie green
Engirt about, ne other garment wore:
For all his hair was like a garment seen;
And in his hand a tall young oak he bore,
Whose knottie snags were sharpened all before,
And beath'd in fire for steel to be in sted.
But whence he was, or of what womb ybore,
Of beasts, or of the earth, I have not red:
But certes was with milk of Wolves and Tygres fed.
This ugly creature in his arms her snatched,
And through the forest bore her quite away,
With briers and bushes all to rent and scratcht;
Ne care he had, ne pity of the pray,
Which many a knight had sought so many a day.
He stayed not, but in his arms her bearing
Ran, till he came to the end of all his way,
Unto his cave far from all peoples hearing,
And there he threw her in, naught feeling, ne naught fearing.
For she dear Lady all the way was dead,
Whilst he in arms her bore; but when she felt
Her self down soust, she waked out of dread
Straight into grief, that her dear heart nigh swelt,
And eft began into tender tears to melt.
Then when she looked about, and nothing found
But darkness and dread horror, where she dwelt,
She almost fell again into a swound,
Ne wist whether above she were, or under ground.
With that she heard some one close by her side
Sighing and sobbing sore, as if the pain
Her tender heart in pieces would divide:
Which she long listening, softly asked again
What mister wight it was that so did plain?
To whom thus aunswer'd was: Ah wretched wight
That seeks to know another grief in vain,
Vnweeting of thine own like hapless plight:
Self to forget to mind another, is oversight.
Aye me (said she) where am I, or with whom?
Among the living, or among the dead?
What shall of me unhappy maid become?
Shall death be the end, or ought else worse, aread.
Unhappy maid (then answered she) whose dread
Untried, is less then when thou shall it try:
Death is to him, that wretched life does lead,
Both grace and gain; but he in hell does lie,
That lives a loathed life, and wishing cannot die.
This dismal day has thee a caytiue made,
And vassal to the vilest wretch alive,
Whose cursed usage and ungodly trade
The heavens abhor, and into darkness drive.
For on the spoil of women he does live,
Whose bodies chaste, when ever in his power
He may them catch, unable to gainestriue,
He with his shameful lust does first deflowre,
And afterward themselves does cruelly devour.
Now twenty days, by which the sons of men
Divide their works, have past through heaven sheene,
Since I was brought into this doleful den;
During which space these sorry eyes have seen
Seven women by him slain, and eaten clean.
And now no more for him but I alone,
And this old woman here remaining been;
Till thou came hither to augment our moan,
And of us three to morrow he will sure eat one.
Ah dreadful tidings which thou do declare,
(Quoth she) of all that ever has been known:
Full many great calamities and rare
This feeble breast endured has, but none
Equal to this, where ever I have gone.
But what are you, whom like unlucky lot
Has linckt with me in the same chain atone?
To tell (quoth she) that which ye see, needs not;
A woeful wretched maid, of God and man forgot.
But what I was, it irkes me to rehearse;
Daughter unto a Lord of high degree;
That ioyd in happy peace, till fates perverse
With guilefull love did secretly agree,
To overthrow my state and dignity.
It was my lot to love a gentle swain,
Yet was he but a Squire of low degree;
Yet was he meet, unless mine eye did feign,
By any Ladies side for Leman to have lain.
But for his meannesse and disparagement,
My Sire, who me too dearly well did love,
Unto my choice by no means would assent,
But often did my folly foul reprove.
Yet nothing could my fixed mind remove,
But whether willed or nilled friend or foe,
I me resolved the utmost end to prove,
And rather then my love abandon so,
Both sire, and friends, and all for ever to forgo.
Thenceforth I sought by secret means to work
Time to my will, and from his wrathful sight
To hide the intent, which in my heart did lurk,
Till I thereto had all things ready dight.
So on a day vnweeting unto wight,
I with that Squire agreede away to flit,
And in a privy place, betwixt us hight,
Within a grove appointed him to meet;
To which I boldly came upon my feeble feet.
But ah unhappy hour me thither brought:
For in that place where I him thought to find,
There was I found, contrary to my thought,
Of this accursed Carle of hellish kind,
The shame of men, and plague of womankind,
Who trussing me, as Eagle does his pray,
Me hither brought with him, as swift as wind,
Where yet untouched till this present day,
I rest his wretched thrall, the sad AEmylia.
Ah sad AEmylia (then said Amoret,)
Thy ruefull plight I pity as mine own.
But read to me, by what devise or wit,
Have thou in all this time, from him unknown
Thine honor saved, though into thraldom thrown.
Through help (quoth she) of this old woman here
I have so done, as she to me has shown.
For ever when he burnt in lustful fire,
She in my stead supplide his bestiall desire.
Thus of their evils as they did discourse,
And each did other much bewail and moan;
Lo where the villain self, their sorrows sourse,
Came to the cave, and rolling thence the stone,
Which wont to stop the mouth thereof, that none
Might issue forth, came rudely rushing in,
And spredding over all the flore alone,
Began dight him self unto his wonted sin;
Which ended, then his bloody banquet should begin.
Which when as fearful Amoret perceived,
She staid not the utmost end thereof to try,
But like a ghastly Gelt, whose wits are reaued,
Ran forth in have with hideous outcry,
For horror of his shameful villainy.
But after her full lightly he vprose,
And her pursued as fast as she did fly:
Full fast she flies, and far before him goes,
Ne feels the thorns and thickets prick her tender toes.
Nor hedge, nor ditch, nor hill, nor dale she stays,
But ouerleapes them all, like Robucke light,
And through the thickest makes her nighest ways;
And evermore when with regardfull sight
She looking back, espies that griesly wight
Approaching nigh, she gins to mend her pace,
And makes her fear a spur to have her flight:
More swift then Myrrh' or Daphne in her race,
Or any of the Thracian Nymphs in saluage chase.
Long so she fled, and so he followed long,
Ne living aid for her on earth appears,
But if the heavens help to redress her wrong,
Moved with pity of her plenteous tears.
It fortuned Belphebe with her pears
The woody Nimphs, and with that lovely boy,
Was hunting then the Libbards and the Bears,
In these wild woods, as was her wonted joy,
To banish sloth, that often does noble minds annoy.
It so befell, as often it falls in chase,
That each of them from other sundred were,
And that same gentle Squire arrived in place,
Where this same cursed caytiue did appear,
Pursuing that fair Lady full of fear,
And now he her quite overtaken had;
And now he her away with him did bear
Under his arm, as seeming wondrous glad,
That by his grenning laughter mote far off be rad.
With drery sight the gentle Squire espying,
Does have to cross him by the nearest way,
Led with that woeful Ladies piteous crying,
And him assailes with all the might he may,
Yet will not he the lovely spoil down lay,
But with his craggy club in his right hand,
Defends him self, and saues his gotten pray.
Yet had it been right hard him to withstand,
But that he was full light and nimble on the land.
Thereto the villain used craft in fight;
For ever when the Squire his iauelin shook,
He held the Lady forth before him right,
And with her body, as a buckler, broke
The puissance of his intended stroke.
And if it chaunst, (as needs it must in fight)
Whilst he on him was greedy to be wroke,
That any little blow on her did light,
Then would he laugh aloud, and gather great delight.
Which subtle slight did him encumber much,
And made him often, when he would strike, forbear;
For hardly could he come the carle to touch,
But that he her must hurt, or hazard near:
Yet he his hand so carefully did bear,
That at the last he did himself attain,
And therein left the pike head of his spear.
A stream of coleblacke blood thence gusht amain,
That all her silken garments did with blood bestaine.
With that he threw her rudely on the flore,
And laying both his hands upon his glaue,
With dreadful strokes let drive at him so sore,
That forced him fly abacke, himself to save:
Yet he therewith so felly still did rave,
That scarce the Squire his hand could once vpreare,
But for advantage ground unto him gave,
Tracing and traversing, now here, now there;
For bootlesse thing it was to think such blows to bear.
Whilst thus in battle they embusied were,
Belphebe raunging in that forest wide,
The hideous noise of their huge strokes did hear,
And drew thereto, making her ear her guide.
Whom when that thief approaching nigh espide,
With bow in hand, and arrows ready bent,
He by his former combat would not bide,
But fled away with ghastly dreriment,
Well knowing her to be his deaths sole instrument.
Whom seeing fly, she speedily poursewed
With winged feet, as nimble as the wind,
And ever in her bow she ready showed,
The arrow, to his deadly mark desynde.
As when Latonaes daughter cruel kind,
In vengement of her mothers great disgrace,
With fell despite her cruel arrows tynde
Against woeful Niobes unhappy race,
That all the gods did moan her miserable case.
So well she sped her and so far she ventred,
That ere unto his hellish den he raught,
Even as he ready was there to have entered,
She sent an arrow forth with mighty draught,
That in the very door him ouercaught,
And in his nape arriving, through it thrild
His greedy throat, therewith in two distraught,
That all his vital spirits thereby spild,
And all his hairy breast with gory blood was filled.
Whom when on ground she groueling saw to roll,
She ran in have his life to have berest:
But ere she could him reach, the sinful soul
Having his carrion corse quite senseless left,
Was fled to hell, surcharged with spoil and theft.
Yet over him she there long gazing stood,
And often admired his monstrous shape, and often
His mighty limbs, whilst all with filthy blood
The place there overflowed, seemd like a sudden flood.
Thenceforth she past into his dreadful den,
Where naught but darkesome drerinesse she found,
Ne creature saw, but hearkened now and then
Some little whispering, and soft groaning sound.
With that she asked, what ghosts there under ground
Lay hid in horror of eternal night?
And bad them, if so be they were not bound,
To come and show themselves before the light,
Now freed from fear and danger of that dismal wight.
Then forth the said AEmylia issewed,
Yet trembling every joint through former fear;
And after her the Hag, there with her mewed,
A foul and loathsome creature did appear;
A leman fit for such a lover dear.
That moved Belphebe her no less to hate,
Then for to rue the others heavy cheer;
Of whom she began enquire of her estate.
Who all to her at large, as happened, did relate.
Thence she them brought toward the place, where late
She left the gentle Squire with Amoret:
There she him found by that new lovely mate,
Who lay the whiles in swoune, full sadly set,
From her fair eyes wiping the deawy wet,
Which softly stild, and kissing them atweene,
And handling soft the hurts, which she did get.
For of that Carle she sorely bruz'd had been,
Als of his own rash hand one wound was to be seen.
Which when she saw, with sudden glauncing eye,
Her noble heart with sight thereof was filled
With deep disdain, and great indignity,
That in her wrath she thought them both have thrild,
With that self arrow, which the Carle had killed:
Yet held her wrathful hand from vengeance sore,
But drawing nigh, ere he her well beheld;
Is this the faith she said, and said no more,
But turned her face, and fled away for evermore.
He seeing her depart, arose up light,
Right sore agrieued at her sharp reproof,
And followed fast: but when he came in sight,
He durst not nigh approach, but kept aloof,
For dread of her displeasures utmost proof.
And evermore, when he did grace entreat,
And framed speeches fit for his behoof,
Her mortal arrows, she at him did threat,
And forced him back with foul dishonor to retreat.
At last when long he followed had in vain,
Yet found no ease of grief, nor hope of grace,
Unto those woods he turned back again,
Full of sad anguish, and in heavy case:
And finding there fit solitary place
For woeful wight, chose out a gloomy glade,
Where hardly eye mote see bright heavens face,
For mossy trees, which covered all with shade
And sad melancholy, there he his cabin made.
His wonted warlike weapons all he broke,
And threw away, with vow to use no more,
Ne thenceforth ever strike in battle stroke,
Ne ever word to speak to woman more;
But in that wilderness, of men forlore,
And of the wicked world forgotten quight,
His hard mishap in dolor to deplore,
And wast his wretched days in woeful plight;
So on him self to wreake his follies own despite.
And eke his garment, to be thereto meet,
He wilfully did cut and shape anew;
And his fair locks, that wont with ointment sweet
To be embaulm'd, and sweat out dainty dew,
He let to grow and griesly to concrew,
Vncomb'd, vncurl'd, and carelessly vnshed;
That in short time his face they ouergrew,
And over all his shoulders did dispred,
That who he whilome was, uneath was to be red.
There he continued in this careful plight,
Wretchedly wearing out his youthly years,
Through wilful penury consumed quight,
That like a pined ghost he soon appears.
For other food then that wild forest bears,
Ne other drink there did he ever taste,
Then running water, tempred with his tears,
The more his weakened body so to wast:
That out of all men's knowledge he was worn at last.
For on a day, by fortune as it fell,
His own dear Lord Prince Arthure came that way,
Seeking adventures, where he mote hear tell;
And as he through the wandering wood did stray,
Having espide this Cabin far away,
He to it drew, to weet who there did won;
Weening therein some holy Hermit lay,
That did resort of sinful people shonne;
Or else some woodman shrouded there from scorching sun.
Arriving there, he found this wretched man,
Spending his days in dolor and despair,
And through long fasting woxen pale and wan,
All ouergrowen with rude and rugged hair;
That albeit his own dear Squire he were,
Yet he him knew not, ne auiz'd at all,
But like strange wight, whom he had seen no where,
Saluting him, began into speech to fall,
And pity much his plight, that lived like outcast thrall.
But to his speech he answered no whit,
But stood still mute, as if he had been dum,
Ne sign of sense did show, ne common wit,
As one with grief and anguishe ouercum,
And unto every thing did answer mum:
And ever when the Prince unto him spoke,
He louted lowly, as did him becum,
And humble homage did unto him make,
Midst sorrow showing joyous semblance for his sake.
At which his uncouth guise and usage quaint
The Prince did wonder much, yet could not guess
The cause of that his sorrowful constraint;
Yet weend by secret signs of manliness,
Which close appeard in that rude brutishness,
That he whilome some gentle swain had been,
Traind up in feats of arms and knightlinesse;
Which he observed, by that he him had seen
To weld his naked sword, and try the edges keen.
And eke by that he saw on every tree,
How he the name of one engraven had,
Which likly was his liefest love to be,
For whom he now so sorely was bestad;
Which was by him BELPHEBE rightly rad.
Yet who was that Belphebe, he ne wist;
Yet saw he often how he wexed glad,
When he it heard, and how the ground he kissed,
Wherein it written was, and how himself he blist:
Tho when he long had marked his demeanor,
And saw that all he said and did, was vain,
Ne ought mote make him change his wonted tenor,
Ne ought mote ease or mitigate his pain,
He left him there in languor to remain,
Till time for him should remedy provide,
And him restore to former grace again.
Which for it is too long here to abide,
I will defer the end until another tide.
Cant. VIII.
The gentle Squire recouers grace,
Sclaunder her guests does stain:
Corflambo chaseth Placidas,
And is by Arthure slain.
WEll said the wiseman, now proved true by this,
Which to this gentle Squire did happen late,
That the displeasure of the mighty is
Then death it self more dread and desperate.
Fornaught the same may calm ne mitigate,
Till time the tempest do thereof delay
With sufferaunce soft, which rigor can abate,
And have the stern remembrance wypt away
Of bitter thoughts, which deep therein infixed lay.
Like as it fell to this unhappy boy,
Whose tender heart the fair Belphebe had,
With one stern look so daunted, that no joy
In all his life, which afterward he lad,
He ever tasted, but with penance sad
And pensive sorrow pind and wore away,
Ne ever laughed, ne once showed countenance glad;
But always wept and wailed night and day,
As blasted bloosme through heat does languish and decay
Till on a day, as in his wonted wise
His doole he made, there chaunst a turtle Dove
To come, where he his dolors did devise,
That likewise late had lost her dearest love,
Which loss her made like passion also prove.
Who seeing his sad plight, her tender heart
With dear compassion deeply did emmoue,
That she began moan his undeserved smart,
And with her doleful accent bear with him a part.
She sitting by him as on ground he lay,
Her mournful notes full piteously did frame,
And thereof made a lamentable lay,
So sensibly compyld, that in the same
Him seemed often he heard his own right name.
With that he forth would pour so plenteous tears,
And beat his breast unworthy of such blame,
And knock his head, and rend his rugged hears,
That could have perst the hearts of Tigres and of Bears.
Thus long this gentle bird to him did use,
Withouten dread of peril to repair
Unto his won, and with her mournful muse
Him to recomfort in his greatest care,
That much did ease his mourning and misfare:
And every day for guerdon of her song,
He part of his small feast to her would share;
That at the last of all his woe and wrong
Companion she became, and so continued long.
Upon a day as she him sat beside,
By chance he certain miniments forth drew,
Which yet with him as relickes did abide
Of all the bounty, which Belphebe threw
On him, whilst goodly grace she did him show:
Amongst the rest a jewel rich he found,
That was a Ruby of right perfect hew,
Shaped like a heart, yet bleeding of the wound,
And with a little golden chain about it bound.
The same he took, and with a riband new,
In which his Ladies colors were, did bind
About the turtles neck, that with the view
Did greatly solace his engrieued mind.
All unawares the bird, when she did find
Her self so decked, hernimble wings displaid,
And flew away, as lightly as the wind:
Which sudden accident him much dismayed,
And looking after long, did mark which way she straid.
But when as long he looked had in vain,
Yet saw her forward still to make her flight,
His weary eye returned to him again,
Full of discomfort and disquiet plight,
That both his iuell he had lost so light,
And eke his dear companion of his care.
But that sweet bird departing, flew forth right
Through the wideregion of the wastfull air,
Until she came where wonned his Belphebe fair.
There found she her (as then it did betide)
Sitting in covert shade of arbors sweet,
After late weary toil, which she had tried
In saluage chase, to rest as seemed her meet.
There she alighting, fell before her feet,
And began to her her mournful plaint to make,
As was herwont, thinking to let her weet
The great tormenting grief, that for her sake
Her gentle Squire through her displeasure did partake.
She her beholding with attentive eye,
At length did mark about her purple breast
That precious iuell, which she formerly
Had known right well with colored ribbands dressed:
Therewith she rose in have, and her addressed
With ready hand it to have rest away.
But the swift bird obayd not her behest,
But swaru'd aside, and there again did stay;
She followed her, and thought again it to assay.
And ever when she nigh approcht, the Dove
Would flit a little forward, and then stay,
Till she drew near, and then again remove;
So tempting her still to pursue the pray,
And still from her escaping soft away:
Till that at length into that forest wide,
She drew her far, and led with slow delay.
In the end she her unto that place did guide,
Whereas that woeful man in languor did abide.
Eftsoons she flew unto his fearelesse hand,
And there a piteous ditty new deuiz'd,
As if she would have made him understand,
His sorrows cause to be of her despised.
Whom when she saw in wretched weeds disguised,
With heary glib deformed, and meiger face,
Like ghost late risen from his grave agryz'd,
She knew him not, but pitied much his case,
And wished it were in her to do him any grace.
He her beholding, at her feet down fell,
And kissed the ground on which her sole did tread,
And washed the same with water, which did well
From his moist eyes, and like two streams procead,
Yet spoke no word, whereby she might aread
What mister wight he was, or what he meant,
But as one daunted with her presence dread,
Only few ruefull looks unto her sent,
As messengers of his true meaning and intent.
Yet nathemore his meaning she ared,
But wondered much at his so selcouth case,
And by his persons secret seemlyhed
Well weend, that he had been some man of place,
Before misfortune did his hew deface:
That being moved with ruth she thus bespake.
Ah woeful man, what heavens hard disgrace,
Or wrath of cruel wight on thee ywrake?
Or self disliked life does thee thus wretched make?
If heaven, then none may it redress or blame,
Since to his power we all are subject borne:
If wrathful wight, then foul rebuke and shame
Be theirs, that have so cruel thee forlorn;
But if through inward grief or wilful scorn
Of life it be, then better do advise.
For he whose days in wilful woe are worn,
The grace of his Creator does despise,
That will not use his gifts for thanklesse nigardise.
When so he heard her say, eftsoons he brake
His sudden silence, which he long had pent,
And sighing inly deep, her thus bespake;
Then have they all themselves against me bent:
For heaven, first author of my languishment,
Envying my too great felicity,
Did closely with a cruel one consent,
To cloud my days in doleful misery,
And make me loath this life, still longing for to die.
Ne any but your self, o dearest dred,
Has done this wrong, to wreake on worthless wight
Your high displesure, through misdeeming bred:
That when your pleasure is to deem aright,
Ye may redress, and me restore to light.
Which sorry words her mighty heart did mate
With mild regard, to see his ruefull plight,
That her inburning wrath she began abate,
And him received again to former favors state.
In which he long time afterward did lead
An happy life with grace and good accord,
Fearlesse of fortunes change or enuies dread,
And eke all mindlesse of his own dear Lord
The noble Prince, who never heard one word
Of tidings, what did unto him betide,
Or what good fortune did to him afford,
But through the endless world did wander wide,
Him seeking evermore, yet no where him descride.
Till on a day as through that wood he rode,
He chaunst to come where those two Ladies late,
Aemylia and Amoret abode,
Both in full sad and sorrowful estate;
The one right feeble through the evil rate
Of food, which in her duresse she had found:
The other almost dead and desperate
Through her late hurts, and through that hapless wound,
With which the Squire in her defense her sore astound.
Whom when the Prince beheld, he began to rue
The evil case in which those Ladies lay;
But most was moved at the piteous view
Of Amoret, so near unto decay,
That her great danger did him much dismay.
Eftsoons that precious liquour forth he drew,
Which he in store about him kept always,
And with few drops thereof did softly dew
Her wounds, that unto strength restored her soon anew.
Tho when they both recovered were right well,
He began of them inquire, what evil guide
Them thither brought, and how their harms befell.
To whom they told all, that did them betide,
And how from thraldom vile they were untied
Of that same wicked Carle, by Virgins hond;
Whose bloody corse they showed him there beside,
And eke his cave, in which they both were bond:
At which he wondered much, when all those signs he fond.
And evermore he greatly did desire
To know, what Virgin did them thence unbind;
And often of them did earnestly inquire,
Where was her won, and how he mote her find.
But when as naught according to his mind
He could outlearne, he them from ground did rear:
No service loathsome to a gentle kind;
And on his warlike beast them both did bear,
Himself by them on foot, to succor them from fear.
So when that forest they had passed well,
A little cotage far away they spide,
To which they drew, ere night upon them fell;
And entering in, found none therein abide,
But one old woman sitting there beside,
Upon the ground in ragged rude attire,
With filthy locks about her scattered wide,
Gnawing her nails for felnesse and for ire,
And there out sucking venime to her parts entyre.
A foul and loathly creature sure in sight,
And in conditions to be loathed no less:
For she was stuffed with rancour and despite
Up to the throat, that often with bitterness
It forth would break, and gush in great excess,
Pouring out streams of poison and of gall
Against all, that truth or virtue do profess,
Whom she with leasings lewdly did miscall,
And wickedly backbite: Her name men Sclaunder call.
Her nature is all goodness to abuse,
And causeless crimes continually to frame,
With which she guiltless persons may accuse,
And steal away the crown of their goodname;
Ne ever Knight so bold, ne ever Dame
So chaste and loyal lived, but she would strive
With forged cause them falsely to defame;
Ne ever thing so well was done alive,
But she with blame would blot, and of due praise deprive.
Her words were not, as common words are meant,
To Express the meaning of the inward mind,
But noisome breath, and poysnous spirit sent
From inward parts, with cancred malice lind,
And breathed forth with blast of bitter wind;
Which passing through the ears, would pierce the heart,
And wound the soul it self with grief unkind:
For like the stings of Aspes, that kill with smart,
Her spightfull words did prick, and wound the inner part.
Such was that Hag, unmeet to host such guests,
Whom greatest Princes court would welcome feign,
But need, that answers not to all requests,
Bad them not look for better entertayne;
And eke that age despised niceness vain,
Enured to hardness and to homely fare,
Which them to warlike discipline did train,
And manly limbs endured with little care
Against all hard mishaps and fortunelesse misfare.
Then all that evening welcomed with cold,
And chearelesse hunger, they together spent;
Yet found no fault, but that the Hag did scold
And rail at them with grudgefull discontent,
For lodging there without her own consent:
Yet they endured all with patience mild,
And unto rest themselves all only lent,
Regardlesse of that queen so base and vilde,
To be unjustly blamd, and bitterly reuilde.
Here well I ween, when as these rimes be red
With misregard, that some rash witted wight,
Whose looser thought will lightly be misled,
These gentle Ladies will misdeeme too light,
For thus conuersing with this noble Knight;
Since now of days such temperance is rare
And hard to find, that heat of youthful spright
For ought will from his greedy pleasure spare,
More hard for hungry steed t'abstaine from pleasant lare.
But antique age yet in the infancy
Of time, did live then like an innocent,
In simple truth and blameless chastity,
Ne them of guile had made experiment,
But void of vile and treacherous intent,
Held virtue for it self in sovereign awe:
Then loyal love had royal regiment,
And each unto his lust did make a law,
From all forbidden things his liking to withdraw.
The Lion there did with the Lamb consort,
And eke the Dove sat by the Faulcons side,
Ne each of other feared fraud or tort,
But did in safe security abide,
Withouten peril of the stronger pride:
But when the world woxe old, it woxe war old
(Whereof it hight) and having shortly tried
The trains of wit, in wickedness woxe bold,
And dared of all sins the secrets to unfold.
Then beauty, which was made to represent
The great Creatours own resemblance bright,
Unto abuse of lawless lust was lent,
And made the bait of bestiall delight:
Then fair grew foul, and foul grew fair in sight,
And that which wont to vanquish God and man,
Was made the vassal of the victors might;
Then did her glorious flower wex dead and wan,
Despisd and trodden down of all that ouerran.
And now it is so utterly decayed,
That any bud thereof does scarce remain,
But if few plants preserved through heavenly aid,
In Princes Court do hap to sprout again,
Dew'd with her drops of bounty Sovereign,
Which from that goodly glorious flower proceed,
Sprung of the ancient stock of Princes strain,
Now the only remnant of that royal breed,
Whose noble kind at first was sure of heavenly seed.
Tho soon as day discovered heavens face
To sinful men with darkness ouerdight,
This gentle crew began from their eyelids chase
The drowzie humor of the dampish night,
And did themselves unto their journey dight.
So forth they yode, and forward softly paced,
That them to view had been an uncouth sight;
How all the way the Prince on footpace traced,
The Ladies both on horse, together fast embraced.
Soon as they thence departed were before,
That shameful Hag, the slander of her sex,
Them followed fast, and them reviled sore,
Him calling these, them whores; that much did vex
His noble heart; thereto she did annexe
False crimes and facts, such as they never meant,
That those two Ladies much ashamed did wexe:
The more did she pursue her lewd intent,
And rayl'd and raged, till she had all her poison spent.
At last when they were passed out of sight,
Yet she did not her spightfull speech forbear,
But after them did bark, and still backbite,
Though there were none her hateful words to hear:
Like as a curre does felly bite and tear
The stone, which passed stranger at him threw;
So she them seeing past the reach of ear,
Against the stones and trees did rail anew,
Till she had duld the sting, which in her tongs end grew.
They passing forth kept on their ready way,
With easy steps so soft as foot could stryde,
Both for great feeblesse, which did often assay
Fair Amoret, that scarcely she could ride,
And eke through heavy arms, which sore annoyd
The Prince on foot, not wonted so to fare;
Whose steadie hand was feign his steed to guide,
And all the way from trotting hard to spare,
So was his toil the more, the more that was his care.
At length they spide, where toward them with speed
A Squire came gallopping, as he would fly
Bearing a little Dwarf before his steed,
That all the way full loud for aid did cry,
That seemed his shrikes would rend the brazen sky:
Whom after did a mighty man pursew,
Ryding upon a Dromedare on hie,
Of stature huge, and horrible of hew,
That would have mazed a man his dreadful face to view.
For from his fearful eyes two fiery beams,
More sharp then points of needles did proceed,
Shooting forth far away two flaming streams,
Full of sad power, that poisonous bale did breed
To all, that on him looked without good heed,
And secretly his enemies did slay:
Like as the Basiliske of serpents seed,
From powrefull eyes close venim does convey
Into the lookers heart, and kills far away.
He all the way did rage at that same Squire,
And after him full many threatenings threw,
With curses vain in his auengefull ire:
But none of them (so fast away he flew)
Him ouertooke, before he came in view.
Where when he saw the Prince in armor bright,
He called to him aloud, his case to rue,
And rescue him through succor of his might,
From that his cruel foe, that him pursewd in sight.
Eftsoons the Prince took down those Ladies twain
From lofty steed, and mounting in their stead
Came to that Squire, yet trembling every vain:
Of whom he began enquire his cause of dread;
Who as he began the same to him aread,
Lo hard behind his back his foe was pressed,
With dreadful weapon aimed at his head,
That unto death had done him vnredrest,
Had not the noble Prince his ready stroke represt.
Who thrusting boldly twixt him and the blow,
The burden of the deadly brunt did bear
Upon his shield, which lightly he did throw
Over his head, before the harm came near.
Nathlesse it fell with so despiteous dreare
And heavy sway, that hard unto his crown
The shield it drove, and did the covering rear,
Therewith both Squire and dwarf did tomble down
Unto the earth, and lay long while in senseless swowne.
Whereat the Prince full wrath, his strong right hand
In full auengement heaued up on hie,
And stroke the Pagan with his steely brand
So sore, that to his saddle bow thereby
He bowed low, and so a while did lie:
And sure had not his massy iron mace
Betwixt him and his hurt been happily,
It would have cleft him to the girding place,
Yet as it was, it did astonish him long space.
But when he to himself returned again,
All full of rage he began to curse and swear,
And vow by Mahoune that he should be slain.
With that his murdrous mace he up did rear,
That seemed naught the souse thereof could bear,
And therewith smote at him with all his might.
But ere that it to him approached near,
The royal child with ready quick foresight,
Did shun the proof thereof and it avoided light.
But ere his hand he could recure again,
To ward his body from the balefull stound,
He smote at him with all his might and maine,
So furiously, that ere he wist, he found
His head before him tombling on the ground.
The whiles his babbling tongue did yet blaspheme
And curse his God, that did him so confound;
The whiles his life ran forth in bloody stream,
His soul descended down into the Stygian reame.
Which when that Squire beheld, he woxe full glad
To see his foe breath out his spright in vain:
But that same dwarf right sorry seemed and sad,
And howld aloud to see his Lord there slain,
And rent his hair and scratcht his face for pain.
Then began the Prince at leisure to inquire
Of all the accident, there happened plain,
And what he was, whose eyes did flame with fire;
All which was thus to him declared by that Squire.
This mighty man (quoth he) whom you have slain,
Of an huge Geauntesse whylome was bred;
And by his strength rule to himself did gain
Of many Nations into thraldom led,
And mighty kingdoms of his force adred;
Whom yet he conquered not by bloody fight,
Ne hosts of men with banners broad dispred,
But by the power of his infectious sight,
With which he killed all, that came within his might.
Ne was he ever vanquished before,
But ever vanquished all, with whom he fought;
Ne was there man so strong, but he down bore,
Ne woman yet so fair, but he her brought
Unto his bay, and captiued her thought.
For most of strength and beauty his desire
Was spoil to make, and wast them unto naught,
By casting secret flakes of lustful fire
From his false eyes, into their hearts and parts entire.
Therefore Corflambo was he called aright,
Though namelesse there his body now does lie,
Yet has he left one daughter that is hight
The fair Poeana; who seems outwardly
So fair, as ever yet saw living eye:
And were her virtue like her beauty bright,
She were as fair as any under sky.
But ah she given is to vain delight,
And eke too loose of life, and eke of love too light.
So as it fell there was a gentle Squire,
That loved a Lady of high parentage,
But for his mean degree might not aspire
To match so high, her friends with counsel sage,
Dissuaded her from such a disparage.
But she, whose heart to love was wholly lent,
Out of his hands could not redeem her gage,
But firmly following her first intent,
Resolved with him to wend, against all her friends consent.
So twixt themselves they pointed time and place,
To which when he according did repair,
An hard mishap and disauentrous case
Him chaunst; in stead of his Aemylia fair
This Giants son, that lies there on the laire
An headless heap, him unawares there caught,
And all dismayed through merciless despair,
Him wretched thrall unto his dongeon brought,
Where he remains, of all vnsuccour'd and unsought.
This Giants daughter came upon a day
Unto the prison in her joyous glee,
To view the thrals, which there in bondage lay:
Amongst the rest she chanced there to see
This lovely swain the Squire of low degree;
To whom she did her liking lightly cast,
And wooed him her paramour to be:
From day to day she wooed and prayed him fast,
And for his love him promised liberty at last.
He though affide unto a former love,
To whom his faith he firmly meant to hold,
Yet seeing not how thence he mote remove,
But by that means, which fortune did unfold,
Her granted love, but with affection cold
To win her grace his liberty to get.
Yet she him still detaines in captive hold,
Fearing least if she should him freely set,
He would her shortly leave, and former love forget.
Yet so much favor she to him has hight,
Above the rest, that he sometimes may space
And walk about her gardens of delight,
Having a keeper still with him in place,
Which keeper is this Dwarf, her dearling base,
To whom the keys of every prison door
By her committed be, of special grace,
And at his will may whom he list restore,
And whom he list reserve, to be afflicted more.
Whereof when tidings came unto mine ear,
Full inly sorry for the fervent zeal,
Which I to him as to my soul did bear;
I thither went where I did long conceal
My self, till that the Dwarf did me reveal,
And told his Dame, her Squire of low degree
Did secretly out of her prison steal;
For me he did mistake that Squire to be;
For never two so like did living creature see.
Then was I taken and before her brought,
Who through the likeness of my outward hew,
Being likewise beguiled in her thought,
Began blame me much for being so untrue,
To seek by flight her fellowship t'eschew,
That loved me dear, as dearest thing alive.
Thence she commanded me to prison new;
Whereof I glad did not gainesay nor strive,
But suffered that same Dwarf me to her dongeon drive.
There did I find mine only faithful friend
In heavy plight and sad perplexity;
Whereof I sorry, yet my self did bend,
Him to recomfort with my company.
But him the more agreeu'd I found thereby:
For all his joy, he said, in that distress
Was mine and his Aemylias liberty.
Aemylia well he loved, as I mote guess;
Yet greater love to me then her he did profess.
But I with better reason him auiz'd,
And showed him how through error and mis-thought
Of our like persons eath to be disguised,
Or his exchange, or freedom might be wrought.
Whereto full loath was he, ne would for ought
Consent, that I who stood all fearelesse free,
Should wilfully be into thraldom brought,
Till fortune did perforce it so decree.
Yet ouerrul'd at last, he did to me agree.
The morrow next about the wonted hour,
The Dwarf called at the door of Amyas,
To come forthwith unto his Ladies bower.
In steed of whom forth came I Placidas,
And undiscerned, forth with him did pas.
There with great ioyance and with gladsome glee,
Of fair Poeana I received was,
And often imbrast, as if that I were he,
And with kind words accoyd, vowing great love to me.
Which I, that was not bent to former love,
As was my friend, that had her long refusd,
Did well accept, as well it did behoue,
And to the present need it wisely vsd.
My former hardness first I fair excusd;
And after promised large amends to make.
With such smooth terms her error I abusd,
To my friends good, more then for mine own sake,
For whose sole liberty I love and life did stake.
Thenceforth I found more favor at her hand,
That to her Dwarf, which had me in his charge,
She bad to lighten my too heavy band,
And grant more scope to me to walk at large.
So on a day as by the flowrie marge
Of a fresh stream I with that Elfe did play,
Finding no means how I might us enlarge,
But if that Dwarf I could with me convey,
I lightly snatched him up, and with me bore away.
Thereat he shriekt aloud, that with his cry
The Tyrant self came forth with yelling bray,
And me pursew'd; but nathemore would I
Forgo the purchase of my gotten pray,
But have perforce him hither brought away.
Thus as they talked, lo where nigh at hand
Those Ladies two yet doubtful through dismay
In presence came, desirous t'vnderstand
Tidings of all, which there had happened on the land.
Where soon as sad Aemylia did epsy
Her captive lovers friend, young Placidas;
All mindlesse of her wonted modesty,
She to him ran, and him with straight embras
Enfolding said, and lives yet Amyas?
He lives (quoth he) and his Aemylia loves.
Then less (said she) by all the woe I pas,
With which my weaker patience fortune proves.
But what mishap thus long him fro my self remoues?
Then began he all this story to renew,
And tell the course of his captivity;
That her dear heart full deeply made to rue,
And sigh full sore, to hear the misery,
In which so long he merciless did lie.
Then after many tears and sorrows spent,
She dear besought the Prince of remedy:
Who thereto did with ready will consent,
And well performed, as shall appear by his event.
Cant. IX.
The Squire of low degree releast
Poeana takes to wife:
Britomart fightes with many Knights
Prince Arthur stints their strife.
HArd is the doubt, and difficult to deem,
When all three kinds of love together meet,
And do dispart the heart with power extreme,
Whether shall weigh the balance down; to weet
The dear affection unto kindred sweet,
Or raging fire of love to woman kind,
Or zeal of friends combynd with virtues meet.
But of them all the band of virtues mind
Me seems the gentle heart, should most assured bind.
For natural affection soon does cesse,
And quenched is with Cupids greater flame:
But faithful friendship does them both suppress,
And them with maystring discipline does tame,
Through thoughts aspyring to eternal fame.
For as the soul does rule the earthly mass,
And all the service of the body frame,
So love of soul does love of body pass,
No less then perfect gold surmounts the meanest brass.
All which who list by trial to assay,
Shall in this story find approved plain;
In which these Squires true friendship more did sway,
Then either care of parents could refrain,
Or love of fairest Lady could constrain.
For though Poeana were as fair as morn,
Yet did this Trusty squire with proud disdain
For his friends sake her offered favors scorn,
And she her self her sire, of whom she was yborne.
Now after that Prince Arthur granted had,
To yield strong succor to that gentle swayne,
Who now long time had lain in prison sad,
He began advise how best he mote darrayne
That enterprise, for greatest glories gain.
That headless tyrants tronke he reard from ground,
And having ympt the head to it again,
Upon his usual beast it firmly bound,
And made it so to ride, as it alive was found.
Then did he take that chaced Squire, and laid
Before the ryder, as he captive were,
And made his Dwarf, though with unwilling aid,
To guide the beast, that did his master bear,
Till to his castle they approached near.
Whom when the watch, that kept continual ward
Saw coming home; all void of doubtful fear,
He running down, the gate to him vnbard;
Whom straight the Prince ensuing, in together fared.
There he did find in her delitious boure
The fair Poeana playing on a Rote,
Complaining of her cruel Paramoure,
And singing all her sorrow to the note,
As she had learned readily by rote.
That with the sweetness of her rare delight,
The Prince half rapt, began on her to dote:
Till better him bethinking of the right,
He her unawares attacht, and captive held by might.
Whence being forth produced, when she perceived
Her own dear sire, she called to him for aid.
But when of him no answer she received,
But saw him senseless by the Squire vpstaide,
She weened well, that then she was betraide:
Then began she loudly cry, and weep, and wail,
And that same Squire of treason to vpbraide.
But all in vain, her plaints might not prevail,
Ne none there was to reskue her, ne none to bail.
Then took he that same Dwarf, and him compeld
To open unto him the prison door,
And forth to bring those thrals, which there he held.
Thence forth were brought to him above a score
Of Knights and Squires to him unknown before:
All which he did from bitter bondage free,
And unto former liberty restore.
Amongst the rest, that Squire of low degree
Came forth full weak and wan, not like him self to be.
Whom soon as fair Aemylia beheld,
And Placidas, they both unto him ran,
And him embracing fast betwixt them held,
Striving to comfort him all that they can,
And kissing often his visage pale and wan.
That fair Paeana them beholding both,
Began both envy, and bitterly to ban;
Through jealous passion weeping inly wroth,
To see the sight perforce, that both her eyes were loath.
But when a while they had together been,
And diversely conferred of their case,
She, though full often she both of them had seen
Asunder, yet not ever in one place,
Began to doubt, when she them saw embrace,
Which was the captive Squire she loved so dear,
Deceived through great likeness of their face,
For they so like in person did appear,
That she uneath discerned, whether whether wear.
And eke the Prince, when as he them auized,
Their like resemblaunce much admired there,
And mazd how nature had so well disguized
Her work, and counterfeit her self so nere,
As if that by one pattern seen somewhere,
She had them made a paragone to be,
Or whether it through skill, or error were.
Thus gazing long, at them much wondered he,
So did the other knights and Squires, which him did see.
Then began they ransacke that same Castle strong,
In which he found great store of hoorded threasure,
The which that tyrant gathered had by wrong
And tortious power, without respect or measure.
Upon all which the Briton Prince made seasure,
And afterward continued there a while,
To rest him self, and solace in soft pleasure
Those weaker Ladies after weary toil;
To whom he did divide part of his purchased spoil.
And for more joy, that captive Lady fair
The fair Paeana he enlarged free;
And by the rest did set in sumptuous chair,
To feastand frollicke; nathemore would she
Show gladsome countenance nor pleasant glee:
But grieved was for loss both of her sire,
And eke of Lordship, with both land and fee:
But most she touched was with grief entire,
For loss of her new love, the hope of her desire.
But her the Prince through his well wonted grace,
To better terms of myldnesse did entreat,
From that foul rudeness, which did her deface;
And that same bitter corsiue, which did eat
Her tender heart, and made refrain from meat,
He with good thewes and speeches well applyde,
Did mollify, and calm her raging heat.
For though she were most fair, and goodly did,
Yet she it all did mar with cruelty and pride.
And for to shut up all in friendly love,
Since love was first the ground of all her grief,
That trusty Squire he wisely well did move
Not to despise that dame, which loved him liefe,
Till he had made of her some better priefe,
But to accept her to his wedded wife.
Thereto he offered for to make him chief
Of all her land and lordship during life:
He yielded, and her took; so stinted all their strife.
From that day forth in peace and joyous blis,
They lived together long without debate,
Ne private jar, ne spite of enemis
Could shake the safe assurance of their state.
And she whom Nature did so fair create,
That she mote match the fairest of her days,
Yet with lewd loves and lust intemperate
Had it defaste; thenceforth reformd her ways,
That all men much admyrde her change, and spoke her praise.
Thus when the Prince had perfectly compylde
These paires of friends in peace and settled rest,
Him self, whose mind did travel as with child,
Of his old love, conceau'd in secret breast,
Resolved to pursue his former guest;
And taking leave of all, with him did bear
Fair Amoret, whom Fortune by bequest
Had left in his protection whileare,
Exchanged out of one into an other fear.
Fear of her safety did her not constrain,
For well she wist now in a mighty hond,
Her person late in peril, did remain,
Who able was all dangers to withstond.
But now in fear of shame she more did stond,
Seeing her self all soly succourlesse,
Left in the victors power, like vassal bond;
Whose will her weakness could no way repress.
In case his burning lust should break into excess.
But cause of fear sure had she none at all
Of him, who goodly learned had of yore
The course of loose affection to forstall,
And lawless lust to rule with reasons lore;
That all the while he by his side her bore,
She was as safe as in a Sanctuary;
Thus many miles they two together wore,
To seek their loves dispersed diversely,
Yet neither showed to other their hearts priuity.
At length they came, whereas a troop of Knights
They saw together skirmishing, as seemed:
Six they were all, all full offell despite,
But four of them the battle best beseemed,
That which of them was best, mote not be deemed.
Those four were they, from whom false Florimell
By Braggadochio lately was redeemed.
To weet, stern Druon, and lewd Claribell,
Loue-lauish Blandamour, and lustful Paridell.
Druons delight was all in single life,
And unto Ladies love would lend no leisure:
The more was Claribell enraged rise
With fervent flames, and loved out of measure:
So eke loved Blandamour, but yet at pleasure
Would change his liking, and new Lemans prove:
But Paridell of love did make no threasure,
But lusted after all, that him did move.
So diversely these four disposed were to love.
But those two other which beside them stood,
Were Britomart, and gentle Scudamour,
Who all the while beheld their wrathful mood,
And wondered at their impacable stoure,
Whose like they never saw till that same hour:
So dreadful strokes each did at other drive,
And laid on load with all their might and power,
As if that every dint the ghost would riue
Out of their wretched corses, and their lives deprive.
As when Dan AEolus in great displeasure,
For loss of his dear love by Neptune hent,
Sends forth the winds out of his hidden threasure,
Upon the sea to wreake his fell intent;
They breaking forth with rude vnruliment,
From all four parts of heaven do rage full sore,
And toss the deepes, and tear the firmament,
And all the world confound with wide uproar,
As if in stead thereof they Chaos would restore.
Cause of their discord, and so fell debate,
Was for the love of that same snowy maid,
Whom they had lost in Turneyment of late,
And seeking long, to weet which way she straid
Met here together, where through lewd vpbraide
Of Ate and Duessa they fell out,
And each one taking part in others aid,
This cruel conflict raised thereabout,
Whose dangerous success depended yet in dout.
For sometimes Paridell and Blandamour
The better had, and bet the others back,
Eftsoons the others did the field recoure,
And on their foes did work full cruel wrack:
Yet neither would their fiendlike fury slack,
But evermore their malice did augment;
Till that uneath they forced were for lack
Of breath, their raging rigor to relent,
And rest themselves for to recover spirits spent.
Their began they change their sides, and new parts take;
For Paridell did take to Druons side,
For old despite, which now forth newly brake
Against Blandamour, whom always he enuide:
And Blandamour to Claribell relide.
So all afresh began former fight renew.
As when two Barks, this carried with the tide,
That with the wind, contrary courses sew,
If wind and tide do change, their courses change anew.
Thenceforth they much more furiously began fare,
As if but then the battle had begone,
Ne helmets bright, ne hawberks strong did spare,
That through the clifts the vermeil blood out sponne,
And all adowne their riuen sides did run.
Such mortal malice, wonder was to see
In friends professed, and so great outrage done:
But sooth is said, and tried in each degree,
Faint friends when they fall out, most cruel fomen be.
Thus they long while continued in fight,
Till Scudamour, and that same Briton maid,
By fortune in that place did chance to light:
Whom soon as they with wrathful eye bewraide,
They began remember of the foul vpbraide,
The which that Britonesse had to them done,
In that late Turney for the snowy maid;
Where she had them both shamefully fordonne,
And eke the famous prize of beauty from them won.
Eftsoons all burning with a fresh desire
Of fell revenge, in their malicious mood
They from them selves began turn their furious ire,
And cruel blades yet steeming with whot blood,
Against those two let drive, as they were wood:
Who wondering much at that so sudden fit,
Yet naught dismayed, them stoutly well withstood;
Ne yielded foot, ne once abacke did flit,
But being doubly smitten likewise doubly smit.
The warlike Dame was on her part assaid,
Of Claribell and Blandamour atone;
And Paridell and Druon fiercely laid
At Scudamour, both his professed fone.
Four charged two, and two surcharged one;
Yet did those two them selves so bravely bear,
That the other little gained by the lone,
But with their own repaired duly wear,
And usury withal: such gain was gotten dear.
Full oftentimes did Britomart assay
To speak to them, and some emparlance move;
But they for naught their cruel hands would stay,
Ne lend an ear to ought, that might behoue,
As when an eager mastiffe once does prove
The taste of blood of some engored beast,
No words may rate, nor rigor him remove
From greedy hold of that his blouddy feast:
So little did they hearken to her sweet beheast.
Whom when the Briton Prince a far beheld
With ods of so unequal match oppressed,
His mighty heart with indignation fweld,
And inward grudge filled his heroicke breast:
Eftsoons him self he to their aid addressed,
And thrusting fierce into the thickest preace,
Divided them, how ever loath to rest,
And would them feign from battle to surceasse,
With gentle words persuading them to friendly peace.
But they so far from peace or patience were,
That all at once at him began fiercely fly,
And lay on load, as they him down would bear;
Like to astorme, which houers under sky
Long here and there, and round about does stie,
At length breaks down in rain, and hail, and sleet,
First from one coast, till naught thereof be dry;
And then another, till that likewise fleet;
And so from side to side till all the world it weet.
But now their forces greatly were decayed,
The Prince yet being fresh untouched before;
Who them with speeches mild began first dissuade
From such foul outrage, and them long forbore:
Till seeing them through suffrance hartned more,
Him self he bent their furies to abate,
And laid at them so sharply and so sore,
That shortly them compelled to retrate,
And being brought in danger, to relent too late.
But now his courage being thoroughly fired,
He meant to make them know their follies prise,
Had not those two him instantly desired
T'asswage his wrath, and pardon their mesprise.
At whose request he began him self advise
To stay his hand, and of a truce to treat
In milder terms, as list them to devise:
Among which the cause of their so cruel heat
He did them ask, who all that passed began repeat.
And told at large how that same errant Knight,
To weet fair Britomart, them late had foiled
In open turney, and by wrongful fight
Both of their public praise had them despoyled,
And also of their private loves beguyled,
Of two full hard to read the harder theft.
But she that wrongful challenge soon assoyled,
And showed that she had not that Lady reft,
(As they supposd) but her had to her liking left.
To whom the Prince thus goodly well replied;
Certes sir Knight, ye seemen much to blame,
To rip up wrong, that battle once has tried;
Wherein the honor both of Arms ye shame,
And eke the love of Ladies foul defame;
To whom the world this franchise ever yielded,
That of their loves choice they might freedom clame,
And in that right should by all knights be shielded:
Against which me seems this war ye wrongfully have wielded.
And yet (quoth she) a greater wrong remains:
For I thereby my former love have lost,
Whom seeking ever since with endless pains,
Has me much sorrow and much travel cost;
Aye me to see that gentle maid so tossed.
But Scudamour then sighing deep, thus said,
Certes her loss ought me to sorrow most,
Whose right she is, where ever she be straide,
Through many perils won, and many fortunes waide.
For from the first that I her love professed,
Unto this hour, this present lucklesse hour,
I never ioyed happiness nor rest,
But thus turmoild from one to other stowre,
I wast my life, and do my days deuowre
In wretched anguishe and incessant woe,
Passing the measure of my feeble power,
That living thus, a wretch I and loving so,
I neither can my love, ne yet my life forgo.
Then good sir Claribell him thus bespake,
Now were it not sir Scudamour to you,
Dislikefull pain, so sad a task to take,
Mote we entreat you, since this gentle crew
Is now so well accorded all anew;
That as we ride together on our way,
Ye will recount to us in order dew
All that adventure, which ye did assay
For that fair Ladies love: past perils well apay.
So began the rest him likewise to require,
But Britomart did him importune hard,
To take on him that pain: whose great desire
He glad to satisfy, him self prepared
To tell through what misfortune he had fared,
In that atchieuement, as to him befell.
And all those dangers unto them declared,
Which since they cannot in this Canto well
Comprised be, I will them in another tell.
Cant. X.
Scudamour does his conqust tell,
Of virtuous Amoret:
Great Venus Temple is described,
And lovers life forth set.
TRue he it said, what ever man it said,
That love with gall and honey does abound,
But if the one be with the other wayd,
For every dram of honey therein found,
A pound of gall does over it redound.
That I too true by trial have approved:
For since the day that first with deadly wound
My heart was launcht, and learned to have loved,
I never ioyed hour, but still with care was moved.
And yet such grace is given them from above,
That all the cares and evil which they meet,
May naught at all their settled minds remove,
But seem against common sense to them most sweet;
As bosting in their martyrdom unmeet.
So all that ever yet I have endured,
I count as naught, and tread down under feet,
Since of my love at length I rest assured,
That to disloyalty she will not be allured.
Long were to tell the travel and long toil,
Through which this shield of love I late have won,
And purchased this peerless beauties spoil,
That harder may be ended, then begone.
But since ye so desire, your will be done.
Then hark ye gentle knights and Ladies free,
My hard mishaps, that ye may learn to shonne;
For though sweet love to conquer glorious be,
Yet is the pain thereof much greater then the fee.
What time the fame of this renowned prise
Flew first abroad, and all men's ears possessed,
I having arms then taken, began auise
To win me honor by some noble gest,
And purchase me some place amongst the best.
I boldly thought (so young men's thoughts are bold)
That this same brave emprize for me did rest,
And that both shield and she whom I behold,
Might be my lucky lot; since all by lot we hold.
So on that hard adventure forth I went,
And to the place of peril shortly came.
That was a temple fair and ancient,
Which of great mother Venus bare the name,
And far renowned through exceeding fame;
Much more then that, which was in Paphos built,
Or that in Cyprus, both long since this same,
Though all the pillours of the one were guilt,
And all the others pauement were with yuory spilt.
And it was seated in an Island strong,
Abounding all with delices most rare,
And walled by nature against inuaders wrong,
That none mote have access, nor inward fare,
But by one way, that passage did prepare.
It was a bridge ybuilt in goodly wize,
With curious Corbes and pendants graven fair,
And arched all with porches, did arize
On stately pillours, framed after the Doricke guize.
And for defense thereof, on the other end
There reared was a castle fair and strong,
That warded all which in or out did wend,
And flancked both the bridges sides along,
Against all that would it feign to force or wrong.
And therein wonned twenty valiant Knights;
All twenty tried in wars experience long;
Whose office was, against all nanner wights
By all means to maintain, that castles ancients rights.
Before that Castle was an open plain,
And in the midst thereof a pillar placed;
On which this shield, of many sought in vain,
The shield of Love, whose guerdon me has graced,
Was hanged on high with golden ribbands laced;
And in the marble stone was written this,
With golden letters goodly well enchaced,
Blessed the man that well can use his blis:
Whose ever be the shield, fair Amoret be his.
Which when I red, my heart did inly earne,
And pant with hope of that adventures hap:
Ne stayed further news thereof to learn,
But with my spear upon the shield did rap,
That all the castle ringed with the clap.
Straight forth issewd a Knight all armed to proof,
And bravely mounted to his most mishap:
Who staying naught to question from aloof,
Ran fierce at me, that fire glaunst from his horses hoof.
Whom boldly I encountered (as I could)
And by good fortune shortly him vnseated.
Eftsoons out sprung two more of equal mould;
But I them both with equal hap defeated:
So all the twenty I likewise entreated,
And left them groaning there upon the plain.
Then preacing to the pillour I repeated
The read thereof for guerdon of my pain,
And taking down the shield, with me did it retain.
So forth without impediment I past,
Till to the Bridges utter gate I came:
The which I found sure locked and chained fast.
I knocked, but no man aunswred me by name;
I called, but no man answered to my clame.
Yet I perseuer'd still to knock and call,
Till at the last I spide within the same,
Where one stood peeping through a creuis small,
To whom I called aloud, half angry therewithal.
That was to weet the Porter of the place,
Unto whose trust the charge thereof was lent:
His name was Doubt, that had a double face,
The One forward looking, the other backward bent,
Therein resembling Ianus ancient,
Which has in charge the ingate of the year:
And evermore his eyes about him went,
As if some proved peril he did fear,
Or did misdoubt some ill, whose cause did not appear.
On the one side he, on the other sat Delay,
Behind the gate, that none her might espy;
Whose manner was all passengers to stay,
And entertain with her occasions sly,
Through which some lost great hope vnheedily,
Which never they recover might again;
And others quite excluded forth, did ly
Long languishing there in vnpittied pain,
And seeking often entrance, afterward in vain.
Me when as he had privily espide,
Bearing the shield which I had conquered late,
He kend it straight, and to me opened wide.
So in I past, and straight he closd the gate.
But being in, Delay in close awaite
Caught hold on me, and thought my steps to stay,
Feigning full many a fond excuse to prate,
And time to steal, the threasure of man's day,
Whose smallest minute lost, no riches render may.
But by no means my way I would forslow,
For ought that ever she could do or say,
But from my lofty steed dismounting low,
Past forth on foot, beholding all the way
The goodly works, and stones of rich assay,
Cast into sundry shapes by wondrous skill,
That like on earth no where I reckon may:
And underneath, the river rolling still
With murmr soft, that seemed to serve the workmans will.
Thence forth I passed to the second gate,
The Gate of good desert, whose goodly pride
And costly frame, were long here to relate.
The same to all stood always open wide:
But in the Porch did evermore abide
An hideous Giant, dreadful to behold,
That stopped the entrance with his spacious stride,
And with the terror of his countenance bold
Full many did affray, that else feign enter would.
His name was Danger dreaded over all,
Who day and night did watch and duly ward,
From fearful cowards, entrance to forstall,
And faint-heart-fooles, whom show of peril hard
Could terrify from Fortunes fair adward:
For oftentimes faint hearts at first espiall
Of his grim face, were from approaching scard;
Unworthy they of grace, whom one denial
Excludes from fairest hope, withouten further trial.
Yet many doughty warriors, often tried
In greater perils to bestout and bold,
Durst not the sternnesse of his look abide,
But soon as they his countenance did behold,
Began to faint, and feel their courage cold.
Again some other, that in hard assaies
Were cowards known, and little count did hold,
Either through gifts, or guile, or such like ways,
Crept in by stouping low, or stealing of the kaies.
But I though nearest man of many more,
Yet much disdaining unto him to lout,
Or creep between his legs, so in to go,
Resolved him to assault with manhood stout,
And either beat him in, or drive him out.
Eftsoons aduauncing that enchaunted shield,
With all my might I began to lay about:
Which when he saw, the glaiue which he did wield
He began forthwith t'auale, and way unto me yield.
So as I entered, I did backward look,
For fear of harm, that might lie hidden there;
And lo his hindparts, whereof heed I took,
Much more deformed fearful ugly were,
Then all his former parts did erst appear.
For hatred, murder, treason, and despite,
With many more lay in ambushment there,
Awayting to entrap the warelesse wight,
Which did not them prevent with vigilant foresight.
Thus having past all peril, I was come
Within the compass of that Islands space;
The which did seem unto my simple doom,
The only pleasant and delightful place,
That ever trodden was of footings trace.
For all that nature by her mother wit
Could frame in earth, and form of substance base,
Was there, and all that nature did omit,
Art playing second natures part, supplied it.
No tree, that is of count, in greenewood grows,
From lowest Juniper to Ceder tall,
No flower in field, that dainty odor throws,
And deckes his branch with blossoms over all,
But there was planted, or grew natural:
Nor sense of man so coy and curious nice,
But there mote find to please it self withal;
Nor heart could wish for any queint device,
But there it present was, and did frail sense entice.
In such luxurious plenty of all pleasure,
It seemed a second paradise to be,
So lauishly enricht with natures threasure,
That if the happy souls, which do possess
Th'Elysian fields, and live in lasting bless,
Should happen this with living eye to see,
They soon would loath their lesser happiness,
And wish to life returned again to guess,
That in this joyous place they mote have ioyance free.
Fresh shadows, fit to shroud from sunny ray;
Fair lawnds, to take the sun in season dew;
Sweet springs, in which a thousand Nymphs did play;
Soft rombling brooks, that gentle slomber drew;
High reared mounts, the lands about to view;
Low looking dales, disloignd from common gaze;
Delightful bowres, to solace lovers true;
False Labyrinthes, fond runners eyes to daze;
All which by nature made did nature self amaze.
And all without were walks and all eyes dight,
With diverse trees, enrang'd in even ranks;
And here and there were pleasant arbors pight,
And shadie seats, and sundry flowring banks,
To sit and rest the walkers weary shankes,
And therein thousand payres of lovers walked,
Praising their god, and yielding him great thanks,
Ne ever ought but of their true loves talked,
Ne ever for rebuke or blame of any balkt.
All these together by themselves did sport
Their spotless pleasures, and sweet loves content.
But far away from these, another sort
Of lovers lincked in true hearts consent;
Which loved not as these, for like intent,
But on chaste virtue grounded their desire,
Far from all fraud, or feigned blandishment;
Which in their spirits kindling zealous fire,
Brave thoughts and noble deeds did evermore aspire.
Such were great Hercules, and Hyllus dear;
True Jonathan, and David trusty tryde;
Stout Theseus, and Pirithous his fear;
Pylades and Orestes by his side;
Myld Titus and Gesippus without pride;
Damon and Pythias whom death could not sever:
All these and all that ever had been tide,
In bands of friendship there did live for ever,
Whose lives although decayed, yet loves decayed never.
Which when as I, that never tasted blis,
Nor happy hour, beheld with gazefull eye,
I thought there was none other heaven then this;
And began their endless happiness envy,
That being free from fear and gealosye,
Might frankely there their loves desire possess;
Whilst I through pains and perlous ieopardie,
Was forced to seek my life's dear patroness:
Much dearer be the things, which come through hard distress.
Yet all those sights, and all that else I saw,
Might not my steps withhold, but that forthright
Unto that purposd place I did me draw,
Where as my love was lodged day and night:
The temple of great Venus, that is hight
The Queen of beauty, and of love the mother,
There worshipped of every living wight;
Whose goodly workmanship far past all other
That ever were on earth, all were they set together.
Not that same famous Temple of Diane,
Whose hight all Ephesus did ouersee,
And which all Asia sought with vows profane,
One of the worlds seven wonders said to be,
Might match with this by many a degree:
Nor that, which that wise King of Jury framed,
With endless cost, to be The Almighty's see;
Nor all that else through all the world is named
To all the heathen Gods, might like to this be clamed.
I much admyring that so goodly frame,
Unto the porch approcht, which open stood;
But therein sat an amiable Dame,
That seemed to be of very sober mood,
And in her semblant showed great womanhood:
Strange was her tire; for on her head a crown
She wore much like unto a Danisk hood,
Poudred with pearl and stone, and all her gown
Enwouen was with gold, that taught full low a down.
On either side of her, two young men stood,
Both strongly armed, as fearing one another;
Yet were they brethren both of half the blood,
Begotten by two fathers of one mother,
Though of contrary natures each to other:
The one of them hight Love, the other Hate,
Hate was the elder, Love the younger brother;
Yet was the younger stronger in his state
Then the elder, and him maystred still in all debate.
Nathlesse that Dame so well them tempted both,
That she them forced hand to join in hand,
Albe that Hatred was thereto full loath,
And turned his face away, as he did stand,
Unwilling to behold that lovely band.
Yet she was of such grace and virtuous might,
That her commaundment he could notwithstand,
But bit his lip for felonous despite,
And gnasht his iron tuskes at that displeasing sight.
Concord she cleeped was in common reed,
Mother of blessed Peace, and Friendship true;
They both her twins, both borne of heavenly seed,
And she her self likewise divinely grew;
The which right well her works divine did snew:
For strength, and wealth, and happiness she lends,
And strife, and war, and anger does subdew:
Of little much, of foes she makes friends,
And to afflicted minds sweet rest and quiet sends.
By her the heaven is in his course contained,
And all the world in state unmoved stands,
As their Almighty maker first ordained,
And bound them with inviolable bands;
Else would the waters ouerflow the lands,
And fire devour the air, and hell them quight,
But that she holds them with her blessed hands.
She is the nourse of pleasure and delight,
And unto Venus grace the gate does open right.
By her I entering half dismayed was,
But she in gentle wise me entertained,
And twixt her self and love did let me pas;
But Hatred would my entrance have restrained,
And with his club me threatened to have brayned,
Had not the Lady with her powrefull speech
Him from his wicked will uneath refrayned;
And the other eke his malice did empeach,
Till I was thoroughly past the peril of his reach.
Into the inmost Temple thus I came,
Which fuming all with frankensence I found,
And odours rising from the altars flame.
Upon an hundred marble pillors round
The roose up high was reared from the ground,
All decked with crowns, and chains, and girlands gay,
And thousand precious gifts worth many a pound,
The which sad lovers for their vows did pay;
And all the ground was strow'd with flowers, as fresh as may.
An hundred Altars round about were set,
All flaming with their sacrifices fire,
That with the steme thereof die Temple swet,
Which rould in clouds to heaven did aspire,
And in them bore true lovers vows entire:
And eke an hundred brazen caudrons bright,
To bath in joy and amorous desire,
Every of which was to a damzell hight;
For all the Priests were damzels, in soft linen dight.
Right in the midst the Goddess self did stand
Upon an altar of some costly mass,
Whose substance was uneath to understand:
For neither precious stone, nor durefull brass,
Nor shining gold, nor mouldring clay it was;
But much more rare and precious to esteem,
Pure in aspect, and like to crystal glass,
Yet glass was not, if one did rightly deem,
But being fair and brickle, likest glass did seem.
But it in shape and beauty did excel
All other Idols, which the heathen adore,
Far passing that, which by surpassing skill
Phidias did make in Paphos Isle of yore,
With which that wretched Greek, that life forlore
Did fall in love: yet this much fairer shined,
But covered with a slender veil before;
And both her feet and legs together twyned
Were with a snake, whose head and tail were fast co^byned.
The cause why she was covered with a vele,
Was hard to know, for that her Priests the same
From peoples knowledge labored to concele.
But sooth it was not sure for womanish shame,
Nor any blemish, which the work mote blame;
But for, they say, she has both kinds in one,
Both male and female, both under one name:
She sire and mother is her self alone,
Begets and eke conceiues, ne needs other none.
And all about her neck and shoulders flew
A flock of little loves, and sports, and joys,
With nimble wings of gold and purple hew;
Whose shapes seemed not like to terrestrial boys,
But like to Angels playing heavenly toys;
The whilst their eldest brother was away,
Cupid their eldest brother; he enioyes
The wide kingdom of love with Lordly sway,
And to his law compels all creatures to obey.
And all about her altar scattered lay
Great sorts of lovers piteously complaining,
Some of their loss, some of their loves delay,
Some of their pride, some paragons disdayning,
Some fearing fraud, some fraudulently fayning,
As every one had cause of good or ill.
Amongst the rest some one through loves constrayning,
Tormented sore, could not contain it still,
But thus brake forth, that all the temple it did fill.
Great Venus, Queen of beauty and of grace,
The joy of Gods and men, that under sky
Do fairest shine, and most adorn thy place,
That with thy smyling look do pacify
The raging seas, and makst the storms to fly;
Thee goddess, thee the winds, the clouds do fear,
And when thou spredst thy mantle forth on hie,
The waters play and pleasant lands appear,
And heavens laugh, and all the world shows joyous cheer.
Then does the daedale earth throw forth to thee
Out of her fruitful lap abundant flowers,
And then all living wights, soon as they see
The spring break forth out of his lusty bowres,
They all do learn to play the Paramours;
First do the merry birds, thy pretty pages
Privily pricked with thy lustful powers,
Chirpe loud to thee out of their leauy cages,
And thee their mother call to cool their kindly rages.
Then do the saluage beasts begin to play
Their pleasant friskes, and loath their wanted food;
The Lions rore, the Tygres loudly bray,
The raging Bulls rebellow through the wood,
And breaking forth, dare tempt the deepest flood,
To come where thou do draw them with desire:
So all things else, that nourish vital blood,
Soon as with fury thou do them inspire,
In generation seek to quench their inward fire.
So all the world by thee at first was made,
And daily yet thou do the same repair:
Ne ought on earth that merry is and glad,
Ne ought on earth that lovely is and fair,
But thou the same for pleasure did prepayre.
Thou art the root of all that joyous is,
Great God of men and women, queen of the air,
Mother of laughter, and welspring of bliss,
O grant that of my love at last I may not miss.
So did he say: but I with murmr soft,
That none might hear the sorrow of my heart,
Yet inly groaning deep and sighing often,
Besought her to grant ease unto my smart,
And to my wound her gracious help impart.
Whilst thus I spoke, behold with happy eye
I spyde, where at the Idols feet apart
A beuie of fair damzels close did lie,
Waiting when as the Antheme should be sung on hye.
The first of them did seem of ryper years,
And grauer countenance then all the rest;
Yet all the rest were eke her equal pears,
Yet unto her obayed all the best.
Her name was VVomanhood, that she expressed
By her sad semblant and demeanure wise:
For steadfast still her eyes did fixed rest,
Ne roved at randon after gazers guyse,
Whose luring baytes oftimes do heedlesse hearts entyse.
And next to her sat goodly Shamefastness,
Ne ever durst her eyes from ground vpreare,
Ne ever once did look up from her desse,
As if some blame of evil she did fear,
That in her cheeks made roses often appear:
And her against sweet Cherefulnesse was placed,
Whose eyes like twinkling stars in evening clear,
Were decked with smyles, that all sad humors chaced,
And darted forth delights, the which her goodly graced.
And next to her sat sober Modesty,
Holding her hand upon her gentle heart;
And her against sat comely Courtesy,
That unto every person knew her part;
And her before was seated overthwart
Soft Silence, and submisse Obedience,
Both linckt together never to dispart,
Both gifts of God not gotten but from thence,
Both girlonds of his Saints against their foes offense.
Thus sat they all a round in seemly rate:
And in the midst of them a goodly maid,
Even in the lap of VVomanhood there sat,
The which was all in lilly white arayd,
With silver streams amongst the linen strayed;
Like to the Morn, when first her shyning face
Has to the gloomy world it self bewrayed,
That same was fairest Amoret in place,
Shyning with beauties light, and heavenly virtues grace.
Whom soon as I beheld, my heart began throb,
And wade in doubt, what best were to be done:
For sacrilege me seemed the Church to rob,
And folly seemed to leave the thing undone,
Which with so strong attempt I had begone.
Tho shaking off all doubt and shamefast fear,
Which Ladies love I heard had never won
Monest men of worth, I to her stepped near,
And by the lilly hand her labored up to rear.
Thereat that foremost matrone me did blame,
And sharp rebuke, for being over bold;
Saying it was to Knight unseemly shame,
Upon a recluse Virgin to lay hold,
That unto Venus services was sold.
To whom I thus, Nay but it fitteth best,
For Cupids man with Venus maid to hold,
For ill your goddess services are dressed
By virgins, and her sacrifices let to rest.
With that my shield I forth to her did show,
Which all that while I closely had conceld;
On which when Cupid with his killing bow
And cruel shafts emblazond she beheld,
At sight thereof she was with terror queld,
And said no more: but I which all that while
The pledge of faith, her hand engaged held,
Like wary Hynd within the weedie soil,
For no entreaty would forgo so glorious spoil.
And evermore upon the Goddess face
Mine eye was fixed, for fear of her offense,
Whom when I saw with amiable grace
To laugh at me, and favor my pretense,
I was emboldned with more confidence,
And naught for niceness nor for envy sparing,
In presence of them all forth led her thence,
All looking on, and like astonished staring,
Yet to lay hand on her, not one of all them daring.
She often prayed, and often me besought,
Sometime with tender tears to let her go,
Sometime with witching smyles: but yet for naught,
That ever she to me could say or do,
Could she her wished freedom fro me woo;
But forth I led her through the Temple gate,
By which I hardly past with much ado:
But that same Lady which me friended late
In entrance, did me also friend in my retrate.
No less did danger threaten me with dread,
When as he saw me, maugre all his power,
That glorious spoil of beauty with me lead,
Then Cerberus, when Orpheus did recoure
His Leman from the Stygian Princes boure.
But evermore my shield did me defend,
Against the storm of every dreadful stoure:
Thus safely with my love I thence did wend.
So ended he his tale, where I this Canto end.
Cant. XI.
Marinells former wound is heald,
he comes to Proteus hall,
Where Thames does the Medway wedd,
and feasts the Sea-gods all.
But ah for pity that I have thus long
Left a fair Lady languishing in pain:
Now well away, that I have done such wrong,
To let fair Florimell in bands remain,
In bands of love, and in sad thraldomes chain;
From which unless some heavenly power her free
By miracle, not yet appearing plain,
She longer yet is like captived to be:
That even to think thereof, it inly pitties me.
Here need you to remember, how erewhile
Unlovely Proteus, missing to his mind
That Virgins love to win by wit or wile,
Her threw into a dongeon deep and blind,
And there in chains her cruelly did bind,
In hope thereby her to his bent to draw:
For when as neither gifts nor graces kind
Her constant mind could move at all he saw,
He thought her to compel by cruelty and awe.
Deep in the bottom of an huge great rock
The dongeon was, in which her bound he left,
That neither iron bars, nor brazen lock
Did need to guard from force, or secret theft
Of all her lovers, which would her have rest.
For walled it was with waves, which raged and ror'd
As they the cliffe in pieces would have cleft;
Besides ten thousand monsters foul abhorred
Did wait about it, gaping griesly all begor'd.
And in the midst thereof did horror dwell,
And darkness dredd, that never viewed day,
Like to the balefull house of lowest hell,
In which old Styx her aged bones always,
Old Styx the Gramdame of the Gods, does lay.
There did this lucklesse maid three months abide,
Ne ever evening saw, ne mornings ray,
Ne ever from the day the night descride,
But thought it all one night, that did no hours divide.
And all this was for love of Marinell,
Who her despysd (ah who would her despise?)
And wemens love did from his heart expel,
And all those joys that weak mankind entyse.
Nathlesse his pride full dearly he did pryse;
For of a woman's hand it was ywroke,
That of the wound he yet in languor lies,
Ne can be cured of that cruel stroke
Which Britomart him gave, when he did her provoke.
Yet far and near the Nymph his mother sought,
And many salues did to his sore apply,
And many herbs did use. But when as naught
She saw could ease his rankling malady,
At last to Tryphon she for help did hie,
(This Tryphon is the seagods surgeon hight)
Whom she besought to find some remedy:
And for his pains a whistle him behight
That of a fishes shell was wrought with rare delight.
So well that Leach did hark to her request,
And did so well employ his careful pain,
That in short space his hurts he had redrest,
And him restored to healthful state again:
In which he long time after did remain
There with the Nymph his mother, like her thrall;
Who sore against his will did him retain,
For fear of peril, which to him mote fall,
Through his too ventrous prowess proved over all.
It fortuned then, a solemn feast was there
To all the Sea-gods and their fruitful seed,
In honor of the spousalls, which then were
Betwixt the Medway and the Thames agreed.
Long had the Thames (as we in records reed)
Before that day her wooed to his bed;
But the proud Nymph would for no worldly meed,
Nor no entreatie to his love be led;
Till now at last relenting, she to him was wed.
So both agreed, that this their bridale feast
Should for the Gods in Proteus house be made;
To which they all repayr'd, both most and least,
As Well which in the mighty Ocean trade,
As that in rivers swim, or brooks do wade.
All which not if an hundred tongues to tell,
And hundred mouths, and voice of brass I had,
And endless memory, that mote excel,
In order as they came, could I recount them well.
Help therefore, O thou sacred imp of Jove,
The noursling of Dame Memory his dear,
To whom those rolls, laid up in heaven above,
And records of antiquity appear,
To which no wit of man may comen near;
Help me to tell the names of all those floods,
And all those Nymphs, which then assembled were
To that great banquet of the watery Gods,
And all their sundry kinds, and all their hid abodes.
First came great Neptune with his threeforkt mace,
That rules the Seas, and makes them rise or fall;
His dewy locks did drop with brine apace,
Under his Diadem imperial:
And by his side his Queen with coronall,
Fair Amphitrite, most divinely fair,
Whose yuorie shoulders weren covered all,
As with a robe, with her own silver hair,
And decked with pearls, which th'Indian seas for her prepaire.
These marched far before the other crew;
And all the way before them as they went,
Triton his trompet shrill before them blew,
For goodly triumph and great iollyment,
That made the rocks to roar, as they were rent.
And after them the royal issue came,
Which of them sprung by lineall descent:
First the Sea-gods, which to themselves do clame
The power to rule the billows, and the waves to tame.
Phorcys, the father of that fatal brood,
By whom those old Heroes won such fame;
And Glaucus, that wise southsayes understood;
And tragic Inoes son, the which became
A God of seas through his mad mothers blame,
Now hight Palemon, and is sailors friend;
Great Brontes, and Astraeus, that did shame
Himself with incest of his kin unkind;
And huge Orion, that does tempests still portend.
The rich Cteatus, and Eurytus long;
Neleus and Pelias lovely brethren both;
Mighty Chrysaor, and Caicus strong;
Eurypulus, that calmes the waters wroth;
And fair Euphoemus, that upon them goth
As on the ground, without dismay or dread:
Fierce Eryx, and Alebius that know'th
The waters depth, and does their bottom tread;
And sad Asopus, comely with his hoarie head.
There also some most famous founders were
Of puissant Nations, which the world possessed;
Yet sons of Neptune, now assembled here:
Ancient Ogyges, even th'auncientest,
And Inachus renowmd above the rest;
Phoenix, and Aon, and Pelasgus old,
Great Belus, Phoeax, and Agenor best;
And mighty Albion, father of the bold
And warlike people, which the Britain Islands hold.
For Albion the son of Neptune was,
Who for the proof of his great puissance,
Out of his Albion did on dry-foot pas
Into old Gall, that now is cleeped France,
To fight with Hercules, that did advance
To vanquish all the world with matchless might,
And there his mortal part by great mischance
Was slain: but that which is the immortal spright
Lives still: and to this feast with Neptunes seed was dight.
But what do I their names seek to rehearse,
Which all the world have with their issue filled?
How can they all in this so narrow verse
Contained be, and in small compass hild?
Let them record them, that are better skild,
And know the moniments of passed times:
Only what needs, shall be here fulfild,
To Express some part of that great equipage,
Which from great Neptune do derive their parentage.
Next came the aged Ocean, and his Dame,
Old Tethys, th'oldest two of all the rest,
For all the rest of those two parents came,
Which afterward both sea and land possessed:
Of all which Nereus th'eldest, and the best,
Did first proceed, then which none more upright,
Ne more sincere in word and deed professed;
Most void of guile, most free from foul despite,
Doing him self, and teaching others to do right.
Thereto he was expert in prophecies,
And could the ledden of the Gods unfold,
Through which, when Paris brought his famous prise
The fair Tindarid less, he him fortold,
That her all Greece with many a champion bold
Should fetch again, and finally destroy
Proud Priams town. So wise is Nereus old,
And so well skild; nathlesse he takes great joy
Oft-times amongst the wanton Nymphs to sport and toy.
And after him the famous rivers came,
Which do the earth enrich and beautify:
The fertile Nile, which creatures new does frame;
Long Rhodanus, whose sourse springs from the sky;
Fair Ister, flowing from the mountains hie;
Divine Seaman der, purpled yet with blood
Of Greeks and Trojans, which therein did die;
Pactolus glistring with his golden flood,
And Tygris fierce, whose streams of none may be withstood.
Great Ganges, and immortal Euphrates,
Deep Indus, and Maeander intricate,
Slow Peneus, and tempestuous Phasides,
Swift Rhene, and Alpheus still immaculate:
Ooraxes, feared for great Cyrus fate;
Tybris, renowned for the Romans fame,
Rich Oranochy, though but known late;
And that huge River, which does bear his name
Of warlike Amazons, which do possess the same.
Joy on those warlike women, which so long
Can from all men so rich a kingdom hold;
And shame on you, o men, which boast your strong
And valiant hearts, in thoughts less hard and bold,
Yet quail in conquest of that land of gold.
But this to you, o Britons, most pertaines,
To whom the right hereof it self has sold;
The which for sparing little cost or pains,
Loose so immortal glory, and so endless gains.
Then was there heard a most celestial sound,
Of dainty music, which did next ensew
Before the spouse: that was Arion crowned;
Who playing on his harp, unto him drew
The ears and hearts of all that goodly crew,
That even yet the Dolphin, which him bore
Through the Agaean seas from Pirates view,
Stood still by him astonished at his lore,
And all the raging seas for joy forgot to rore.
So went he playing on the watery plain.
Soon after whom the lovely Bridegroom came,
The noble Thamis, with all his goodly train,
But him before there went, as best became;
His ancient parents, namely th'auncient Them.
But much more aged was his wife then he,
The Ouze, whom men do Isis rightly name;
Full weak and crooked creature seemed she,
And almost blind through eld, that scarce her way could see.
Therefore on either side she was sustained
Of two small grooms, which by their names were hight
The Churne, and Charwell, two small streams, which pained
Them selves her footing to direct aright,
Which failed often through faint and feeble plight:
But Them was stronger, and of better stay;
Yet seemed full aged by his outward sight,
With head all hoary, and his beard all gray,
Deawed with silver drops, that trickled down always.
And eke he somewhat seemed to stoop before
With bowed back, by reason of the lode,
And ancient heavy burden, which he bore
Of that fair City, wherein make abode
So many learned impes, that shoot abroad,
And with their branches spread all Britany,
No less then do her elder sisters brood.
Joy to you both, ye double noursery,
Of Arts, but Oxford thine does Them most glorify.
But he their son full fresh and jolly was,
All decked in a robe of watchet hew,
On which the waves, glittering like Crystal glass,
So cunningly enwouen were, that few
Could weenen, whether they were false or true.
And on his head like to a Coronet
He wore, that seemed strange to common view,
In which were many towers and castles set,
Than it encompast round as with a golden fret.
Like as the mother of the Gods, they say,
In her great iron charet wonts to ride,
When to loves palace she does take her way;
Old Cybele, arayd with pompous pride,
Wearing a Diadem embattild wide
With hundred turrets, like a Turribant.
With such an one was Thamis beautifide;
That was to weet the famous Troynouant,
In which her kingdoms throne is chiefly resiant.
And round about him many a pretty Page
Attended duly, ready to obey;
All little Rivers, which owe vassallage
To him, as to their Lord, and tribute pay:
The chaulky Kenet, and the Thetis gray,
The morish Cole, and the soft sliding Breane,
The wanton Lee, that often does loose his way,
And the still Darent, in whose waters clean
Ten thousand fishes play, and deck his pleasant stream.
Then came his neighbor floods, which nigh him dwell,
And water all the English soil throughout;
They all on him this day attended well;
And with meet service waited him about;
Ne none disdained low to him to lout:
No not the stately Seuerne grudged at all,
Ne storming Humber, though he looked stout;
But both him honored as their principal,
And let their swelling waters low before him fall.
There was the speedy Tamar, which deuides
The Cornish and the Deuonish confines;
Through both whose borders swiftly down it glides,
And meeting Plim, to Plimmouth thence declines:
And Dart, nigh chockt with sands of tinny mines.
But Auon marched in more stately path,
Proud of his Adamants, with which he shines
And glisters wide, as als of wondrous Bath,
And Bristow fair, which on his waves he builded has.
And there came Stoure with terrible aspect,
Bearing his six deformed heads on hye,
That does his course through Blandford plains direct,
And washes Winborne meades in season dry.
Next him went Wylibourne with passage slye,
That of his wiliness his name does take,
And of him self does name the shire thereby:
And Mole, that like a nousling Mole does make
His way still under ground, till Thamis he overtake.
Then came the Rother, decked all with woods
Like a wood God, and flowing fast to Rhy:
And Sture, that parts with his pleasant floods
The Eastern Saxons from the Southern ny,
And Clare, and Harwitch both does beautify:
Him followed Yar, soft washing Norwitch wall,
And with him brought a present joyfully
Of his own fish unto their festival,
Whose like none else could show, the which they Ruffins call.
Next these the plenteous Ouse came far from land,
By many a city, and by many a town,
And many rivers taking under hand
Into his waters, as he passes down,
The Cle, the Were, the Guant, the Sture, the Rowne.
Thence does by Huntingdon and Cambridge flit,
My mother Cambridge, whom as with a Crown
He does adorn, and is adorned of it
With many a gentle Muse, and many a learned wit.
And after him the fatal Welland went,
That if old sawes prove true (which God forbid)
Shall drown all Holland with his excrement,
And shall see Stamford, though now homely hid,
Then shine in learning, more then ever did
Cambridge or Oxford, Englands goodly beams.
And next to him the Nene down softly slid;
And bounteous Trent, that in him self enseames
Both thirty sorts of fish, and thirty sundry streams.
Next these came Tyne, along whose stony bancke
That Roman Monarch built a brazen wall,
Which mote the feebled Britons strongly flancke
Against the Picts, that swarmed over all,
Which yet thereof Gualseuer they do call:
And Twede the limit betwixt Logris land
And Albany: And Eden though but small,
Yet often stainde with blood of many a band
Of Scots and English both, that tyned on his strand.
Then came those six sad brethren, like forlorn,
That whilome were (as antique fathers tell)
Six valiant Knights, of one fair Nymphe yborne,
Which did in noble deeds of arms excel,
And wonned there, where now York people dwell;
Still Ure, swift Werfe, and Oze the most of might,
High Swale, unquiet Nide, and troublous Skell;
All whom a Scythian king, that Humber hight,
Slew cruelly, and in the river drowned quight.
But past not long, ere Brutus warlicke son
Locrinus them aueng'd, and the same date,
Which the proud Humber unto them had done,
By equal dome repayd on his own pate:
For in the self same river, where he late
Had drenched them, he drowned him again;
And named the river of his wretched fate;
Whose bad condition yet it does retain,
Often tossed with his storms, which therein still remain.
These after, came the stony shallow Lone,
That to old Loncaster his name does lend;
And following Dee, which Britons longygone
Did call divine, that does by Chester tend;
And Conway which out of his stream does send
Plenty of pearls to deck his dames withal,
And Lindus that his pikes does most commend,
Of which the ancient Lincoln men do call,
All these together marched toward Proteus hall.
Ne thence the Irishe Rivers absent were,
Since no less famous then the rest they be,
And join in neighborhood of kingdom nere,
Why should they not likewise in love agree,
And joy likewise this solemn day to see.
They saw it all, and present were in place;
Though I them all according their degree,
Cannot recount, nor tell their hidden race,
Nor read the saluage cu^treis, thorough which they pace.
There was the Liffy rolling down the lea,
The sandy Slane, the stony Aubrian,
The spacious Shenan spreading like a sea,
The pleasant Boyne, the fishy fruitful Ban,
Swift Awniduff, which of the English man
Is cal'de Black water, and the Liffar deep,
Sad Trowis, that once his people ouerran,
Strong Allo tombling from Slewlogher steep,
And Mulla mine, whose waves I whilom taught to weep.
And there the three renowned brethren were,
Which that great Giant Blomius begot,
Of the fair Nymph Rheusa wandering there.
One day, as she to shun the season whot,
Under Slewbloome in shady grove was got,
This Giant found her, and by force deflowered,
Whereof conceiving, she in time forth brought
These three fair sons, which being thence forth powrd
In three great rivers ran, and many countries scowrd.
The first, the gentle Shure that making way
By sweet Clonmell, adornes rich Waterford;
The next, the stubborn Newre, whose waters gray
By fair Kilkenny and Rosseponte board,
The third, the goodly Barow, which does hoord
Great heaps of Salmons in his deep bosom:
All which long sundred, do at last accord
To join in one, ere to the sea they come,
So flowing all from one, all one at last become.
There also was the wide embayed Mayre,
The pleasant Bandon crowned with many a wood,
The spreading Lee, that like an Island fair
Encloseth Cork with his divided flood;
And balefull Our, late staind with English blood:
With many more, whose names no tongue can tell.
All which that day in order seemly good
Did on the Thamis attend, and waited well
To do their duefull service, as to them befell.
Then came the Bride, the lovely Medua came,
Clad in a vesture of unknown gear,
And uncouth fashion, yet her well became;
That seemed like silver, sprinkled here and theare
With glittering spangs, that did like stars appear,
And wau'd upon, like water Chamelot,
To hide the metal, which yet every where
Bewrayd it self, to let men plainly wot,
It was no mortal work, that seemed and yet was not.
Her goodly locks adowne her back did flow
Unto her waste, with flowers bescattered,
The which ambrosiall odours forth did throw
To all about, and all her shoulders spread
As a new spring; and likewise on her head
A Chapelet of sundry flowers she wore,
From under which the deawy humor shed,
Did tricle down her hair, like to the hoar
Congealed little drops, which do the morn adore.
On her two pretty handmaides did attend,
One called the These, the other called the Crane;
Which on her waited, things amiss to mend,
And both behind vpheld her spredding train;
Under the which, her feet appeared plain,
Her silver feet, fair washed against this day:
And her before there paced Pages twain,
Both clad in colors like, and like array,
The Down and eke the Frith, both which prepared her way.
And after these the Sea Nymphs marched all,
All goodly damzels, decked with long green hair,
Whom of their sire Nereides men call,
All which the Oceans daughter to him bare
The gray eyde Doris: all which fifty are;
All which she there on her attending had.
Swift Proto, mild Eucrate, Thetis fair,
Soft Spio, sweet Endore, Sao sad,
Light Doto, wanton Glauce, and Galene glad.
White hand Eunica, proud Dynamene,
Joyous Thalia, goodly Amphitrite,
Lovely Pasithee, kind Eulimene,
Light foot Cymothoe, and sweet Melite,
Fairest Pherusa, Phao lilly white,
Wondered Agaue, Poris, and Nesaea,
With Erato that does in love delight,
And Panopae, and wise Protomedaea,
And snowy neckd Doris, and milkewhite Galathaea.
Speedy Hippothoe, and chaste Actea,
Large Lisianassa, and Pronaea sage,
Euagore, and light Pontoporea,
And she, that with her least word can assuage
The surging seas, when they do sorest rage,
Cymodoce, and stout Autonoe,
And Neso, and Eione well in age,
And seeming still to smile, Glauconome,
And she that hight of many heastes Polynome.
Fresh Alimeda, decked with girlond green;
Hyponeo, with salt bedewed wrests:
Laomedia, like the crystal sheene;
Liagore, much praisd for wise behests;
And Psamathe, for her broad snowy breasts;
Cymo, Eupompe, and Themiste just;
And she that virtue loves and vice detests
Euarna, and Menippe true in trust,
And Nemertea learned well to rule her lust.
All these the daughters of old Nereus were,
Which have the sea in charge to them assinde,
To rule his tides, and surges to vprere,
To bring forth storms, or fast them to vpbinde.
And sailers save from wreckes of wrathful wind.
And yet besides three thousand more there were
Of The Oceans seed, but Jove's and Phoebus kind;
The which in floods and fountains do appear,
And all mankind do nourish with their waters clear.
The which, more eath it were for mortal wight,
To tell the sands, or count the stars on hye,
Or ought more hard, then think to reckon right.
But well I wot, that these which I descry,
Were present at this great solemnity:
And there amongst the rest, the mother was
Of luckelesse Marinell Cymodoce,
Which, for my Muse her self now tired has,
Unto an other Canto I will ouerpas.
Cant. XII.
Marin for love of Florimell,
In languor wastes his life:
The Nymph his mother gets her,
And gives to him for wife.
O What an endless work have I in hand,
To count the seas abundant progeny,
Whose fruitful seed far passes those in land,
And also those which won in th'azure sky?
For much more eath to tell the stars on hy,
Albe they endless seem in estimation,
Then to recount the Seas posterity:
So fertile be the floods in generation,
So huge their numbers, and so numberless their nation.
Therefore the antique wisards well invented,
That Venus of the fomy sea was bred;
For that the seas by her are most augmented.
Witness th'exceeding fry, which there are fed,
And wondrous sholes, which may of none be red.
Then blame me not, if I have erred in count
Of Gods, of Nymphs, Of rivers yet vnred:
For though their numbers do much more surmount,
Yet all those same were there, which erst I did recount.
All those were there, and many other more,
Whose names and nations were too long to tell,
That Proteus house they filled even to the door;
Yet were they all in order, as befell,
According their degrees disposed well.
Amongst the rest, was fair Cymodoce,
The mother of unlucky Marinell,
Who thither with her came, to learn and see
The manner of the Gods when they at banquet be.
But for he was half mortal, being bred
Of mortal sire, though of immortal womb,
He might not with immortal food be fed,
Ne with the eternal Gods to bancket come;
But walked abroad, and round about did rome,
To view the building of that uncouth place,
That seemed unlike unto his earthly home:
Where, as he to and fro by chance did trace,
There unto him betid a disauentrous case.
Under the hanging of an hideous clieffe,
He heard the lamentable voice of one,
That piteously complaind her careful grieffe,
Which never she before disclosd to none.
But to her self her sorrow did bemone,
So feelingly her case she did complain,
That ruth it moved in the rocky stone,
And made it seem to feel her grievous pain,
And often to groan with billows beating from the maine.
Though vain I see my sorrows to unfold,
And count my cares, when none is nigh to hear,
Yet hoping grief may lessen being told,
I will them tell though unto no man near:
For heaven that unto all lends equal ear,
Is far from hearing of my heavy plight;
And lowest hell, to which I lie most near,
Cares not what evils hap to wretched wight;
And greedy seas do in the spoil of life delight.
Yet lo the seas I see by often beating,
Do pearce the rocks, and hardest marble wears;
But his hard rocky heart for no entreating
Will yield, but when my piteous plaints he hears,
Is hardened more with my abundant tears.
Yet though he never list to me relent,
But let me waste in woe my wretched years,
Yet will I never of my love repent,
But joy that for his sake I suffer prisonment.
And when my weary ghost with grief outworne,
By timely death shall win her wished rest,
Let then this plaint unto his ears be borne,
That blame it is to him, that arms professed,
To let her die, whom he might have redrest.
There did she pause, enforced to give place,
Unto the passion, that her heart oppressed,
And after she had wept and wail'd a space,
She began afresh thus to renew her wretched case.
Ye Gods of seas, if any Gods at all
Have care of right, or ruth of wretches wrong,
By one or other way me woeful thrall,
Deliver hence out of this dungeon strong,
In which I daily dying am too long.
And if ye deem me death for loving one,
That loves not me, then do it not prolong,
But let me die and end my days atone,
And let him live vnlou'd, or love him self alone.
But if that life ye unto me decree,
Then let me live, as lovers ought to do,
And of my life's dear love beloved be:
And if he shall through pride your doom undo,
Do you by duresse him compel thereto,
And in this prison put him here with me:
One prison fittest is to hold us two:
So had I rather to be thrall, then free;
Such thraldom or such freedom let it surely be.
But o vain judgment, and conditions vain,
The which the prisoner points unto the free,
The whiles I him condemn, and deem his pain,
He where he list goes loose, and laughes at me.
So ever loose, so ever happy be.
But where so loose or happy that thou art,
Know Marinell that all this is for thee.
With that she wept and wail'd, as if her heart
Would quite have burst through great abundance of her smart.
All which complaint when Marinell had heard,
And understood the cause of all her care
To come of him, for using her so hard,
His stubborn heart, that never felt misfare
Was touched with soft remorse and pity rare;
That even for grief of mind he often did groan,
And inly wish, that in his power it wear
Her to redress: but since he means found none
He could no more but her great misery bemone.
Thus whilst his stony heart with tender ruth
Was touched, and mighty courage mollifide,
Dame Venus son that tameth stubborn youth
With iron bit, and makes him abide,
Till like a victor on his back he ride,
Into his mouth his maystring bridle threw,
That made him stoop, till he did him bestride:
Then began he make him tread his steps anew,
And learn to love, by learning lovers pains to rue.
Now began he in his grieved mind devise,
How from that dungeon he might her enlarge;
Some while he thought, by fair and humble wise
To Proteus self to sue for her discharge:
But then he feared his mothers former charge
Against women's love, long given him in vain.
Then began he think, perforce with sword and targe
Her forth to fetch, and Proteus to constrain:
But soon he began such folly to forthinke again.
Then did he cast to steal her thence away,
And with him bear, where none of her might know.
But all in vain: for why he found no way
To enter in, or issue forth below:
For all about that rock the sea did flow.
And though unto his will she given were,
Yet without ship or bote her thence to row,
He wist not how her thence away to bear;
And danger well he wist long to continue there.
At last when as no means he could invent,
Back to him self, he began return the blame,
That was the author of her punishment;
And with vile curses, and reproachful shame
To damn him self by every evil name;
And deem unworthy or of love or life,
That had despisde so chaste and fair a dame,
Which him had sought through trouble and long strife;
Yet had refusde a God that her had sought to wife.
In this sad plight he walked here and there,
And romed round about the rock in vain,
As he had lost him self, he wist not where;
Often listening if he mote her hear again;
And still bemoning her unworthy pain.
Like as an Hynde whose calfe is fallen unawares
Into some pit, where she him hears complain,
An hundred times about the pit side fares,
Right sorrowfully mourning her bereaved cares.
And now by this the feast was thoroughly ended,
And every one began homeward to resort.
Which seeing Marinell, was sore offended,
That his departure thence should be so short,
And leave his love in that sea-walled fort.
Yet durst he not his mother disobay,
But her attending in full seemly sort,
Did march amongst the many all the way:
And all the way did inly mourn, like one astray.
Being returned to his mothers bower,
In solitary silence far from wight,
He began record the lamentable stowre,
In which his wretched love lay day and night,
For his dear sake, that ill deserved that plight:
The thought whereof empierst his heart so deep,
That of no worldly thing he took delight;
Ne daily food did take, ne nightly sleep,
But pyn'd, and mourned, and languisht, and alone did weep.
That in short space his wonted cheerful hew
Began fade, and lively spirits deaded quight:
His cheek bones raw, and eie-pits hollow grew,
And brawney arms had lost their known might,
That nothing like himself he seemed in sight.
Ere long so weak of limb, and sick of love
He woxe, that longer he note stand upright,
But to his bed was brought, and laid above,
Like ruefull ghost, unable once to stir or move.
Which when his mother saw, she in her mind
Was troubled sore, ne wist well what to ween,
Ne could by search nor any means out find
The secret cause and nature of his teene,
Whereby she might apply some medicine;
But weeping day and night, did him attend,
And mourned to see her loss before her eyne,
Which grieved her more, that she it could not mend.
To see an helpelesse evil, double grief does lend.
Naught could she read the root of his disease,
Ne ween what mister malady it is,
Whereby to seek some means it to appease.
Most did she think, but most she thought amiss,
That that same former fatal wound of his
Whyleare by Tryphon was not thoroughly healed,
But closely rankled under th'orifis:
Least did she think, that which he most concealed,
That love it was, which in his heart lay unrevealed.
Therefore to Tryphon she again does have,
And him does chyde as false and fraudulent,
That fayld the trust, which she in him had plast,
To cure her son, as he his faith had lent:
Who now was fallen into new languishment
Of his old hurt, which was not thoroughly cured.
So back he came unto her patient,
Where searching every part, her well assured,
That it was no old sore, which his new pain procured.
But that it was some other malady,
Or grief unknown, which he could not discern:
So left he her withouten remedy.
Then began her heart to faint, and quake, and earne,
And inly troubled was, the truth to learn.
Unto himself she came, and him besought,
Now with fair speches, now with threatenings stern,
If ought lay hidden in his grieved thought,
It to reveal: who still her answered, there was naught.
Nathlesse she rested not so satisfide,
But leaving watery gods, as booting naught,
Unto the shinie heaven in haste she hide,
And thence Apollo King of Leaches brought.
Apollo came; who soon as he had sought
Through his disease, did by and by out find,
That he did languish of some inward thought,
The which afflicted his engrieued mind;
Which love he red to be, that leads each living kind.
Which when he had unto his mother told,
She began thereat to fret, and greatly grieve.
And coming to her son, began first to scold,
And chyde at him, that made her misbelieue:
But afterward she began him soft to shrieue,
And woo with fair entreaty, to disclose,
Which of the Nymphs his heart so sore did mieue.
For sure she weend it was some one of those,
Which he had lately seen, that for his love he chose.
Now less she feared that same fatal read,
That warned him of women's love beware:
Which being meant of mortal creatures sead,
For love of Nymphs she thought she need not care,
But promised him, what ever wight she wear,
That she her love, to him would shortly gain:
So he her told: but soon as she did hear
That Florimell it was, which wrought his pain,
She began a fresh to chafe, and grieve in every vain.
Yet since she saw the straight extremity,
In which his life unluckily was laid,
It was no time to scan the prophecy,
Whether old Proteus true or false had said,
That his decay should happen by a maid.
It Is late in death of danger to aduize,
Or love forbid him, that is life denayd:
But rather began in troubled mind deuize,
How she that Ladies liberty might enterprise.
To Proteus self to sew she thought it vain,
Who was the root and worker of her woe:
Nor unto any meaner to complain,
But unto great king Neptune self did go,
And on her knee before him falling low,
Made humble suit unto his Majesty,
To grant to her, her sons life, which his foe
A cruel Tyrant had presumpteouslie
By wicked doom condemned, a wretched death to die.
To whom God Neptune softly smyling, thus;
Daughter me seems of double wrong ye plain,
Against one that has both wronged you, and us:
For death t'adward I ween'd did appertain
To none, but to the seas sole Sovereign.
Read therefore who it is, which this has wrought,
And for what cause; the truth discover plain.
For never wight so evil did or thought,
But would some rightful cause pretend, though rightly naught.
To whom she answered, Then it is by name
Proteus, that has ordayn'd my son to die;
For that a waist, the which by fortune came
Upon your seas, he claym'd as property:
And yet nor his, nor his in equity,
But yours the waift by high prerogative.
Therefore I humbly crave your Majesty,
It to repleuie, and my son repriue:
So shall you by one gift save all us three alive.
He granted it: and straight his warrant made,
Under the Sea-gods seal autenticall,
Commanding Proteus straight t'enlarge the maid,
Which wandering on his seas imperial,
He lately took, and sithence kept as thrall.
Which she receiving with meet thankfulness,
Departed straight to Proteus therewithal:
Who reading it with inward loathfulnesse,
Was grieved to restore the pledge, he did possess.
Yet durst he not the warrant to withstand,
But unto her delivered Florimell.
Whom she receiving by the lilly hand,
Admyr'd her beauty much, as she mote well:
For she all living creatures did excel;
And was right joyous, that she gotten had
So fair a wife for her son Marinell.
So home with her she straight the virgin lad,
And showed her to him, then being sore bestad.
Who soon as he beheld that angels face,
Adorned with all divine perfection,
His cheared heart eftsoons away began chase
Sad death, revived with her sweet inspection,
And feeble spirit inly felt refection;
As withered weed through cruel winters tine,
That feels the warmth of sunny beams reflection,
Liftes up his head, that did before decline
And gins to spread his leaf before the fair sunshine.
Right so himself did Marinell vpreare,
When he in place his dearest love did spy;
And though his limbs could not his body bear,
Ne former strength return so suddenly,
Yet cheerful signs he showed outwardly.
Ne less was she in secret heart affected,
But that she masked it with modesty,
For fear she should of lightness be detected:
Which to another place I leave to be perfected.
THE FIFTH BOOK OF THE FAERIE QVEENE. Containing, THE LEGEND OF ARTEGALL OR OF
JUSTICE.
SO often as I with state of present time,
The image of the antique world compare,
When as man's age was in his freshest prime.
And the first blossom of fair virtue bare,
Such odds I find twixt those, and these which are,
As that, through long continuance of his course,
Me seems die world is run quite out of square,
From the first point of his appointed sourse,
And being once amiss grows daily wourse and wourse.
For from the golden age, that first was named,
It Is now at erst become a stony one;
And men themselves, the which at first were framed
Of earthly mould, and formed of flesh and bone,
Are now transformed into hardest stone:
Such as behind their backs (so backward bred)
Were thrown by Pyrrha and Deucalione:
And if then those may any worse be red,
They into that ere long will be degendered.
Let none then blame me, if in discipline
Of virtue and of civil uses lore,
I do not form them to the common line
Of present days, which are corrupted sore,
But to the antique use, which was of yore,
When good was only for it self desired,
And all men sought their own, and none no more;
When Justice was not for most meed outhyred,
But simple Truth did rain, and was of all admyred.
For that which all men then did virtue call,
Is now called vice; and that which vice was hight,
Is now hight virtue, and so used of all:
Right now is wrong, and wrong that was is right,
As all things else in time are changed quight.
Ne wonder; for the heavens revolution
Is wandered far from, where it first was pight,
And so do make contrary constitution
Of all this lower world, toward his dissolution.
For who so list into the heavens look,
And search the courses of the rolling spheres,
Shall find that from the point, where they first took
Their setting forth, in these few thousand years
They all are wandered much; that plain appears.
For that same golden fleecy Ram, which bore
Phrixus and Hell from their stepdames fears,
Has now forgot, where he was plast of yore,
And shouldred has the Bull, which fair Europa bore.
And eke the Bull has with his bow-bent horn
So hardly butted those two twins of Jove,
That they have crushed the Crab, and quite him borne
Into the great Nemoean lions grove.
So now all range, and do at randon roue
Out of their proper places far away,
And all this world with them amiss do move,
And all his creatures from their course astray,
Till they arrive at their last ruinous decay.
Ne is that same great glorious lamp of light,
That does enlumine all these lesser fyres,
In better case, ne keeps his course more right,
But is miscarried with the other Spheres.
For since the term of fourteen hundred years,
That learned Ptolomaee his hight did take,
He is declyned from that mark of theirs,
Nigh thirty minutes to the Southern lake;
That makes me fear in time he will us quite forsake.
And if to those Egyptian wisards old,
Which in Star-read were wont have best insight,
Faith may be given, it is by them told,
That since the time they first took the Suns hight,
Four times his place he shifted has in sight,
And twice has risen, where he now does West,
And wested twice, where he ought rise aright.
But mostis Mars amiss of all the rest,
And next to him old Saturn, that was wont be best.
For during Saturnes ancient reign it is said,
That all the world with goodness did abound:
All loved virtue, no man was affrayd
Of force, ne fraud in wight was to be found:
No war was known, no dreadful trompets sound,
Peace universal rayn'd among men and beasts,
And all things freely grew out of the ground:
Justice sat high adored with solemn feasts,
And to all people did divide her dred beheasts.
Most sacred virtue she of all the rest,
Resembling God in his imperial might;
Whose sovereign power is herein most expressed,
That both to good and bad he deals right,
And all his works with Justice has bedight.
That power he also does to Princes lend,
And makes then like himself in glorious sight,
To sit in his own seat, his cause to end,
And rule his people right, as he does recommend.
Dread Sovereign Goddess, that do highest sit
In seat of judgment, in The Almighty's place,
And with magnificke might and wondrous wit
Do to thy people righteous doom aread,
That furthest Nations filles with awful dread,
Pardon the boldness of thy basest thrall,
That dare discourse of so divine a read,
As thy great justice praised over all:
The instrument whereof lo here thy Artegall.
Cant. I.
Artegall trayn'd in Justice lore
Irenaes quest pursewed,
He does avenge on Sanglier
his Ladies blood embrewed.
THough virtue then were held in highest price,
In those old times, of which I do entreat,
Yet then likewise the wicked seed of vice
Began to spring which shortly grew full great,
And with their boughs the gentle plants did beat.
But evermore some of the virtuous race
Rose up, inspired with heroicke heat,
That cropped the branches of the sient base,
And with strong hand their fruitful rancknes did deface.
Such first was Bacchus, that with furious might
All The East before untamed did ouerronne,
And wrong repressed, and established right,
Which lawless men had formerly fordonne.
There Justice first her princely rule begone.
Next Hercules his like ensample showed,
Who all the West with equal conquest won,
And monstrous tyrants with his club subdewed;
The club of Justice dread, with kingly power endewed.
And such was he, of whom I have to tell,
The Champion of true Justice Artegall.
Whom (as ye lately mote remember well)
An hard adventure, which did then befall,
Into redoubted peril forth did call;
That was to succor a distressed Dame,
Whom a strong tyrant did unjustly thrall,
And from the heritage, which she did clame,
Did with strong hand withhold: Grantorto was his name.
Wherefore the Lady, which Eirena hight,
Did to the Faery Queen her way address,
To whom complaining her afflicted plight,
She her besought of gracious redress.
That sovereign Queen, that mighty Emperesse,
Whose glory is to aid all suppliants pore,
And of weak Princes to be Patroness,
Chose Artegall to right her to restore;
For that to her he seemed best skild in righteous lore.
For Artegall in justice was vpbrought
Even from the cradle of his infancy,
And all the depth of rightful doom was taught
By fair Astraea, with great industry,
Whilst here on earth the lived mortallie.
For till the world from his perfection fell
Into all filth and foul iniquity,
Astraea here among earthly men did dwell,
And in the rules of justice them instructed well.
Whiles through the world she walked in this sort,
Upon a day she found this gentle child,
Amongst his peers playing his childish sport:
Whom seeing fit, and with no crime defilde,
She did allure with gifts and speeches mild,
To wend with her. So thence him far she brought
Into a cave from company exilde,
In which she noursled him, till years he raught,
And all the discipline of justice there him taught.
There she him taught to weigh both right and wrong
In equal balance with due recompense,
And equity to measure out along,
According to the line of conscience,
When so it needs with rigor to dispense.
Of all the which, for want there of mankind,
She caused him to make experience
Upon wyld beasts, which she in woods did find,
With wrongful power oppressing others of their kind.
Thus she him trained, and thus she him taught,
In all the skill of deeming wrong and right,
Until the ripeness of man's years he raught;
That even wild beasts did fear his awful sight,
And men admyr'd his ouerruling might;
Ne any lived on ground, that durst withstand
His dreadful heast, much less him match in fight,
Or bide the horror of his wreakfull hand,
When so he list in wrath lift up his steely brand.
Which steely brand, to make him dreaded more,
She gave unto him, gotten by her slight
And earnest search, where it was kept in store
In Jove's eternal house, vnwist of wight,
Since he himself it used in that great fight
Against the Titans, that whylome rebelled
Against highest heaven; Chrysaor it was hight;
Chrysaor that all other swords excelled,
Well proved in that same day, when Jove those Giants quelled.
For of most perfect metal it was made,
Tempred with Adamant amongst the same,
And garnisht all with gold upon the blade
In goodly wise, whereof it took his name,
And was of no less virtue, then of fame.
For there no substance was so firm and hard,
But it would pierce or cleave, where so it came;
Ne any armor could his dint out ward,
But wheresoever it did light, it thoroughly shard.
Now when the world with sin began to abound,
Astraea loathing longer here to space
Among wicked men, in whom no truth she found,
Returned to heaven, whence she derived her race;
Where she has now an everlasting place,
Among those twelve signs, which nightly we do see
The heavens bright-shining baudricke to enchace;
And is the Virgin, sixth in her degree,
And next her self her righteous balance hanging be.
But when she parted hence, she left her groom
An iron man, which did on her attend
Always, to execute her steadfast doom,
And willed him with Artegall to wend,
And do what ever thing he did intend.
His name was Talus, made of iron mould,
Immovable, resistlesse, without end.
Who in his hand an iron flale did hold,
With which he thresht out falsehood, and did truth unfold.
He now went with him in this new inquest,
Him for to aid, if aid he chaunst to need,
Against that cruel Tyrant, which oppressed
The fair Irena with his foul misdeede,
And kept the crown in which she should succeed.
And now together on their way they bin,
When as they saw a Squire in squallid weed,
Lamenting sore his sorrowful sad tyne,
With many bitter tears shed from his blubbred eyne.
To whom as they approached, they espide
A sorry sight, as ever seen with eye;
An headless Lady lying him beside,
In her own blood all wallow'd woefully,
That her gay clothes did in discolor die.
Much was he moved at that ruefull sight;
And flamed with zeal of vengeance inwardly,
He asked, who had that Dame so foully dight;
Or whether his own hand, or whether other wight?
Ah woe is me, and well away (quoth he)
Bursting forth tears, like springs out of a bank,
That ever I this dismal day did see:
Full far was I from thinking such a pranke;
Yet little loss it were, and mickle thank,
If I should grant that I have done the same,
That I mote drink the cup, whereof she drank:
But that I should die guilty of the blame,
The which another did, who now is fled with shame.
Who was it then (said Artegall) that wrought?
And why, do it declare unto me true.
A knight (said he) if knight he may be thought,
That did his hand in Ladies blood embrew,
And for no cause, but as I shall you show.
This day as I in solace sat hereby
With a fair love, whose loss I now do rue,
There came this knight, having in company
This lucklesse Lady, which now here does headless lie.
He, whether mine seemed fayrer in his eye,
Or that he wexed weary of his own,
Would change with me; but I did it deny;
So did the Ladies both, as may be known,
But he, whose spirit was with pride vpblowne,
Would not so rest contented with his right,
But having from his courser her down thrown,
Fro me rest mine away by lawless might,
And on his steed her set, to bear her out of sight.
Which when his Lady saw, she followed fast,
And on him catching hold, began loud to cry
Not so to leave her, nor away to cast,
But rather of his hand besought to die.
With that his sword he drew all wrathfully,
And at one stroke cropped off her head with scorn,
In that same place, whereas it now does lie.
So he my love away with him has borne,
And left me here, both his and mine own love to morn.
Aread (said he) which way then did he make?
And by what marks may he be known again?
To hope (quoth he) him soon to overtake,
That hence so long departed, is but vain:
But yet he pricked over yonder plain,
And as I marked, bore upon his shield,
By which it is easy him to know again,
A broken sword within a bloody field;
Expressing well his nature, which the same did wield.
No sooner said, but straight he after sent
His iron page, who him pursew'd so light,
As that it seemed above the ground he went:
For he was swift as swallow in her flight,
And strong as Eyon in his Lordly might.
It was not long, before he ouertooke
Sir Sanglier; (so cleeped was that Knight)
Whom at the first he ghessed by his look,
And by the other marks, which of his shield he took.
He bad him stay, and back with him retire;
Who full of scorn to be commanded so,
The Lady to alight did est require,
Whilst he reformed that uncivil so:
And straight at him with all his force did go.
Who moved no more therewith, then when a rock
Is lightly stricken with some stones throw;
But to him leaping, lent him such a knock,
That on the ground he laid him like a senseless block.
But ere he could him self recure again,
Him in his iron paw he seized had;
That when he wak't out of his warelesse pain,
He found him self vnwist, so ill bestad,
That lim he could not wag. Thence he him lad,
Bound like a beast appointed to the stall:
The sight whereof the Lady sore adrad,
And feigned to fly for fear of being thrall;
But he her quickly stayed, and forced to wend withal.
When to the place they came, where Artegall
By that same careful Squire did then abide,
He gently began him to demand of all,
That did betwixt him and that Squire betide.
Who with stern countenance and indignant pride
Did answer, that of all he guiltless stood,
And his accuser thereuppon defide:
For neither he did shed that Ladies blood,
Nor took away his love, but his own proper good.
Well did the Squire perceive him self too weak,
To answer his defiaunce in the field,
And rather chose his challenge off to break,
Then to approve his right with spear and shield.
And rather guilty chose him self to yield.
But Artegall by signs perceiving plain,
That he it was not, which that Lady killed,
But that strange Knight, the fairer love to gain,
Did cast about by sleight the truth thereout to strain.
And said, now sure this doubtful causes right
Can hardly but by Sacrament be tried,
Or else by ordele, or by blooddy fight;
That ill perhaps mote fall to either side.
But if ye please, that I your cause decide,
Perhaps I may all further quarrel end,
So ye will swear my judgment to abide.
Thereto they both did franckly condescend,
And to his doom with listfull ears did both attend.
Since then (said he) ye both the dead deny,
And both the living Lady claim your right,
Let both the dead and living equally
Divided be betwixt you here in sight,
And each of either take his share aright.
But look who does dissent from this my read,
He for a twelve months day shall in despite
Bear for his penance that same Ladies head;
To witness to the world, that she by him is dead.
Well pleased with that doom was Sangliere,
And offered straight the Lady to be slain.
But that same Squire, to whom she was more dear,
When as he saw she should be cut in twain,
Did yield, she rather should with him remain
Alive, then to him self be shared dead;
And rather then his love should suffer pain,
He chose with shame to bear that Ladies head.
True love despises shame, when life is called in dread.
Whom when so willing Artegall perceived;
Not so thou Squire, (he said) but thine I deem
The living Lady, which from thee he reaued:
For worthy thou of her do rightly seem.
And you, Sir Knight, that love so light esteem,
As that ye would for little leave the same,
Take here your own, that does you best beseem,
And with it bear the burden of defame;
Your own dead Ladies head, to tell abroad your shame.
But Sangliere disdained much his doom,
And sternly began repine at his beheast;
Ne would for ought obey, as did become,
To bear that Ladies head before his breast.
Until that Talus had his pride represt,
And forced him, maulgre, it up to rear.
Who when he saw it bootelesse to resist,
He took it up, and thence with him did bear,
As rated Spaniell takes his burden up for fear.
Much did that Squire Sir Artegall adore,
For his great justice, held in high regard;
And as his Squire him offered evermore
To serve, for want of other meet reward,
And wend with him on his adueuture hard.
But he thereto would by no means consent;
But leaving him forth on his journey fared:
Ne wight with him but only Talus went.
They two enough t'encounter an whole Regiment.
Cant. II.
Artegall hears of Florimell,
Does with the Pagan fight:
Him slaies, drownes Lady Momera,
Does race her castle quight.
Naught is more honorable to a knight,
Ne better does beseem brave cheualry,
Then to defend the feeble in their right,
And wrong redress in such as wend awry.
Whilome those great Heroes got thereby
Their greatest glory, for their rightful deeds,
And place deserved with the Gods on hy.
Herein the noblesse of this knight exceedes,
Who now to perils great for justice sake proceeds.
To which as he now was upon the way,
He chaunst to meet a Dwarf in hasty course;
Whom he required his forward have to stay,
Till he of tidings mote with him discourse.
Loath was the Dwarf, yet did he stay perforse,
And began of sundry news his store to tell,
And to his memory they had recourse:
But chiefly of the fairest Florimell,
How she was found again, and spousde to Marinell.
For this was Dony, Florimels own Dwarf,
Whom having lost (as ye have heard whyleare)
And finding in the way the scattred scarf,
The fortune of her life long time did fear.
But of her health when Artegall did hear,
And safe return, he was full inly glad,
And asked him where, and when her bridale cheer
Should be solemnized: for if time he had,
He would be there, and honor to her spousall ad.
Within three days (quoth she) as I do here,
It will be at the Castle of the strond;
What time if naught me let, I will be there
To do her service, so as I am bond.
But in my way a little here beyond
A cursed cruel Sarazin does won,
That keeps a Bridges passage by strong hond,
And many errant Knights has there fordonne;
That makes all men for fear that passage for to shonne.
What mister wight (quoth he) and how far hence
Is he, that does to travelers such harms?
He is (said he) a man of great defense;
Expert in battle and in deeds of arms;
And more emboldned by the wicked charms,
With which his daughter does him still support;
Having great Lordships got and goodly farms,
Through strong oppression of his power extort;
By which he still them holds, and keeps with strong effort.
And daily he his wrongs increases more,
For never wight he lets to pass that way;
Over his Bridge, albee he rich or poor,
But he him makes his passage-penny pay:
Else he does hold him back or beat away.
Thereto he has a groom of evil guize,
Whose scalp is bare, that bondage does bewray,
Which pols and pills the poor in piteous wize;
But he him self upon the rich does tyrannize.
His name is hight Pollente, rightly so
For that he is so puissant and strong,
That with his power he all does ouergo,
And makes them subject to his mighty wrong;
And some by sleight he eke does vnderfong.
For on a Bridge he custometh to fight,
Which is but narrow, but exceeding long;
And in the same are many trap falls pight,
Through which the rider down does fall through oversight
And underneath the same a river flows,
That is both swift and dangerous deep withal;
Into the which whom so he overthrows,
All destitute of help does headlong fall,
But he him self, through practice usual,
Leapes forth into the flood, and there assaies
His foe confused through his sudden fall,
That horse and man he equally dismaies,
And either both them drownes, or traitorously slaies.
Then does he take the spoil of them at will,
And to his daughter brings, that dwells thereby:
Who all that comes does take, and therewith fill
The coffers of her wicked threasury;
Which she with wrongs has heaped up so hy,
That many Princes she in wealth exceedes,
And purchased all the country lying ny
With the revenue of her plenteous meedes,
Her name is Munera, agreeing with her deeds.
Thereto she is full fair, and rich attired,
With golden hands and silver feet beside,
That many Lords have her to wife desired:
But she them all despises for great pride.
Now by my life (said he) and God to guide,
None other way will I this day betake,
But by that Bridge, whereas he does abide:
Therefore me thither lead. No more he spoke,
But thitherward forthright his ready way did make.
Unto the place he came within a while,
Where on the Bridge he ready armed saw
The Sarazin, awayting for some spoil.
Who as they to the passage began to draw,
A villain to them came with scull all raw,
That passage money did of them require,
According to the custom of their law.
To whom he aunswerd wroth, lo there thy hire;
And with that word him struck, that straight he did expire.
Which when the Pagan saw, he wexed wroth,
And straight him self unto the fight addressed,
Ne was Sir Artegall behind: so both
Together ran with ready spears in rest.
Right in the midst, whereas they breast to breast
Should meet, a trap was letten down to fall
Into the flood; straight leapt the Carle unblessed,
Well weening that his foe was fallen withal:
But he was well aware, and leapt before his fall.
There being both together in the flood,
They each at other tyrannousty flew;
Ne ought the water cooled their whot blood,
But rather in them kindled choler new.
But there the Paynim, who that use well knew
To fight in water, great advantage had,
That oftentimes him nigh he overthrew:
And eke the courser, whereupon he rad,
Could swim like to a fish, whiles he his back bestrad.
Which odds when as Sir Artegall espide,
He saw no way, but close with him in have;
And to him driving strongly down the tide,
Upon his iron collar griped fast,
That with the straint his wesand nigh he brast.
There they together strove and struggled long,
Either the other from his steed to cast;
Ne ever Artegall his griple strong
For any thing would slack, but still upon him hong.
As when a Dolphin and a Sele are met,
In the wide champian of the Ocean plain:
With cruel chause their courages they whet,
The maysterdome of each by force to gain,
And dreadful battle twixt them do darraine:
They snuf, they snort, they bou^ce, they rage, they rore,
That all the sea disturbed with their train,
Does fry with some above the surges hoar.
Such was betwixt these two the troublesome uproar.
So Artegall at length him forced forsake
His horses back, for dread of being drowned,
And to his handy swimming him betake.
Eftsoons him self he from his hold vnbownd,
And then no ods at all in him he fownd:
For Artegall in swimming skillful was,
And durst the depth of any water sownd.
So ought each Knight, that use of peril has,
In swimming be expert through waters force to pas.
Then very doubtful was the wars event,
Uncertain whether had the better side.
For both were skildin that experiment,
And both in arms well traind and thoroughly tried.
But Art egall was better breathed beside,
And toward the end, grew greater in his might,
That his faint foe no longer could abide
His puissance, ne bear him self upright,
But from the water to the land betook his flight.
But Artegall pursewd him still so near,
With bright Chrysaor in his cruel hand,
That as his head he began a little rear
Above the brincke, to tread upon the land,
He smote it off, that tumbling on the strand
It bit the earth for very fell despite,
And gnashed with his teeth, as if he band
High God, whose goodness he despaired quight,
Or cursed the hand, which did that vengeance on him dight
His corpse was carried down along the Lee,
Whose waters with his filthy blood it stained:
But his blasphemous head, that all might see,
He pitched upon a pole on high ordained;
Where many years it afterward remained,
To be a mirror to all mighty men,
In whose right hands great power is contained,
That none of them the feeble ouerren,
But always do their power within just compass pen.
That done, unto the Castle he did wend,
In which the Paynims daughter did abide,
Guarded of many which did her defend:
Of whom he entrance sought, but was denide,
And with reproachful blasphemy defide,
Beaten with stones down from the battilment,
That he was forced to withdraw aside;
And bad his servant Talus to invent
Which way he enter might, without endangerment.
Eftsoons his Page drew to the Castle gate,
And with his iron flale at it let fly,
That all the warders it did sore amate,
The which erewhile spoke so reprochfully,
And made them stoop, that looked erst so hie.
Yet still he bet, and bounst upon the door,
And thundered strokes thereon so hideouslie,
That all the piece he shaked from the flore,
And filled all the house with fear and great uproar.
With noise whereof the Lady forth appeared
Upon the Castle wall, and when she saw
The dangerous state, in which she stood, she feared
The sad effect of her near overthrow;
And began entreat that iron man below,
To cease his outrage, and him fair besought,
Since neither force of stones which they did throw,
Nor power of charms, which she against him wrought,
Might otherwise prevail, or make him cease for ought.
But when as yet she saw him to proceed,
Unmoved with prayers, or with piteous thought,
She meant him to corrupt with goodly meede;
And causde great sackes with endless riches fraught,
Unto the battilment to be vpbrought,
And powered forth over the Castle wall,
That she might win some time, though dearly bought
Whilst he to gathering of the gold did fall.
But he was nothing moved, nor tempted therewithal.
But still continued his assault the more,
And laid on load with his huge iron flaile,
That at the length he has yrent the door,
And made way for his master to assail.
Who being entered, naught did then avail
For wight, against his power them selves to rear:
Each one did fly; their hearts began to fail,
And hid them selves in corners here and there;
And eke their dame half dead did hide her self for fear.
Long they her sought, yet no where could they find her,
That sure they ween'd she was escapt away:
But Talus, that could like a limehound wind her,
And all things secret wisely could bewray,
At length found out, whereas she hidden lay
Under an heap of gold. Thence he her drew
By the fair locks, and fowly did array,
Withouten pity of her goodly hew,
That Artegall him self her seemelesse plight did rue.
Yet for no pity would he change the course
Of Justice, which in Talus hand did lie;
Who rudely hayld her forth without remorse,
Still holding up her suppliant hands on hye,
And kneeling at his feet submissiuely.
But he her suppliant hands, those hands of gold,
And eke her feet, those feet of silver try,
Which sought unrighteousness, and justice sold,
Chopped off, and nayld on high, that all might the^ behold.
Her self then took he by the sclender wast,
In vain loud crying, and into the flood
Over the Castle wall adowne her cast,
And there her drowned in the durty mud:
But the stream washed away her guilty blood.
Thereafter all that mucky pelf he took,
The spoil of peoples evil gotten good,
The which her sire had scrap't by hook and crook,
And burning all to ashes, powered it down the brook.
And lastly all that Castle quite he raced,
Even from the sole of his foundation,
And all the hewn stones thereof defaced,
That there mote be no hope of reparation,
Nor memory thereof to any nation.
All which when Talus thoroughly had performed,
Sir Artegall undid the evil fashion,
And wicked customs of that Bridge reformed.
Which done, unto his former journey he returned.
In which they measured mickle weary way,
Till that at length nigh to the sea they drew;
By which as they did travel on a day,
They saw before them, far as they could view,
Full many people gathered in a crew;
Whose great assembly they did much admire.
For never there the like resort they knew.
So toward them they coasted, to enquire
What thing so many nations met, did there desire.
There they beheld a mighty Giant stand
Upon a rock, and holding forth on hie
An huge great pair of balance in his hand,
With which he boasted in his surquedrie,
That all the world he would weigh equally,
If ought he had the same to counterpoys.
For want whereof he weighed vanity,
And filled his ballaunce full of idle toys:
Yet was admired much of fools, women, and boys.
He said that he would all the earth vptake,
And all the sea, divided each from either:
So would he of the fire one ballaunce make,
And one of the air, without or wind, or wether:
Then would he ballaunce heaven and hell together,
And all that did within them all contain;
Of all whose weight, he would not miss a fether.
And look what surplus did of each remain,
He would to his own part restore the same again.
For why, he said they all unequal were,
And had encroched upon others share,
Like as the sea (which plain he showed there)
Had worn the care, so did the fire the air,
So all the rest did others parts empaire.
And so were realms and nations run awry.
All which he undertook for to repair,
In sort as they were formed aunciently;
And all things would reduce unto equality.
Therefore the vulgar did about him flock,
And cluster thick unto his leasings vain,
Like foolish flies about an honey crocke,
In hope by him great benefit to gain,
And uncontrolled freedom to obtain.
All which when Artegall did see, and hear,
How he misled the simple peoples train,
In sdeignfull wize he drew unto him near,
And thus unto him spoke, without regard or fear.
Thou that presum'st to weigh the world anew,
And all things to an equal to restore,
In stead of right me seems great wrong do show,
And far above thy forces pitch to sore.
For ere thou limit what is less or more
In every thing, thou ought first to know,
What was the poyse of every part of yore:
And look then how much it does ouerflow,
Or fail thereof, so much is more then just to trow.
For at the first they all created were
In goodly measure, by their Makers might,
And weighed out in ballaunces so nere,
That not a dram was missing of their right,
The earth was in the middle center pight,
In which it does immovable abide,
Hemd in with waters like a wall in sight;
And they with air, that not a drop can slide:
Al which the heavens contain, and in their courses guide.
Such heavenly justice does among them rain,
That every one do know their certain bound,
In which they do these many years remain,
And among them al no change has yet been found.
But if thou now should weigh them new in pound,
We are not sure they would so long remain:
All change is perilous, and all chance unsound.
Therefore leave off to weigh them all again,
Till we may be assured they shall their course retain.
Thou foolish Elfe (said then the Giant wroth)
See not, how badly all things present be,
And each estate quite out of order goth?
The sea it self do thou not plainly see
Encroch upon the land there under thee;
And the earth it self how daily its increast,
By all that dying to it turned be.
Were it not good that wrong were then surceast,
And from the most, that some were given to the least?
Therefore I will throw down these mountains hie,
And make them level with the lowly plain:
These towering rocks, which reach unto the sky,
I will thrust down into the deepest maine,
And as they were, them equalize again.
Tyrants that make men subject to their law,
I will suppress, that they no more may rain;
And Lordings curb, that commons ouer-aw;
And all the wealth of rich men to the poor will draw.
Of things unseen how can thou deem aright,
Then answered the righteous Artegall,
Since thou misdeem'st so much of things in sight?
What though the sea with waves continual
Do eat the earth, it is no more at all:
Ne is the earth the less, or loses ought,
For whatsoever from one place does fall,
Is with the tide unto an other brought:
For there is nothing lost, that may be found, if sought.
Likewise the earth is not augmented more,
By all that dying into it do fade.
For of the earth they formed were of yore,
How ever gay their blossom or their blade
Do flourish now, they into dust shall vade.
What wrong then is it, if that when they die,
They turn to that, whereof they first were made?
All in the power of their great Maker lie:
All creatures must obey the voice of the most hie.
They live, they die, like as he does ordain,
Ne ever any asks reason why.
The hills do not the lowly dales disdain;
The dales do not the lofty hills envy.
He makes Kings to sit in souerainty;
He makes subjects to their power obey;
He pulls down, he sets up on hy;
He gives to this, from that he takes away.
For all we have is his: what he list do, he may.
What ever thing is done, by him is done,
Ne any may his mighty will withstand;
Ne any may his sovereign power shonne,
Ne loose that he has bound with steadfast band.
In vain therefore do thou now take in hand,
To call to count, or weigh his works anew,
Whose counsels depth thou can not understand,
Since of things subject to thy daily view
Thou do not know the causes, nor their courses dew.
For take thy ballaunce, if thou be so wise,
And weigh the wind, that under heaven does blow;
Or weigh the light, that in the East does rise;
Or weigh the thought, that from man's mind does flow.
But if the weight of these thou can not show,
Weigh but one word which from thy lips does fall.
For how can thou those greater secrets know,
That do not know the least thing of them all?
Ill can he rule the great, that cannot reach the small.
Therewith the Giant much abashed said;
That he of little things made reckoning light,
Yet the least word that ever could be laid
Within his ballaunce, he could way aright.
Which is (said he) more heavy then in weight,
The right or wrong, the false or else the true?
He answered, that he would try it straight,
So he the words into his ballaunce threw,
But straight the winged words out of his ballaunce flew.
Wroth wext he then, and said, that words were light,
Ne would within his ballaunce well abide.
But he could justly weigh the wrong or right.
Well then, said Artegall, let it be tried.
First in one balance set the true aside.
He did so first; and then the false he laid
In the other scale; but still it down did slide,
And by no mean could in the weight be stayed.
For by no means the false will with the truth be wayd.
Now take the right likewise, said Artegale,
And counterpeise the same with so much wrong.
So first the right he put into one scale;
And then the Giant strove with puissance strong
To fill the other scale with so much wrong.
But all the wrongs that he therein could lay,
Might not it peise; yet did he labor long,
And swat, and chauf'd, and proved every way:
Yet all the wrongs could not a little right down way.
Which when he saw, he greatly grew in rage,
And almost would his balances have broken:
But Artegall him fairly began assuage,
And said; be not upon thy balance wroken:
For they do naught but right or wrong betoken;
But in the mind the doom of right must be;
And so likewise of words, the which be spoken,
The ear must be the balance, to decree
And judge, whether with truth or falsehood they agree.
But set the truth and set the right aside,
For they with wrong or falsehood will not fare;
And put two wrongs together to be tried,
Or else two falses, of each equal share;
And then together do them both compare.
For truth is one, and right is ever one.
So did he, and then plain it did appear,
Whether of them the greater were atone.
But right sat in the midst of the beam alone.
But he the right from thence did thrust away,
For it was not the right, which he did seek;
But rather strove extremities to way,
The One to diminish, the other for to eeke.
For of the mean he greatly did misleeke.
Whom when so lewdly minded Talus found,
Approaching nigh unto him cheek by cheek,
He shouldered him from off the higher ground,
And down the rock him throwing, in the sea him dround.
Like as a ship, whom cruel tempest drives
Upon a rock with horrible dismay,
Her shattered ribs in thousand pieces riues,
And spoiling all her geares and goodly ray,
Does makes her self misfortunes piteous pray.
So down the cliffe the wretched Giant tumbled;
His battred balances in pieces lay,
His timbered bones all broken rudely rumbled,
So was the high aspyring with huge ruin humbled.
That when the people, which had there about
Long waited, saw his sudden desolation,
They began to gather in tumultuous rout,
And mutining, to stir up civil faction,
For certain loss of so great expectation.
For well they hoped to have got great good;
And wondrous riches by his innovation.
Therefore resolving to revenge his blood,
They rose in arms, and all in battle order stood.
Which lawless multitude him coming too
In warlike wise, when Artegall did view,
He much was troubled, ne wist what to do.
For loath he was his noble hands t'embrew
In the base blood of such a rascal crew;
And otherwise, if that he should retire,
He feared least they with shame would him pursew.
Therefore he Talus to them sent, t'inquire
The cause of their array, and truce for to desire.
But soon as they him nigh approaching spide,
They began with all their weapons him assay,
And rudely stroke at him on every side:
Yet naught they could him hurt, ne ought dismay.
But when at them he with his flaile began lay,
He like a swarm of flies them overthrew;
Ne any of them durst come in his way,
But here and there before his presence flew,
And hid themselves in holes and bushes from his view.
As when a Faulcon has with nimble flight
Flowne at a flush of Ducks, foreby the brook,
The trembling foul dismayed with dreadful sight
Of death, the which them almost ouertooke,
Do hide themselves from her astonying look,
Amongst the flags and covert round about.
When Talus saw they all the field forsook
And none appeared of all that rascal rout,
To Artegall he turned, and went with him throughout.
Cant. III.
The spousals of fair Florimell,
where turney many knights:
There Braggadochio is vncas'd
in all the Ladies sights.
AFter long storms and tempests ouerblowne,
The sun at length his joyous face does clear:
So when as fortune all her spite has shown,
Some blisfull hours at last must needs appear;
Else should afflicted wights oftimes despeire.
So comes it now to Florimell by turn,
After long sorrows suffered whyleare,
In which captived she many months did mourn,
To taste of joy, and to wont pleasures to return.
Who being freed from Proteus cruel band
By Marinell, was unto him affide,
And by him brought again to Faerie land;
Where be her spous'd, and made his joyous bride.
The time and place was blazed far and wide;
And solemn feasts and giusts ordained therefore.
To which there did resort from every side
Of Lords and Ladies infinite great store;
Ne any Knight was absent, that brave courage bore.
To tell the glory of the feast that day,
The goodly service, the deuicefull sights,
The bridegromes state, the brides most rich array,
The pride of Ladies, and the worth of knights,
The royal banquets, and the rare delights
Were work fit for an Herald, not for me:
But for so much as to my lot here lights,
That with this present treatise does agree,
True virtue to advance, shall here recounted be.
When all men had with full satietie
Of meats and drinks their appetites suffiz'd,
To deeds of arms and proof of cheualrie
They began themselves address, full rich aguiz'd,
As each one had his furnitures deuiz'd.
And first of all issued Sir Marinell,
And with him six knights more, which enterpriz'd
To challenge all in right of Florimell,
And to maintain, that she all others did excel.
The first of them was hight Sir Orimont,
A noble Knight, and tried in hard assayes:
The second had to name Sir Bellisont,
But second unto none in prowess praise;
The third was Brunell, famous in his days;
The fourth Ecastor, of exceeding might;
The fifth Armeddan, skild in lovely lays;
The sixth was Lansack, a redoubted Knight:
All six well seen in arms, and proved in many a fight.
And them against came all that list to giust,
From every coast and country under sun:
None was debard, but all had leave that lust.
The trompets sound; then all together run.
Full many deeds of arms that day were done,
And many knights unhorsed, and many wounded,
As fortune fell; yet little lost or won:
But all that day the greatest praise redounded
To Marinell, whose name the Heralds loud resounded.
The second day, so soon as morrow light
Appeared in heaven, into the field they came,
And there all day continew'd cruel fight,
With diverse fortune fit for such a game,
In which all strove with peril to win fame.
Yet whether side was victor, note be ghest:
But at the last the trompets did proclaim
That Marinell that day deserved best.
So they disparted were, and all men went to rest.
The third day came, that should due trial lend
Of all the rest, and then this warlike crew
Together met, of all to make an end.
There Marinell great deeds of arms did show;
And through the thickest like a Lion flew,
Rashing often helmes, and ryuing plates a sonder,
That every one his danger did eschew.
So terribly his dreadful strokes did thonder,
That all men stood amazed, and at his might did wonder.
But what on earth can always happy stand?
The greater prowess greater perils find.
So far he past amongst his enemies band,
That they have him enclosed so behind,
As by no means he can himself outwind.
And now perforce they have him prisoner taken;
And now they do with captive bands him bind;
And now they lead him thence, of all forsaken,
Unless some succor had in time him overtaken.
It fortuned whylest they were thus ill beset,
Sir Artegall into the Tilt-yard came,
With Braggadochio, whom he lately met
Upon the way, with that his snowy Dame.
Where when he understood by common fame,
What evil hap to Marinell betid,
He much was moved at so unworthy shame,
And straight that boaster prayed, with whom he rid,
To change his shield with him, to be the better hid.
So forth he went, and soon them over hent,
Where they were leading Marinell away,
Whom he assayld with dreadlesse hardiment,
And forced the burden of their prize to stay.
They were an hundred knights of that array;
Of which the one half upon himself did set,
The Other stayed behind to guard the pray.
But he ere long the former fifty bet;
And from the other fifty soon the prisoner fet.
So back he brought Sir Marinell again;
Whom having quickly armed again anew,
They both together joined might and maine,
To set afresh on all the other crew.
Whom with sore havoc soon they overthrew,
And chaced quite out of the field, that none
Against them durst his head to peril show.
So were they left Lords of the field alone:
So Marinell by him was rescued from his fone.
Which when he had performed, then back again
To Braggadochio did his shield restore:
Who all this while behind him did remain,
Keeping there close with him in precious store
That his false Lady, as ye heard before.
Then did the trompets sound, and Judges rose,
And all these knights, which that day armor bore,
Came to the open hall, to listen whose
The honor of the prize should be adiudg'd by those.
And thither also came in open sight
Fair Florimell, into the common hall,
To greet his guerdon unto every knight,
And best to him, to whom the best should fall.
Then for that stranger knight they loud did call,
To whom that day they should the girlond yield.
Who came not forth: but for Sir Artegall
Came Braggadochio, and did show his shield,
Which bore the Sun broad blazed in a golden field.
The sight whereof did all with gladness fill:
So unto him they did addeeme the prise
Of all that Triumph. Then the trompets shrill
Don Braggadochios name resounded thrice:
So courage lent a cloak to cowardice.
And then to him came fairest Florimell,
And goodly began to greet his brave emprise,
And thousand thanks him yield, that had so well
Approved that day, that she all others did excel.
To whom the boaster, that all knights did blot,
With proud disdain did scornful answer make;
That what he did that day, he did it not
For her, but for his own dear Ladies sake,
Whom on his peril he did undertake,
Both her and eke all others to excel:
And further did uncomely speeches crake.
Much did his words the gentle Lady quell,
And turned aside for shame to hear, what he did tell.
Then forth he brought his snowy Florimele,
Whom Trompart had in keeping there beside,
Covered from peoples gazement with a vele.
Whom when discovered they had thoroughly eide,
With great amazement they were stupefide;
And said, that surely Florimell it was,
Or if it were not Florimell so tried,
That Florimell her self she then did pas.
So feeble skill of perfect things the vulgar has.
Which when as Marinell beheld likewise,
He was therewith exceedingly dismayed;
Ne wist he what to think, or to devise,
But like as one, whom feends had made affrayd,
He long astonished stood, ne ought he said,
Ne ought he did, but with fast fixed eyes
He gazed still upon that snowy maid;
Whom ever as he did the more auize,
The more to be true Florimell he did surmize.
As when two suns appear in the azure sky,
Mounted in Phoebus charet fiery bright,
Both darting forth fair beams to each man's eye,
And both adorned with lamps of flaming light,
All that behold so strange prodigious sight,
Not knowing natures work, nor what to ween,
Are rapt with wonder, and with rare affright.
So stood Sir Marinell, when he had seen
The semblant of this false by his fair beauties Queen.
All which when Artegall, who all this while
Stood in the preasse close covered, well aduewed,
And saw that boasters pride and graceless guile,
He could no longer bear, but forth issewed,
And unto all himself there open showed,
And to the boaster said; Thou losell base,
That have with borrowed plumes thy self endewed,
And others worth with leasings do deface,
When they are all restored, thou shall rest in disgrace.
That shield, which thou do bear, was it indeed,
Which this days honor saved to Marinell;
But not that arm, nor thou the man I reed,
Which did that service unto Florimell.
For proof show forth thy sword, and let it tell,
What strokes, what dreadful stoure it stird this day:
Or show the wounds, which unto thee befell;
Or show the sweat, with which thou did sway
So sharp a battle, that so many did dismay.
But this the sword, which wrought those cruel stounds,
And this the arm, the which that shield did bear,
And these the signs, (so showed forth his wounds)
By which that glory gotten does appear.
As for this Lady, which he shows here,
Is not (I wager) Florimell at all;
But some fair Franion, fit for such a fere,
That by misfortune in his hand did fall.
For proof whereof, he bad them Florimell forth call.
So forth the noble Lady was ybrought,
Adorned with honor and all comely grace:
Whereto her bashful shamefastness ywrought
A great increase in her fair blushing face;
As roses did with lillies interlace.
For of those words, the which that boaster threw,
She inly yet conceived great disgrace.
Whom when as all the people such did view,
They shouted loud, and signs of gladness all did show.
Then did he set her by that snowy one,
Like the true saint beside the image set,
Of both their beauties to make paragone,
And trial, whether should the honor get.
Straight way so soon as both together met,
Th'enchaunted Damzell vanished into naught:
Her snowy substance melted as with heat,
Ne of that goodly hew remained ought,
But th'emptie girdle, which about her wast was wrought.
As when the daughter of Thaumantes fair,
Has in a watery cloud displayed wide
Her goodly bow, which paints the liquid air;
That all men wonder at her colors pride;
All suddenly, ere one can look aside,
The glorious picture vanishes away,
Ne any token does thereof abide:
So did this Ladies goodly form decay,
And into nothing go, ere one could it bewray.
Which when as all that present were, beheld,
They stricken were with great astonishment,
And their faint hearts with senseless horror queld,
To see the thing, that seemed so excellent,
So stolen from their fancies wonderment;
That what of it became, none understood.
And Braggadochio self with dreriment
So daunted was in his despeyring mood,
That like a lifelesse corse immovable he stood.
But Artegall that golden belt vptooke,
The which of all her spoil was only left;
Which was not hers, as many it mistook,
But Florimells own girdle, from her reft,
While she was flying, like a weary weft,
From that foul monster, which did her compel
To perils great; which he vnbuckling eft,
Presented to the fairest Florimell;
Who round about her tender wast it fitted well.
Full many Ladies often had assayd,
About their middles that fair belt to knit;
And many a one supposed to be a maid:
Yet it to none of all their loins would fit,
Till Florimell about her fastened it.
Such power it had, that to no woman's wast
By any skill or labor it would sit,
Unless that she were continent and chaste,
But it would lose or break, that many had disgrast.
Whilst thus they busied were bout Florimell,
And boastfull Braggadochio to defame,
Sir Guyon as by fortune then befell,
Forth from the thickest preasse of people came,
His own good steed, which he had stolen, to clame;
And the one hand seizing on his golden bit,
With the other drew his sword: for with the same
He meant the thief there deadly to have smit:
And had he not been held, he naught had fayld of it.
Thereof great hurly burly moved was
Throughout the hall, for that same warlike horse.
For Braggadochio would not let him pas;
And Guyon would him algates have perforse,
Or it approve upon his carrion corse.
Which troublous stir when Artegall perceived,
He nigh them drew to stay th'auengers forse,
And began inquire, how was that steed bereaved,
Whether by might extort, or else by slight deceived.
Who all that piteous story, which befell
About that woeful couple, which were slain,
And their young bloody babe to him began tell;
With whom whiles he did in the wood remain,
His horse purloyned was by subtle train:
For which he challenged the thief to fight.
But he for naught could him thereto constrain.
For as the death he hated such despite,
And rather had to lose, then try in arms his right.
Which Artegall well hearing, though no more
By law of arms there need ones right to try,
As was the wont of warlike knights of yore,
Then that his foe should him the field deny,
Yet further right by tokens to descrie,
He asked, what privy tokens he did bear.
If that (said Guyon) may you satisfy,
Within his mouth a black spot does appear,
Shapt like a horses shoe, who list to seek it there.
Whereof to make due trial, one did take
The horse in hand, within his mouth to look:
But with his heels so sorely he him struck,
That all his ribs he quite in pieces broke,
That never word from that day forth he spoke.
Another that would seem to have more wit,
Him by the bright embrodered hedstall took:
But by the shoulder him so sore he bit,
That he him maimed quite, and all his shoulder split.
Ne he his mouth would open unto wight,
Until that Guyon self unto him spoke,
And called Brigadore (so was he hight)
Whose voice so soon as he did undertake,
Eftsoons he stood as still as any stake,
And suffered all his secret mark to see:
And when as he him named, for joy he brake
His bands, and followed him with gladfull glee,
And friskt, and flong aloft, and louted low on knee.
Thereby Sir Artegall did plain areed,
That unto him the horse belonged, and said;
Lo there Sir Guyon, take to you the steed,
As he with golden saddle is arayd;
And let that losell, plainly now displayed,
Hence fare on foot, till he an horse have gained.
But the proud boaster began his doom upbraid,
And him reuil'd, and rated, and disdayned,
That iudegement so unjust against him had ordained.
Much was the knight incenst with his lewd word,
To have revenged that his villeny;
And thrice did lay his hand upon his sword,
To have him slain, or dearly done aby.
But Guyon did his choler pacify,
Saying, Sir knight, it would dishonor be
To you, that are our judge of equity,
To wreake your wrath on such a carle as he
It Is punishment enough, that all his shame do see.
So did he mitigate Sir Artegall,
But Talus by the back the boaster hent,
And drawing him out of the open hall,
Upon him did inflict this punishment.
First he his beard did shave, and fowly shent:
Then from him reft his shield, and it renuerst,
And blotted out his arms with falsehood blent,
And himself baffuld, and his arms vnherst,
And broke his sword in twain, and all his armor sperst.
The whiles his guilefull groom was fled away:
But vain it was to think from him to fly.
Who ouertaking him did disaray,
And all his face deformed with infamy,
And out of court him scourged openly.
So ought all faytours, that true knighthood shame,
And arms dishonor with base villainy,
From all brave knights be banished with defame:
For often their lewdnes blotteth good deserts with blame.
Now when these counterfeits were thus uncased
Out of the foreside of their forgerie,
And in the sight of all men clean disgraced,
All began to jest and gibe full merrily
At the remembrance of their knauerie.
Ladies can laugh at Ladies, Knights at Knights,
To think with how great vaunt of bravery
He them abused, through his subtle slights,
And what a glorious show he made in all their sights.
There leave we them in pleasure and repast,
Spending their joyous days and gladfull nights,
And taking usury of time forepast,
With all dear delices and rare delights,
Fit for such Ladies and such lovely knights:
And turn were here to this fair furrows end
Our weary yokes, to gather fresher sprights,
That when as time to Artegall shall tend,
We on his first adventure may him forward send.
Cant. IIII
Artegall deals right betwixt
two brethren that do strive,
Saues Terpine from the gallow tree,
and does from death reprine.
WHo so upon him self will take the skill
True Justice unto people to divide,
Had need have mighty hands, for to fulfill
That, which he does with righteous doom decide,
And for to master wrong and puissant pride.
For vain it is to deem of things aright,
And makes wrong doers justice to deride,
Unless it be performed with dreadlesse might.
For power is the right hand of Justice truly hight.
Therefore whylome to knights of great emprise
The charge of Justice given was in trust,
That they might execute her judgments wise,
And with their might beat down licentious lust,
Which proudly did impugn her sentence just.
Whereof no brauer president this day
Remains on earth, preserved from iron rust
Of rude oblivion, and long times decay,
Then this of Artegall, which here we have to say.
Who having lately left that lovely pair,
Enlincked fast in wedlockes loyal bond,
Bold Marinell with Florimell the fair,
With whom great feast and goodly glee he fond,
Departed from the Castle of the strond,
To follow his adventures first intent,
Which long ago he taken had in hond:
Ne wight with him for his assistance went,
But that great iron groom, his guard and government.
With whom as he did pass by the sea shore,
He chaunst to come, whereas two comely Squires,
Both brethren, whom one womb together bore,
But stirred up with different desires,
Together strove, and kindled wrathful fires:
And them beside two seemly damzels stood,
By all means seeking to assuage their ires,
Now with fair words; but words did little good,
Now with sharp threats; but threats the more increast their mood.
And there before them stood a Coffer strong,
Fast bound on every side with iron bands,
But seeming to have suffered mickle wrong,
Either by being wreckt upon the sands,
Or being carried far from foreign lands.
Seemed that for it these Squires at ods did fall,
And bent against them selves their cruel hands.
But evermore, those Damzels did forestall
Their furious encounter, and their fierceness pall.
But firmly fixed they were, with dint of sword,
And battles doubtful proof their rights to try,
Ne other end their fury would afford,
But what to them Fortune would justify.
So stood they both in readiness; thereby
To join the combat with cruel intent;
When Artegall arriving happily,
Did stay a while their greedy bickerment,
Till he had questioned the cause of their dissent.
To whom the elder did this answer frame;
Then weete ye Sir, that we two brethren be,
To whom oursire, Milesio by name,
Did equally bequeath his lands in fee,
Two Islands, which ye there before you see
Not far in sea; of which the one appears
But like a little Mount of small degree;
Yet was as great and wide ere many years,
As that same other Isle, that greater breadth now bears.
But tract of time, that all things does decay,
And this devouring Sea, that naught does spare,
The most part of my land has washed away,
And thrown it up unto my brothers share:
So his increased, but mine did empaire.
Before which time I loved, as was my lot,
That further maid, hight Philtera the fair,
With whom a goodly doure I should have got,
And should have joined been to her in wedlocks knot.
Then did my younger brother Amidas
Love that same other Damzell, Lucy bright,
To whom but little dowre allotted was;
Her virtue was the dowre, that did delight.
What better dowre can to a dame be hight?
But now when Philtra saw my lands decay,
And former liuelod fail, she left me quight,
And to my brother did ellope straight way:
Who taking her from me, his own love left astray.
She seeing then her self forsaken so,
Through dolorous despair, which she conceived,
Into the Sea her self did headlong throw,
Thinking to have her grief by death bereaved.
But see how much her purpose was deccaued.
Whilst thus amidst the billows beating of her
Twixt life and death, long to and fro she weaued,
She chaunst unawares to light upon this coffer,
Which to her in that danger hope of life did offer.
The wretched maid that erst desired to die,
When as the pain of death she tasted had,
And but half seen his ugly visnomie,
Began to repent, that she had been so mad,
For any death to change life though most bad:
And catching hold of this Sea-beaten chest,
The lucky Pylot of her passage sad,
After long tossing in the seas distressed,
Her weary bark at last upon mine Isle did rest.
Where I by chance then wandering on the shore,
Did her espy, and through my good endeavor
From dreadful mouth of death, which threatened sore
Her to have swallowed up, did help to save her.
She then in recompense of that great favor,
Which I on her bestowed, bestowed on me
The portion of that good, which Fortune gave her,
Together with her self in dowry free;
Both goodly portions, but of both the better she.
Yet in this coffer, which she with her brought,
Great threasure sithence we did find contained;
Which as our own we took, and so it thought.
But this same other Damzell since has fained,
That to her self that threasure appertained;
And that she did transport the same by sea,
To bring it to her husband new ordained,
But suffered cruel shipwreck by the way.
But whether it be so or no, I can not say.
But whether it indeed be so or no,
This do I say, that what so good or ill
Or God or Fortune unto me did throw,
Not wronging any other by my will,
I hold mine own, and so will hold it still.
And though my land he first did win away,
And then my love (though now it little skill,)
Yet my good luck he shall not likewise pray;
But I will it defend, whilst ever that I may.
So having said, the younger did ensew;
Full true it is, what so about our land
My brother here declared has to you:
But not for it this ods twixt us does stand,
But for this threasure thrown upon his strand;
Which well I prove, as shall appear by trial,
To be this maids, with whom I fastened hand,
Known by good marks, and perfect good espiall,
Therefore it ought be rendered her without denial.
When they thus ended had, the Knight began;
Certes your strife were easy to accord,
Would ye remit it to some righteous man.
Unto your self, said they, we give our word,
To bide what judgment ye shall us afford.
Then for assurance to my doom to stand,
Under my foot let each lay down his sword,
And then you shall my sentence understand.
So each of them laid down his sword out of his hand.
Then Artegall thus to the younger said;
Now tell me Amidas, if that ye may,
Your brothers land the which the sea has laid
Unto your part, and plucked from his away,
By what good right do you withhold this day?
What other right (quoth he) should you esteem,
But that the sea it to my share did lay?
Your right is good (said he) and so I deem,
That what the sea unto you sent, your own should seem.
Then turning to the elder thus he said;
Now Bracidas let this likewise be shown.
Your brothers threasure, which from him is strayd,
Being the dowry of his wife well known,
By what right do you claim to beyour own?
What other right (quoth he) should you esteem,
But that the sea has it unto me thrown?
Your right is good (said he) and so I deem,
That what the sea unto you sent, your own should seem.
For equal right in equal things does stand,
For what the mighty Sea has once possessed,
And plucked quite from all possessors hand,
Whether by rage of waves, that never rest,
Or else by wrack, that wretches has distressed,
He may dispose by his imperial might,
As thing at randon left, to whom he list.
So Amidas, the land was yours first hight,
And so the threasure yours is Bracidas by right.
When he his sentence thus pronounced had,
Both Amidas and Philtra were displeased:
But Bracidas and Lucy were right glad,
And on the threasure by that judgment seized.
So was their discord by this doom appeased,
And each one had his right. Then Artegall
When as their sharp contention he had ceased,
Departed on his way, as did befall,
To follow his old quest, the which him forth did call.
So as he traveled upon the way,
He chaunst to come, where happily he spide
A rout of many people far away;
To whom his course he hastily applide,
To weete the cause of their assemblaunce wide.
To whom when he approached near in sight,
(An uncouth sight) he plainly then descride
To be a troop of women warlike dight,
With weapons in their hands, as ready for to fight.
And in the midst of them he saw a Knight,
With both his hands behind him pinnoed hard,
And round about his neck an halter tight,
As ready for the gallow tree prepared:
His face was covered, and his head was barred,
That who he was, uneath was to descry;
And with full heavy heart with them he fared,
Grieved to the soul, and groaning inwardly,
That he of women's hands so base a death should die.
But they like tyrants, merciless the more,
Rejoiced at his miserable case,
And him reviled, and reproched sore
With bitter taunts, and terms of vile disgrace.
Now when as Artegall arrived in place,
Did ask, what cause brought that man to decay,
They round about him began to swarm apace,
Meaning on him their cruel hands to lay,
And to have wrought unawares some villainous assay.
But he was soon aware of their ill mind,
And drawing back deceived their intent;
Yet though him self did shame on womankinde
His mighty hand to shend, he Talus sent
To wrecke on them their follies hardyment:
Who with few sowces of his iron flale,
Dispersed all their troop incontinent,
And sent them home to tell a piteous tale,
Of their vain prowess, turned to their proper bale.
But that same wretched man, ordaynd to die,
They left behind them, glad to be so quit:
Him Talus took out of perplexity,
And horror of foul death for Knight unfit,
Who more then loss of life ydreaded it;
And him restoring unto living light,
So brought unto his Lord, where he did sit,
Beholding all that womanish weak fight;
Whom soon as he beheld, he knew, and thus behight.
Sir Turpine, hapless man, what make you here?
Or have you lost your self, and your discretion,
That ever in this wretched case ye were?
Or have ye yielded you to proud oppression
Of women's power, that boast of men's subjection?
Or else what other deadly dismal day
Is fallen on you, by heavens hard direction,
That ye were run so fondly far astray,
As for to lead your self unto your own decay?
Much was the man confounded in his mind,
Partly with shame, and partly with dismay,
That all astonished he him self did find,
And little had for his excuse to say,
But only thus; Most hapless well ye may
Me justly term, that to this shame am brought,
And made the scorn of Knighthod this same day.
But who can escape, what his own fate has wrought?
The work of heavens will surpasses human thought.
Right true: but faulty men use oftentimes
To attribute their folly unto fate,
And lay on heaven the guilt of their own crimes.
But tell, Sir Terpin, ne let you amate
Your misery, how fell ye in this state.
Then since ye needs (quoth he) will know my shame,
And all the ill, which chaunst to me of late,
I shortly will to you rehearse the same,
In hope ye will not turn misfortune to my blame.
Being desirous (as all Knights are wont)
Through hard adventures deeds of arms to try,
And after fame and honor for to hunt,
I heard report that far abroad did fly,
That a proud Amazon did late defy
All the brave Knights, that hold of Maidenhead,
And unto them wrought all the villainy,
That she could forge in her malicious head,
Which some has put to shame, and many done be dead.
The cause, they say, of this her cruel hate,
Is for the sake of Bellodant the bold,
To whom she bore most fervent love of late,
And wooed him by all the ways she could:
But when she saw at last, that he ne would
For ought or naught be won unto her will,
She turned her love to hatred manifold,
And for his sake vowed to do all the ill
Which she could do to Knights, which now she does fulfill.
For all those Knights, the which by force or guile
She does subdue, she fowly does entreat.
First she does them of warlike arms despoile,
And cloth in women's weeds: And then with threat
Does them compel to work, to earne their meat,
To spin, to card, to sew, to wash, to wring;
Ne does she give them other thing to eat,
But bread and water, or like feeble thing,
Them to disable from revenge aduenturing.
But if through stout disdain of manly mind,
Any her proud obseruaunce will withstand,
Upon that gibbet, which is there behind,
She causes them be hanged up out of hand;
In which condition I right now did stand.
For being overcome by her in fight,
And put to that base service of her band,
I rather chose to die in lines despite,
Then lead that shameful life, unworthy of a Knight.
How hight that Amazon (said Artegall?)
And where, and how far hence does she abide?
Her name (quoth he) they Radigund do call,
A Princess of great power, and greater pride,
And Queen of Amazons, in arms well tried,
And sundry battles, which she has achieved
With great success, that her has glorifide,
And made her famous, more then is believed;
Ne would I it have ween'd, had I not late it prieued.
Now sure (said he) and by the faith that I
To Maydenhead and noble knighthood owe,
I will not rest, till I her might do try,
And venge the shame, that she to Knights does show.
Therefore Sir Terpin from you lightly throw
This squalid weed, the pattern of despair;
And wend with me, that ye may see and know,
How Fortune will your ruined name repair,
And knights of Maidenhead, whose praise she would empaire.
With that, like one that hopeless was repry'ud
From deaths door, at which he lately lay,
Those iron fetters, wherewith he was gyu'd,
The badges ofreproch, he threw away,
And nimbly did him dight to guide the way
Unto the dwelling of that Amazone.
Which was from thence not past a mile or tway:
A goodly city and a mighty one,
The which of her own name she called Radegone.
Where they arriving, by the watchmen were
Descried straight, who all the city warned,
How that three warlike persons did appear,
Of which the one him seemed a Knight all armed,
And the other two well likely to have harmed.
Estsoones the people all to harness ran,
And like a sort of Bees in clusters swarmed:
Ere long their Queen her self half, like a man
Came forth into the rout, and them t'array began.
And now the Knights being arrived near,
Did beat upon the gates to enter in,
And at the Porter, skorning them so few,
Threw many threats, if they the town did win,
To tear his flesh in pieces for his sin.
Which when as Radigund there coming heard,
Her heart for rage did grate, and teeth did grin:
She bad that straight the gates should be vnbard,
And to them way to make, with weapons well prepared.
Soon as the gates were open to them set,
They pressed forward, entrance to have made.
But in the middle way they were ymet
With a sharp shower of arrows, which them staid,
And better bad advise, ere they assaid
Unknown peril of bold women's pride.
Then all that rout upon them rudely laid,
And heaped strokes so fast on every side,
And arrows haild so thick, that they could not abide.
But Radigund her self, when she espide
Sir Terpin, from her direful doom acquit,
So cruel doile amongst her maids dauide,
T'auenge that shame, they did on him commit,
All suddenly enflamed with furious fit,
Like a fell Lioness at him she flew,
And on his head-peece him so fiercely smit,
That to the ground him quite she overthrew,
Dismayed so with the stroke, that he no colors knew.
Soon as she saw him on the ground to grouell,
She lightly to him leapt, and in his neck
Her proud foot setting, at his head did level,
Weening at once her wrath on him to wreake,
And his contempt, that did her iudg'ment break.
As when a Bear has seized her cruel claws
Upon the carcass of some beast too weak,
Proudly stands over, and a while does pause,
To hear the piteous beast pleading her plaintiff cause.
Whom when as Artegall in that distress
By chance beheld, he left the bloody slaughter,
In which he swam, and ran to his redress.
There her assayling fiercely fresh, he raught her
Such an huge stroke, that it of sense distraught her:
And had she not it warded warily,
It had deprived her mother of a daughter.
Nathlesse for all the power she did apply,
It made her stagger often, and stare with ghastly eye.
Like to an Eagle in his kingly pride,
Soring through his wide Empire of the air,
To weather his broad sails, by chance has spide
A Goshauke, which has seized for her share
Upon some foul, that should her feast prepare;
With dreadful force he flies at her byliue,
That with his souce, which none enduren dare,
Her from the quarrey he away does drive,
And from her griping pounce the greedy prey does riue.
But soon as she her sense recouer'd had,
She fiercely toward him her self began dight,
Through vengeful wrath and sdeignfull pride half mad:
For never had she suffered such despite.
But ere she could join hand with him to fight,
Her warlike maids about her flockt so fast,
That they disparted them, maugre their might,
And with their troops did far a sunder cast:
But among the rest the fight did until evening last.
And every while that mighty iron man,
With his strange weapon, never wont in war,
Them sorely vexed, and courst, and ouerran,
And broke their bows, and did their shooting mar,
That none of all the many once did darre
Him to assault, nor once approach him nie,
But like a sort of sheep dispersed far
For dread of their devouring enemy,
Through all the fields and valleys did before him fly.
But when as days fair shinie-beame, yclowded
With fearful shadows of deformed night,
Warned man and beast in quiet rest be shrouded,
Bold Radigund with sound of trumpe on hight,
Causd all her people to surcease from fight,
And gathering them unto her cities gate,
Made them all enter in before her sight,
And all the wounded, and the weak in state,
To be conuayed in, ere she would once retrate.
When thus the field was voided all away,
And all things quieted, the Elfin Knight
Weary of toil and travel of that day,
Causd his pauilion to be richly pight
Before the city gate, in open sight;
Where he him self did rest in safety,
Together with sir Terpin all that night:
But Talus used in times of ieopardy
To keep a nightly watch, for dread of treachery.
But Radigund full of heart-gnawing grief,
For the rebuke, which she sustained that day,
Could take no rest, ne would receive relief,
But tossed in her troublous mind, what way
She mote revenge that blot, which on her lay.
There she resolved her self in single fight
To try her Fortune, and his force assay,
Rather then see her people spoiled quight,
As she had seen that day a disauenterous sight.
She called forth to her a trusty maid,
Whom she thought fittest for that business,
Her name was Clarin, and thus to her said;
Go damzell quickly, do thy self address,
To do the message, which I shall express.
Go thou unto that stranger Faery Knight,
Who yeester day drove us to such distress,
Tell, that to morrow I with him will fight,
And try in equal field, whether has greater might.
But these conditions do to him propound,
That if I vanquishe him, he shall obey
My law, and ever to my lore be bound,
And so will I, if me he vanquish may;
What ever he shall like to do or say.
Go straight, and take with thee, to witness it,
Six of thy fellows of the best array,
And bear with you both wine and iuncates fit,
And bid him eat, henceforth he often shall hungry sit.
The Damzell straight obayd, and putting all
In readiness, forth to the Towne-gate went,
Where sounding loud a Trumpet from the wall,
Unto those warlike Knights she warning sent.
Then Talus forth issuing from the tent,
Unto the wall his way did fearelesse take,
To weeten what that trumpets sounding meant:
Where that same Damzell lowdly him bespake,
And showed, that with his Lord she would emparlaunce make.
So he them straight conducted to his Lord,
Who, as he could, them goodly well did greet,
Till they had told their message word by word:
Which he accepting well, as he could weete,
Them fairly entertaynd with curt'sies meet,
And gave them gifts and things of dear delight.
So back again they homeward turned their feet.
But Artegall him self to rest did dight,
That he mote fresher be against the next days fight.
Cant. V.
Artegall fights with Radigund
And is subdewd by guile:
He is by her emprisoned,
But wrought by Clarins wile.
SO soon as day forth dawning from the East,
Nights humid curtain from the heavens withdrew,
And early calling forth both man and beast,
Commanded them their daily works renew,
These noble warriors, mindful to pursew
The last days purpose of their vowed fight,
Them selves thereto preparde in order dew;
The Knight, as best was seeming for a Knight,
And th'Amazon, as best it likt her self to dight.
All in a Camis light of purple silk
Wouen upon with silver, subtly wrought,
And quilted upon satin white as milk,
Trayled with ribbands diversely distraught
Like as the workman had their courses taught;
Which was short tucked for light motion
Up to her ham, but when she list, it raught
Down to her lowest heel, and thereuppon
She wore for her defense a mayled habergeon.
And on her legs she painted buskins wore,
Basted with bends of gold on every side,
And mailes between, and laced close before:
Upon her thigh her Cemitare was tide,
With an embrodered belt of mickell pride;
And on her shoulder hung her shield, bedeckt
Upon the bosse with stones, that shined wide,
As the fair Moon in her most full aspect,
That to the Moon it mote be like in each respect.
So forth she came out of the city gate,
With stately port and proud magnificence,
Guarded with many damzels, that did wait
Upon her person for her sure defense,
Playing on shaumes and trumpets, that from hence
Their sound did reach unto the heavens hight.
So forth into the field she marched thence,
Where was a rich Pauilion ready pight,
Her to receive, till time they should begin the fight.
Then forth came Artegall out of his tent,
All armed to point, and first the Lists did enter:
Soon after eke came she, with fell intent,
And countenance fierce, as having fully bent her,
That battles utmost trial to aduenter.
The Lists were closed fast, to bar the rout
From rudely pressing to the middle center;
Which in great heaps them circled all about,
Waiting, how Fortune would resolve that dangerous dout.
The Trumpets sounded, and the field began;
With bitter strokes it both began, and ended.
She at the first encounter on him ran
With furious rage, as if she had intended
Out of his breast the very heart have rended:
But he that had like tempests often tried,
From that first flaw him self right well defended.
The more she raged, the more he did abide;
She hewd, she foynd, she lasht, she laid on every side.
Yet still her blows he bore, and her forbore,
Weening at last to win advantage new;
Yet still her cruelty increased more,
And though power faild, her courage did accrue,
Which failing he began fiercely her pursew.
Like as a Smith that to his cunning feat
The stubborn metal seeks to subdew,
Soon as he feels it mollifide with heat,
With his great iron sledge does strongly on it beat.
So did Sir Artegall upon her lay,
As if she had an iron anduile been,
That flakes of fire, bright as the sunny ray,
Out of her steely arms were flashing seen,
That all on fire ye would her surely ween.
But with her shield so well her self she warded,
From the dread danger of his weapon keen,
That all that while her life she safely guarded:
But he that help from her against her will discarded.
For with his trenchant blade at the next blow
Half of her shield he shared quite away,
That half her side it self did naked show,
And thenceforth unto danger opened way.
Much was she moved with the mighty sway
Of that sad stroke, that half enraged she grew,
And like a greedy Bear unto her pray,
With her sharp Cemitare at him she flew,
That glauncing down his thigh, the purple blood forth drew.
Thereat she began to triumph with great boast,
And to upbraid that chance, which him misfell,
As if the prize she gotten had almost,
With spightfull speeches, fitting with her well;
That his great heart began inwardly to swell
With indignation, at her vaunting vain,
And at her struck with puissance fearful fell;
Yet with her shield she warded it again,
That shattered all to pieces round about the plain.
Having her thus disarmed of her shield,
Upon her helmet he again her struck,
That down she fell upon the grassie field,
In senseless swoune, as if her life forsook,
And pangs of death her spirit ouertooke.
Whom when he saw before his foot prostrated,
He to her lept with deadly dreadful look,
And her sunshynie helmet soon unlaced,
Thinking at once both head and helmet to have raced.
But when as he discovered had her face,
He saw his senses strange astonishment,
A miracle of natures goodly grace,
In her fair visage void of ornament,
But bathed in blood and sweat together meant;
Which in the rudeness of that evil plight,
Bewrayd the signs of feature excellent:
Like as the Moon in foggie winters night,
Does seem to be her self, though darkened be her light.
At sight thereof his cruel minded heart
Empierced was with pitiful regard,
That his sharp sword he threw from him apart,
Cursing his hand that had that visage mard:
No hand so cruel, nor no heart so hard,
But ruth of beauty will it mollify.
By this vpstarting from her swoune, she star'd
A while about her with confused eye;
Like one that from his dream is waked suddenlye.
Soon as the knight she there by her did spy,
Standing with empty hands all weaponlesse,
With fresh assault upon him she did fly,
And began renew her former cruelnesse:
And though he still retyt'd, yet nathelesse
With huge redoubled strokes she on him laid;
And more increast her outrage merciless,
The more that he with meek entreaty prayed,
Her wrathful hand from greedy vengeance to have stayed.
Like as a Puttocke having spyde in sight
A gentle Faulcon sitting on an hill,
Whose other wing, now made unmeet for flight,
Was lately broken by some fortune ill;
The foolish Kyte, led with licentious will,
Does beat upon the gentle bird in vain,
With many idle stoups her troubling still:
Even so did Radigund with bootlesse pain
Annoy this noble Knight, and sorely him constrain.
Naught could he do, but shun the dred despite
Of her fierce wrath, and backward still retire,
And with his single shield, well as he might,
Bear off the burden of her raging ire;
And evermore he gently did desire,
To stay her stroks, and he himself would yield:
Yet nould she hark, ne let him once respyre,
Till he to her delivered had his shield,
And to her mercy him submitted in plain field.
So was he overcome, not overcome,
But to her yielded of his own accord;
Yet was he justly damned by the doom
Of his own mouth, that spoke so warelesse word,
To be her thrall, and service her afford.
For though that he first victory obtained,
Yet after by abandoning his sword,
He wilful lost, that he before attained.
No fayrer conquest, then that with goodwill is gained.
Tho with her sword on him she flatling struck,
In sign of true subjection to her power,
And as her vassal him to thraldom took.
But Terpine borne to'a more unhappy hour,
As he, on whom the lucklesse stars did lowre,
She causd to be attacht, and forthwith led
Unto the crook to abide the balefull stowre,
From which he lately had through reskew fled:
Where he full shamefully was hanged by the head.
But when they thought on Talus hands to lay,
He with his iron flaile amongst them thondred,
That they were feign to let him escape away,
Glad from his company to be so sondred;
Whose presence all their troops so much encombred
That th'heapes of those, which he did wound and slay,
Besides the rest dismayed, might not be nombred:
Yet all that while he would not once assay,
To reskew his own Lord, but thought it just t'obay.
Then took the Amazon this noble knight,
Left to her will by his own wilful blame,
And caused him to be disarmed quight,
Of all the ornaments of knightly name,
With which whylome he gotten had great fame:
In stead whereof she made him to be dight
In woman's weeds, that is to manhood shame,
And put before his lap a napron white,
In stead of Curiets and bases fit for fight.
So being clad, she brought him from the field,
In which he had been trained many a day,
Into a long large chamber, which was sield
With moniments of many knights decay,
By her subdewed in victorious fray:
Amongst the which she causd his warlike arms
Be hanged on high, that mote his shame bewray;
And broke his sword, or fear of further harms,
With which he wont to stir up battailous alarmes.
There entered in, he round about him saw
Many brave knights, whose names right well he knew,
There bound t'obay that Amazons proud law,
Spinning and carding all in comely rue,
That his big heart loathed so uncomely view.
But they were forced through penury and pyne,
To do those works, to them appointed dew:
For naught was given them to sup or dyne,
But what their hands could earne by twisting linen twyne.
Amongst them all she placed him most low,
And in his hand a distaffe to him gave,
That he thereon should spin both flax and tow;
A sordid office for a mind so brave.
So hard it is to be a woman's slave.
Yet he it took in his own selfs despite,
And thereto did himself right well behave,
Her to obey, since he his faith had plight,
Her vassal to become, if she him won in fight.
Who had him seen, imagine mote thereby,
That whylome has of Hercules been told,
How for Iolas sake he did apply
His mighty hands, the distaffe vile to hold,
For his huge club, which had subdew'd of old
So many monsters, which the world annoyed;
His Lions skin chaungd to a pall of gold,
In which forgetting wars, he only ioyed
In combats of sweet love, and with his mistress toyed.
Such is the cruelty of women kind,
When they have shaken off the shamefast band,
With which wise Nature did them strongly bynd,
Tobay the heasts of man's well ruling hand,
That then all rule and reason they withstand,
To purchase a licentious liberty.
But virtuous women wisely understand,
That they were borne to base humility,
Unless the heavens them lift to lawful soueraintie.
Thus there long while continued Artegall,
Serving proud Radigund with true subjection;
How ever it his noble heart did gall,
Tobay a woman's tyrannous direction,
That might have had of life or death election:
But having chosen, now he might not change.
During which time, the warlike Amazon,
Whose wandering fancy after lust did raunge,
Began cast a secret liking to this captive strange.
Which long concealing in her covert breast,
She chaw'd the cud of lovers careful plight;
Yet could it not so thoroughly digest,
Being fast fixed in her wounded spright,
But it tormented her both day and night:
Yet would she not thereto yield free accord,
To serve the lowly vassal of her might,
And of her servant make her sovereign Lord:
So great her pride, that she such baseness much abhord.
So much the greater still her anguish grew,
Through stubborn handling of her loue-sicke heart;
And still the more she strove it to subdew,
The more she still augmented her own smart,
And wyder made the wound of th'hidden dart.
At last when long she struggled had in vain,
She began to stoop, and her proud mind convert
To meek obeisance of loves mighty rain,
And him entreat for grace, that had procured her pain.
Unto her self in secret she did call
Her nearest handmayd, whom she most did trust,
And to her said; Clarinda whom of all
I trust a live, since I thee fostred first;
Now is the time, that I untimely must
Thereof make trial, in my greatest need:
It is so happened, that the heavens unjust,
Spighting my happy freedom, have agreed,
To thrall my looser life, or my last bale to breed.
With that she turned her head, as half abashed,
To hide the blush which in her visage rose,
And through her eyes like sudden lightning flashed,
Decking her cheek with a vermilion rose:
But soon she did her countenance compose,
And to her turning, thus began again;
This griefs deep wound I would to thee disclose,
Thereto compelled through hart-murdring pain,
But dread of shame my doubtful lips does still restrain.
Ah my dear dread (said then the faithful Maid)
Can dread of ought your dreadlesse heart withhold,
That many has with dread of death dismayed,
And dare even deaths most dreadful face behold?
Say on my sovereign Lady, and be bold;
Does not your handmayds life at your foot lie?
Therewith much comforted, she began unfold
The cause of her conceived malady,
As one that would confess, yet feign would it deny.
Clarin (said she) thou see yond Fayry Knight,
Whom not my valor, but his own brave mind
Subjected has to my unequal might;
What right is it, that he should thraldom find,
For lending life to me a wretch unkind;
That for such good him recompense with ill?
Therefore I cast, how I may him unbind,
And by his freedom get his free goodwill;
Yet so, as bound to me he may continue still.
Bound unto me, but not with such hard bands
Of strong compulsion, and straight violence,
As now in miserable state he stands;
But with sweet love and sure benevolence,
Void of malicious mind, or foul offense.
To which if thou can win him any way,
Without discovery of my thoughts pretense,
Both goodly meede of him it purchase may,
And eke with grateful service me right well apay.
Which that thou may the better bring to pas,
Lo here this ring, which shall thy warrant be,
And token true to old Eumenias,
From time to time, when thou it best shall see,
That in and out thou may have passage free.
Go now, Clarinda, well thy wits advise,
And all thy forces gather unto thee;
Armies of lovely looks, and speeches wise,
With which thou can even Jove himself to love entise.
The trusty Maid, conceiving her intent,
Did with sure promise of her good endeavor,
Give her great comfort, and some hearts content.
So from her parting, she thenceforth did labor
By all the means she might, to curry favor
With th'Elfin Knight, her Ladies best beloved;
With daily show of courteous kind behavior,
Even at the markewhite of his heart she roued,
And with wide glauncing words, one day she thus him proved.
Unhappy Knight, upon whose hopeless state
Fortune envying good, has felly frowned,
And cruel heavens have heapt an heavy fate;
I rue that thus thy better days are drowned
In sad despair, and all thy senses swowned
In stupid sorrow, since thy iuster merit
Might else have with felicity been crowned:
Look up at last, and wake thy dulled spirit,
To think how this long death thou might disinherit.
Much did he marvel at her uncouth speech,
Whose hidden drift he could not well perceive;
And began to doubt, least she him sought t'appeach
Of treason, or some guilefull train did weaue,
Through which she might his wretched life bereave.
Both which to bar, he with this answer met her;
Fair Damzell, that with ruth (as I perceive)
Of my mishaps, art moved to wish me better,
For such your kind regard, I can but rest your detter.
Yet weet ye well, that to a courage great
It is no less beseeming well, to bear
The storm of fortunes frown, or heavens threat,
Then in the sunshine of her countenance clear
Timely to joy, and carry comely cheer.
For though this cloud have now me ouercast,
Yet do I not of better times despeyre;
And, though unlike, they should for ever last,
Yet in my truths assurance I rest fixed fast.
But what so stony mind (she then replyde)
But if in his own power occasion lay,
Would to his hope a window open wide,
And to his fortunes help make ready way?
Unworthy sure (quoth he) of better day,
That will not take the offer of good hope,
And eke pursew, if he attain it may.
Which speeches she applying to the scope
Of her intent, this further purpose to him shope.
Then why do not, thou ill aduized man,
Make means to win thy liberty forlorn,
And try if thou by fair entreatie, can
Move Radigund? who though she still have worn
Her days in war, yet (weet thou) was not borne
Of Bears and Tygres, nor so saluage minded,
As that, albe all love of men she scorn,
She yet forgets, that she of men was kynded:
And sooth often seen, that proudest hearts base love has blinded.
Certes Clarinda, not of cancred will,
(Said he) nor obstinate disdainefull mind,
I have forbore this duty to fulfill:
For well I may this ween, by that I find,
That she a Queen, and come of Princely kind,
Both worthy is for to be sewd unto,
Chiefly by him, whose life her law does bynd,
And eke of power her own doom to undo,
And als of princely grace to be inclyn'd thereto.
But want of means has been mine only let,
From seeking favor, where it does abound;
Which if I might by your good office get,
I to your self should rest for ever bound,
And ready to deserve, what grace I found.
She feeling him thus bite upon the bayt,
Yet doubting least his hold was but unsound,
And not well fastened, would not strike him strayt,
But drew him on with hope, fit leisure to awayt.
But foolish Maid, whiles heedlesse of the hook,
She thus often times was beating off and on,
Through slipperie footing, fell into the brook,
And there was caught to her confusion.
For seeking thus to salve the Amazon,
She wounded was with her deceipts own dart,
And began thenceforth to cast affection,
Conceived close in her beguiled heart,
To Artegall, through pity of his causeless smart.
Yet durst she nop disclose her fancies wound,
Ne to himself, for doubt of being sdayned,
Ne yet to any other wight on ground,
For fear her mistress should have knowledge gained,
But to her self it secretly retained,
Within the closet of her covert breast:
The more thereby her tender heart was payned.
Yet to awayt fit time she weened best,
And fairly did dissemble her sad thoughts unrest.
One day her Lady, calling her apart,
Can to demand of her some tidings good,
Touching her loves success, her lingering smart.
Therewith she began at first to change her mood,
As one adaw'd, and half confused stood;
But quickly she it ouerpast, so soon
As she her face had wypt, to fresh her blood:
Tho began she tell her all, that she had done,
And all the ways she sought, his love for to have won.
But said, that he was obstinate and stern,
Scorning her offers and conditions vain;
Ne would be taught withany terms, to learn
So fond a lesson, as to love again.
Die rather would he in penurious pain,
And his abridged days in dolor wast,
Then his foes love or liking entertain:
His resolution was both first and last,
His body was her thrall, his heart was freely plast.
Which when the cruel Amazon perceived,
She began to storm, and rage, and rend her gall,
For very fell despite, which she conceived,
To be so scorned of a base borne thrall,
Whose life did lie in her least eyelids fall;
Of which she vowed with many a cursed threat,
That she therefore would him ere long forstall.
Nathlesse when calmed was her furious heat,
She changed that threatfull mood, and mildly began entreat.
What now is left Clarinda? what remains,
That we may compass this our enterprise?
Great shame to lose so long employed pains,
And greater shame to abide so great misprize,
With which he dares our offers thus despize.
Yet that his guilt the greater may appear,
And more my gracious mercy by this wize,
I will a while with his first folly bear,
Till thou have tried again, and tempted him more near.
Say, and do all, that may thereto prevail;
Leave naught vnpromist, that may him persuade,
Life, freedom, grace, and gifts of great avail,
With which the Gods themselves are mylder made:
Thereto add art, even women's witty trade,
The art of mighty words, that men can charm;
With which in case thou can him not invade,
Let him feel hardness of thy heavy arm:
Who will not stoop with good, shall be made stoop with harm.
Some of his diet do from him withdraw;
For I him find to be too proudly fed.
Give him more labor, and with streighter law,
That he with work may be forwearied.
Let him lodge hard, and lie in strawen bed,
That may pull down the courage of his pride;
And lay upon him, for his greater dread,
Cold iron chains, with which let him be tide;
And let, what ever he desires, be him denide.
When thou have all this done, then bring me news
Of his demean: thenceforth notlike a lover,
But like a rebel stout I will him use.
For I resolve this siege not to give over,
Till I the conquest of my will recover.
So she departed, full of grief and sdaine,
Which inly did to great impatience move her.
But the false maiden shortly turned again
Unto the prison, where her heart did thrall remain.
There all her subtle nets she did unfold,
And all the engines of her wit display;
In which she meant him warelesse to enfold,
And of his innocence to make her pray.
So cunnningly she wrought her crafts assay,
That both her Lady, and her self withal,
And eke the knight attonce she did betray:
But most the knight, whom she with guilefull call
Did cast for to allure, into her trap to fall.
As a bad Nurse, which fayning to receive
In her own mouth the food, meant for her child,
Withholdes it to her self, and does deceive
The infant, so for want of nourture spoyld:
Even so Clarinda her own Dame beguyld,
And turned the trust, which was in her affyde,
To feeding of her private fire, which boyld
Her inward breast, and in her entrayles fryde,
The more that she it sought to cover and to hyde.
For coming to this knight, she purpose feigned,
How earnest suit she erst for him had made
Unto her Queen, his freedom to have gained;
But by no means could her thereto persuade:
But that in stead thereof, she sternely bade
His misery to be augmented more,
And many iron bands on him to lade.
All which nathlesse she for his love forbore:
So praying him t'accept her service evermore.
And more then that, she promised that she would,
In case she might find favor in his eye,
Deuize how to enlarge him out of hold.
The Fayrie glad to gain his liberty,
Can yield great thanks for such her courtesy,
And with fair words, fit for the time and place,
To feed the humor of her malady;
Promised, if she would free him from that case,
He would by all good means he might, deserve such grace.
So daily he fair semblant did her show,
Yet never meant he in his noble mind,
To his own absent love to be untrue:
Ne ever did deceiptfull Clarin find
In her false heart, his bondage to unbind;
But rather how she mote him faster tie.
Therefore unto her mistress most unkind
She daily told, her love he did defye,
And him she told, her Dame his freedom did deny.
Yet thus much friendship she to him did show,
That his scarce diet somewhat was amended,
And his work lessened, that his love mote grow:
Yet to her Dame him still she discommended,
That she with him mote be the more offended.
Thus he long while in thraldom there remained,
Of both beloved well, but little frended;
Until his own true love his freedom gained,
Which in an other Canto will be best contained.
Cant. VI.
Talus brings news to Britomart,
of Artegals mishap,
She goes to seek him, Dolon meets,
who seeks her to entrap.
SOme men, I wot, will deem in Artegall
Great weakness, and report of him much ill,
For yielding so himself a wretched thrall,
To th'insolent command of women's will;
That all his former praise does fowly spill.
But he the man, that say or do so dare,
Be well aduiz'd, that he stand steadfast still:
For never yet was wight so well aware,
But he at first or last was trapt in women's snare.
Yet in the straightness of that captive state,
This gentle knight himself so well behaved,
That notwithstanding all the subtle bait,
With which those Amazons his love still craved,
To his own love his loialtie he saved:
Whose character in th'Adamantine mould
Of his true heart so firmly was engraued,
That no new loves impression ever could
Bereave it thence: such blot his honor blemish should.
Yet his own love, the noble Britomart,
Scarce so conceived in her jealous thought,
What time sad tidings of his balefull smart
In woman's bondage, Talus to her brought;
Brought in untimely hour, ere it was sought.
For after that the utmost date, assynde
For his return, she waited had for naught,
She began to cast in her misdoubtfull mind
A thousand fears, that loue-sicke fancies feign to find.
Sometime she feared, least some hard mishap
Had him misfalne in his aduenturous quest;
Sometime least his false foe did him entrap
In traytrous train, or had unawares oppressed:
But most she did her troubled mind molest,
And secretly afflict with jealous fear,
Least some new love had him from her possessed;
Yet loath she was, since she no ill did hear,
To think of him so ill: yet could she not forbear.
One while she blamed her self; another while
She him condemned, as trustlesse and untrue:
And then, her grief with error to beguyle,
She fayn'd to count the time again anew,
As if before she had not counted true.
For hours but days; for weeks, that passed were,
She told but months, to make them seem more few:
Yet when she reckned them, still drawing near,
Each hour did seem a month, and every month a year.
But when as yet she saw him not return,
She thought to send some one to seek him out;
But none she found so fit to serve that turn,
As her own self, to ease her self of dout.
Now she deuiz'd amongst the warlike rout
Of errant Knights, to seek her errant Knight;
And then again resolved to hunt him out
Amongst loose Ladies, lapped in delight:
And then both Knights enuide, and Ladies eke did spite.
One day, when as she long had sought for ease
In every place, and every place thought best,
Yet found no place, that could her liking please,
She to a window came, that opened West,
Toward which coast her love his way addressed.
There looking forth, she in her heart did find
Many vain fancies, working her unrest;
And sent her winged thoughts, more swift then wind,
To bear unto her love the message of her mind.
There as she looked long, at last she spide
One coming toward her with hasty speed:
Well weend she then, ere him she plain descride,
That it was one sent from her love indeed.
Who when he nigh approcht, she mote arede
That it was Talus, Artegall his groom;
Whereat her heart was filled with hope and dread;
Ne would she stay, till he in place could come,
But ran to meet him forth, to know his tidings sum.
Even in the door him meeting, she begun;
And where is he thy Lord, and how far hence?
Declare at once; and has he lost or wun?
The iron man, albe he wanted sense
And sorrows feeling, yet with conscience
Of his ill news, did inly chill and quake,
And stood still mute, as one in great suspense,
As if that by his silence he would make
Her rather read his meaning, then him self it spoke.
Till she again thus said; Talus be bold,
And tell what ever it be, good or bad,
That from thy tongue thy hearts intent does hold.
To whom he thus at length. The tidings sad,
That I would hide, will needs, I see, be rad.
My Lord, your love, by hard mishap does lie
In wretched bondage, woefully bestad.
Ay me (quoth she) what wicked destiny?
And is he vanquished by his tyrant enemy?
Not by that Tyrant, his intended foe;
But by a Tyranness (he then replide,)
That him captiued has in hapless woe.
Cease thou bad newes-man, badly do thou hide
Thy masters shame, in harlots bondage tide.
The rest my self too readily can spell.
With that in rage she turned from him aside,
Forcing in vain the rest to her to tell,
And to her chamber went like solitary cell.
There she began to make her monefull plaint
Against her Knight, for being so untrue;
And him to touch with falsehoods foul attaint,
That all his other honor overthrew.
Often did she blame her self, and often rue,
For yielding to a strangers love so light,
Whose life and manners strange she never knew;
And evermore she did him sharply twight
For breach of faith to her, which he had firmly plight.
And then she in her wrathful will did cast,
How to revenge that blot of honor blent;
To fight with him, and goodly die her last:
And then again she did her self torment,
Inflicting on her self his punishment.
A while she walked, and chauft; a while she threw
Her self upon her bed, and did lament:
Yet did she not lament with loud alew,
As women wont, but with deep sighs, and singulfs few.
Like as a wayward child, whose sounder sleep
Is broken with some fearful dreams affright,
With froward will does set him self to weep;
Ne can be stild for all his nurses might,
But kicks, and squals, and shriekes for fell despite:
Now scratching her, and her loose locks misusing;
Now seeking darkness, and now seeking light;
Then craving suck, and then the suck refusing.
Such was this Ladies fit, in her loves fond accusing.
But when she had with such unquiet fits
Her self there close afflicted long in vain,
Yet found no easement in her troubled wits,
She unto Talus forth returned again,
By change of place seeking to ease her pain;
And began enquire of him, with mylder mood,
The certain cause of Artegals detain;
And what he did, and in what state he stood,
And whether he did woo, or whether he were wooed.
Ah wellaway (said then the iron man,)
That he is not the while in state to woo;
But lies in wretched thraldom, weak and wan,
Not by strong hand compelled thereunto,
But his own doom, that none can now undo.
Said I not then (quoth she) erwhile aright,
That this is things compacte betwixt you two,
Me to deceive of faith unto me plight,
Since that he was not forced, nor overcome in fight?
With that he began at large to her dilate
The whole discourse of his captiuance sad,
In sort as ye have heard the same of late.
All which when she with hard enduraunce had
Here to the end, she was right sore bestad,
With sudden stounds of wrath and grief atone:
Ne would abide, till she had answer made,
But straight her self did dight, and armor don;
And mounting to her steed, bad Talus guide heron.
So forth she rode upon her ready way,
To seek her Knight, as Talus her did guide:
Sadly she rode, and never word did say,
Nor good nor bad, ne ever looked aside,
But still right down, and in her thought did hide
The felnesse of her heart, right fully bent
To fierce auengement of that woman's pride,
Which had her Lord in her base prison pent,
And so great honor with so foul reproach had blent.
So as she thus melancholicke did ride,
Chawing the cud of grief and inward pain,
She chaunst to meet toward th'euen-tide
A Knight, that softly paced on the plain,
As if him self to solace he were feign.
Well shot in years he seemed, and rather bent
To peace, then needless trouble to constrain.
As well by view of that his vestiment,
As by his modest semblant, that no evil meant.
He coming near, began gently her salute.
With courteous words, in the most comely wize;
Who though desirous rather to rest mute,
Then terms to entertain of common guize,
Yet rather then she kindness would despize,
She would her self displease, so him requite.
Then began the other further to deuize
Of things abroad, as next to hand did light,
And many things demand, to which she answered light.
For little lust had she to talk of ought,
Or ought to hear, that mote delightful be;
Her mind was whole possessed of one thought,
That gave none other place. Which when as he
By outward signs, (as well he might) did see,
He list no longer to use lothfull speech,
But her besought to take it well in gree,
Since shady dampe had dimd the heavens reach,
To lodge with him that night, unless good cause empeach
The Championess, now seeing night at door,
Was glad to yield unto his good request:
And with him went without gaine-saying more.
Not far away, but little wide by West,
His dwelling was, to which he him addressed;
Where soon arriving they received were
In seemly wise, as them beseemed best:
For he their host them goodly well did cheer,
And talked of pleasant things, the night away to wear.
Thus passing th'euening well, till time of rest,
Then Britomart unto a bower was brought;
Where grooms awayted her to have undressed.
But she ne would undressed be for ought,
Ne doffe her arms, though he her much besought.
For she had vowed, she said, not to forgo
Those warlike weeds, till she revenge had wrought
Of a late wrong upon a mortal foe;
Which she would sure perform, betide her well or woe.
Which when their Host perceived, right discontent
In mind he grew, for fear least by that art
He should his purpose miss, which close he meant:
Yet taking leave of her, he did depart.
There all that night remained Britomart,
Restless, recomfortlesse, with heart deep grieved,
Not suffering the least twinkling sleep to start
Into her eye, which the heart mote have relieved,
But if the least appeared, her eyes she straight reprieued.
Ye guilty eyes (said she) the which with guyle
My heart at first betrayed, will ye betray
My life now to, for which a little while
Ye will not watch? false watches, wellaway,
I wot when ye did watch both night and day
Unto your loss: and now needs will ye sleep?
Now ye have made my heart to wake always,
Now will ye sleep? ah wake, and rather weep,
To think of your nights want, that should ye waking keep.
Thus did she watch, and wear the weary night
In waylfull plaints, that none was to appease;
Now walking soft, now sitting still upright,
As sundry change her seemed best to ease.
Ne less did Talus suffer sleep to seize
His eyelids sad, but watched continually,
Lying without her door in great disease;
Like to a Spaniell waiting carefully
Least any should betray his Lady treacherously.
What time the native Belman of the night,
The bird, that warned Peter of his fall,
First rings his silver Bell t'each sleepy wight,
That should their minds up to devotion call,
She heard a wondrous noise below the hall.
All suddenly the bed, where she should lie,
By a false trap was let adowne to fall
Into a lower room, and by and by
The lost was raysd again, that no man could it spy.
With sight whereof she was dismayed right sore,
Perceiving well the treason, which was meant:
Yet stirred not at all for doubt of more,
But kept her place with courage confident,
Waiting what would ensue of that event.
It was not long, before she heard the sound
of armed men, coming with close intent
Toward her chamber; at which dreadful stound
She quickly caught her sword, and shield about her bound.
With that there came unto her chamber door
Two Knights, all armed ready for to fight,
And after them full many other more,
A rascal rout, with weapons rudely dight.
Whom soon as Talus spide by glims of night,
He started up, there where on ground he lay,
And in his hand his thresher ready keight.
They seeing that, let drive at him straight way,
And round about him preace in riotous array.
But soon as he began to lay about
With his rude iron flaile, they began to fly,
Both armed Knights, and eke unarmed rout:
Yet Talus after them apace did plie,
Where ever in the dark he could them spy;
That here and there like scattred sheep they lay.
Then back returning, where his Dame did lie,
He to her told the story of that fray,
And all that treason there intended did bewray.
Wherewith though wondrous wroth, and inly burning,
To be avenged for so foul a deed,
Yet being forced to abide the days returning,
She there remained, but with right wary heed,
Least any more such practice should proceed.
Now mote ye know (that which to Britomart
Unknown was) whence all this did proceed,
And for what cause so great mischievous smart
Was meant to her, that never evil meant in heart.
The goodman of this house was Dolon hight,
A man of subtle wit and wicked mind,
That whilome in his youth had been a Knight,
And arms had borne, but little good could find,
And much less honor by that warlike kind
Of life: for he was nothing valorous,
But with sly shifts and wiles did vnderminde
All noble Knights, which were aduenturous,
And many brought to shame by treason treacherous.
He had three sons, all three like fathers sons,
Like treacherous, like full of fraud and guile,
Of all that on this earthly compass wonnes:
The eldest of the which was slain erewhile
By Artegall, through his own guilty wile;
His name was Guizor, whose untimely fate
For to avenge, full many treasons vile
His father Dolon had deuiz'd of late
With these his wicked sons, and showed his cankred hate.
For sure he weend, that this his present guest
Was Artegall, by many tokens plain;
But chiefly by that iron page he ghest,
Which still was wont with Artegall remain;
And therefore meant him surely to have slain.
But by Gods grace, and her good heedinesse,
She was preserved from their traytrous train.
Thus she all night wore out in watchfulness,
Ne suffered slothful sleep her eyelids to oppress.
The morrow next, so soon as dawning hour
Discovered had the light to living eye,
She forth yssew'd out of her loathed bower,
With full intent t'auenge that villainy,
On that vilde man, and all his family
And coming down to seek them, where they wond,
Nor sire, nor sons, nor any could she spy:
Each rowme she sought, but them all empty fond;
They all were fled for fear, but whether, nether kond.
She saw it vain to make there longer stay,
But took her steed, and thereon mounting light,
Began her address unto her former way.
She had not rid the mountenance of a flight,
But that she saw there present in her sight,
Those two false brethren, on that perilous Bridge,
On which Pollente with Artegall did fight.
Straight was the passage like a ploughed ridge,
That if two met, the one mote needs fall over the lidge.
There they did think them selves on her to wreake:
Who as she nigh unto them drew, the one
These vile reproaches began unto her speak;
Thou recreant false traitor, that with lone
Of arms have knighthood stolen, yet Knight art none,
No more shall now the darkness of the night
Defend thee from the vengeance of thy fone,
But with thy blood thou shall appease the spright
Of Guizor, by thee slain, and murdered by thy slight.
Strange were the words in Britomartis ear;
Yet stayed she not for them, but forward fared,
Till to the perilous Bridge she came, and there
Talus desired, that he might have prepared
The way to her, and those two losels scared.
But she thereat was wroth, that for despite
The glauncing sparkles through her beuer glared,
And from her eyes did flash out fiery light,
Like coals, that through a silver Censer sparkle bright.
She stayed not to advise which way to take;
But putting spurs unto her fiery beast,
Thorough the midst of them she way did make.
The one of them, which most her wrath increast,
Upon her spear she bore before her breast,
Till to the Bridges further end she past,
Where falling down, his challenge he releast:
The other over side the Bridge she cast
Into the river, where he drunk his deadly last.
As when the flashing Leuin haps to light
Upon two stubborn oaks, which stand so near,
That way betwixt them none appears in sight;
The Engine fiercely flying forth, does tear
The One from the earth, and through the air does bear;
The other it withforce does overthrow,
Upon one side, and from his roots does rear.
So did the Championess those two there strew,
And to their sire their carcasses left to bestow.
Cant. VII
Britomart comes to Isis Church,
Where she strange visions sees:
She fights with Radigund, her slases,
And Artegall thence frees.
Naught is on earth more sacred or divine,
That Gods and men do equally adore,
Then this same virtue, that does right define:
For th'heuens themselves, whence mortal men implore
Right in their wrongs, are ruled by righteous lore
Of highest Jove, who does true justice deal
To his inferior Gods, and evermore
Therewith contains his heavenly Commonweal:
The skill whereof to Princes hearts he does reveal.
Well therefore did the antique world invent,
That Justice was a God of sovereign grace,
And altars unto him, and temples lent,
And heavenly honors in the highest place;
Calling him great Osyris, of the race
Of the old Egyptian Kings, that whylome were;
With feigned colors shading a true case:
For that Osyris, whilst he lived here,
The iustest man alive, and truest did appear.
His wife was Isis, whom they likewise made
A Goddess of great power and souerainty,
And in her person cunningly did shade
That part of Justice, which is Equity,
Whereof I have to treat here presently.
Unto whose temple when as Britomart
Arrived, she with great humility
Did enter in, ne would that night depart;
But Talus mote not be admitted to her part.
There she received was in goodly wize
Of many Priests, which duly did attend
Upon the rites and daily sacrifize,
All clad in linen robes with silver hemd;
And on their heads with long locks comely kemd,
They wore rich Mitres shaped like the Moon,
To show that Isis does the Moon portend;
Like as Osyris signifies the Sun.
For that they both like race in equal justice run.
The Championess them greeting, as she could,
Was thence by them into the Temple led;
Whose goodly building when she did behold,
Borne upon stately pillours, all dispred
With shining gold, and arched over head,
She wondered at the workemans passing skill,
Whose like before she never saw nor red;
And thereuppon long while stood gazing still,
But thought, that she thereon could never gaze her fill.
Thence forth unto the Idol they her brought,
The which was framed all of silver fine,
So well as could with cunning hand be wrought,
And clothed all in garments made of line,
Hemd all about with fringe of silver twine.
Upon her head she wore a Crown of gold,
To show that she had power in things divine;
And at her feet a Crocodile was rold,
That with her wreathed tail her middle did enfold.
One foot was set upon the Crocodile,
And on the ground the other fast did stand,
So meaning to suppress both forged guile,
And open force: and in her other hand
She stretched forth a long white sclender wand.
Such was the Goddess, whom when Britomart
Had long beheld, her self upon the land
She did prostrate, and with right humble heart,
Unto her self her silent prayers did impart.
To which the Idol as it were inclining,
Her wand did move with amiable look,
By outward show her inward sense desining.
Who well perceiving, how her wand she shook,
It as a token of good fortune took.
By this the day with dampe was ouercast,
And joyous light the house of Jove forsook:
Which when she saw, her helmet she vnlaste,
And by the altars side her self to slumber plaste.
For other beds the Priests there used none,
But on their mother Earths dear lap did lie,
And bake their sides upon the cold hard stone,
T'enure them selves to sufferaunce thereby
And proud rebellious flesh to mortify.
For by the vow of their religion
They tied were to steadfast chastity,
And continence of life, that all forgon,
They mote the better tend to their devotion.
Therefore they mote not taste of fleshly food,
Ne feed on ought, the which does blood contain,
Ne drink of wine, for wine they say is blood,
Even the blood of Giants, which were slain,
By thundering Jove in the Phlegrean plain.
For which the earth (as they the story tell)
Wroth with the Gods, which to perpetual pain
Had damned her sons, which against them did rebel,
With inward grief and malice did against them swell.
And of their vital blood, the which was shed
Into her pregnant bosom, forth she brought
The fruitful vine, whose liquor blouddy red
Having the minds of men with fury fraught,
Mote in them stir up old rebellious thought,
To make new war against the Gods again:
Such is the power of that same fruit, that naught
The fell contagion may thereof restrain,
Ne within reasons rule, her madding mood contain.
There did the warlike Maid her self repose,
Under the wings of Isis all that night,
And with sweet rest her heavy eyes did close,
After that long days toil and weary plight.
Where whilst her earthly parts with soft delight
Of senseless sleep did deeply drowned lie,
There did appear unto her heavenly spright
A wondrous vision, which did close implie
The course of all her fortune and posterity.
Her seem', das she was doing sacrifize
To Isis, decked with Mitre on her head,
And linen stole after those Priests guize,
All suddenly she saw transfigured
Her linen stole to robe of scarlet red.
And Moone-like Mitre to a Crown of gold,
That even she her self much wondered
At such a change, and ioyed to behold
Her self, adorned with gems and jewels manifold.
And in the midst of her felicity,
An hideous tempest seemed from below,
To rise through all the Temple suddenly,
That from the Altar all about did blow
The holy fire, and all the embers strew
Upon the ground, which kindled privily,
Into outrageous flames unawares did grow,
That all the Temple put in ieopardy
Of flaming, and her self in great perplexity.
With that the Crocodile, which sleeping lay
Under the Idols feet in fearelesse bower,
Seemed to awake in horrible dismay,
As being troubled with that stormy stowre;
And gaping greedy wide, did straight devour
Both flames and tempest: with which grown great,
And swollen with pride of his own peerless power,
He began to threaten her likewise to eat;
But that the Goddess with her rod him back did beat.
Tho turning all his pride to humblesse meek,
Him self before her feet he lowly threw,
And began for grace and love of her to seek:
Which she accepting, he so near her drew,
That of his game she soon enwombed grew,
And forth did bring a Lion of great might;
That shortly did all other beasts subdew.
With that she waked, full of fearful fright,
And doubtfully dismayed through that so uncouth sight.
So thereuppon long while she musing lay,
With thousand thoughts feeding her fantasy,
Until she spide the lamp of lightsome day,
Vp-lifted in the porch of heaven hie.
Then up she rose fraught with melancholy,
And forth into the lower parts did pas;
Whereas the Priests she found full busily
About their holy things for morrow Mas:
Whom she saluting fair, fair resaluted was.
But by the change of her vnchearefull look,
They might perceive, she was not well in plight;
Or that some pensiveness to heart she took.
Therefore thus one of them, who seemed in sight
To be the greatest, and the grauest wight,
To her bespake; Sir Knight it seems to me,
That thorough evil rest of this last night,
Or ill apayd, or much dismayed ye be,
That by your change of cheer is easy for to see.
Certes (said she) since ye so well have spide
The troublous passion of my pensive mind,
I will not seek the same from you to hide,
But will my cares unfold, in hope to find
Your aid, to guide me out of error blind.
Say on (quoth he) the secret of your heart:
For by the holy vow, which me does bind,
I am adiur'd, best counsel to impart
To all, that shall require my comfort in their smart.
Then began she to declare the whole discourse
Of all that vision, which to her appeard,
As well as to her mind it had recourse.
All which when he unto the end had heard,
Like to a weak faint-hearted man he fared,
Through great astonishment of that strange sight;
And with long locks vp-standing, stiffly stared
Like one adawed with some dreadful spright.
So filled with heavenly fury, thus he her behight.
Magnificke Virgin, that in queint disguise
Of British arms do mask thy royal blood,
So to pursue a perilous emprize,
How coulst thou ween, through that disguized hood,
To hide thy state from being understood?
Can from the immortal Gods ought hidden be?
They do thy lineage, and thy Lordly brood;
They do thy sire, lamenting sore for thee;
They do thy love, forlorn in women's thraldom see.
The end whereof, and all the long event,
They do to thee in this same dream discover.
For that same Crocodile does represent
The righteous Knight, that is thy faithful lover,
Like to Osyris in all just endeuer.
For that same Crocodile Osyris is,
That under Isis feet does sleep tor ever:
To show that clemence often in things amiss,
Restraines those stern behests, and cruel doomes of his.
That Knight shall all the troublous storms assuage,
And raging flames, that many foes shall rear,
To hinder thee from the just heritage
Of thy sires Crown, and from thy country dear.
Then shall thou take him to thy loved fere,
And join in equal portion of thy realm:
And afterward a son to him shall bear,
That Lion-like shall show his power extreme.
So bless thee God, and give thee ioyance of thy dream.
All which when she unto the end had heard,
She much was eased in her troublous thought,
And on those Priests bestowed rich reward:
And royal gifts of gold and silver wrought,
She for a present to their Goddess brought.
Then taking leave of them, she forward went,
To seek her love, where he was to be sought;
Ne rested till she came without relent
Unto the land of Amazons, as she was bent.
Whereof when news to Radigund was brought,
Not with amaze, as women wonted be,
She was confused in her troublous thought,
But filled with courage and with joyous glee,
As glad to hear of arms, the which now she
Had long surceast, she bad to open bold,
That she the face of her new foe might see.
But when they of that iron man had told,
Which late her folk had slain, she bad the^ forth to hold
So there without the gate (as seemed best)
She caused her Pauilion be pight;
In which stout Britomart her self did rest,
Whiles Talus watched at the door all night.
All night likewise, they of the town in fright,
Upon their wall good watch and ward did keep.
The morrow next, so soon as dawning light
Bad do away the dampe of drouzie sleep,
The warlike Amazon out of her bower did peep.
And caused straight a Trumpet loud to shrill,
To warn her foe to battle soon be pressed:
Who long before awoke (for she full ill
Could sleep all night, that in unquiet breast
Did closely harbor such a jealous guest)
Was to the battle whilome ready dight.
Eftsoons that warriouresse with haughty crest
Did forth issue, all ready for the fight:
On the other side her foe appeared soon in sight.
But ere they reared hand, the Amazone
Began the straight conditions to propound,
With which she used still to tie her fone;
To serve her so, as she the rest had bound.
Which when the other heard, she sternly frownd
For high disdain of such indignity,
And would no longer treat, but bad them sound.
For her no other terms should ever tie.
Then what prescribed were by laws of cheualrie.
The Trumpets sound, and they together run
With greedy rage, and with their faulchins smot;
Ne either sought the others strokes to shun,
But through great fury both their skill forgot,
And practicke use in arms: ne spared not
Their dainty parts, which nature had created
So fair and tender, without stain or spot,
For other uses, then they them translated;
Which they now hackt and hewd, as if such use they hated,
As when a Tygre and a Lioness
Are met at spoiling of some hungry pray,
Both challenge it with equal greediness:
But first the Tygre claws thereon did lay;
And therefore loath to loose her right away,
Does in defense thereof full stoutly stond:
To which the Lion strongly does gainesay,
That she to hunt the beast first took in hond;
And therefore ought it have, where ever she it fond.
Full fiercely laid the Amazon about,
And dealt her blows unmercifully sore:
Which Britomart withstood with courage stout,
And them repaide again with double more.
So long they fought, that all the grassie flore
Was filled with blood, which from their sides did flow,
And gushed through their arms, that all in gore
They trod, and on the ground their lives did strew,
Like fruitles seed, of which untimely death should grow.
At last proud Radigund with fell despite,
Having by chance espide advantage near,
Let drive at her with all her dreadful might,
And thus vpbrayding said; This token bear
Unto the man, whom thou do love so dear;
And tell him for his sake thy life thou gave.
Which spiteful words she sore engrieu'd to hear,
Thus answered; Lewdly thou my love deprauest,
Who shortly must repent that now so vainly brauest.
Nath'lesse that stroke so cruel passage found,
That glauncing on her shoulder plate, it bit
Unto the bone, and made a griesly wound,
That she her shield through raging smart of it
Could scarce uphold; yet soon she it requit.
For having force increast through furious pain,
She her so rudely on the helmet smit,
That it empierced to the very brain,
And her proud person low prostrated on the plain.
Where being laid, the wrothfull Britonesse
Stayed not, till she came to her self again,
But in revenge both of her loves distress,
And her late vile reproach, though vaunted vain,
And also of her wound, which sore did pain,
She with one stroke both head and helmet cleft.
Which dreadful sight, when all her warlike train
There present saw, each one of sense bereft,
Fled fast into the town, and her sole victor left.
But yet so fast they could not home retrate,
But that swift Talus did the foremost win;
And pressing through the preace unto the gate,
Pelmell with them attonce did enter in.
There then a piteous slaughter did begin:
For all that ever came within his reach,
He with his iron flale did thresh so thin,
That he no work at all left for the leach:
Like to an hideous storm, which nothing may empeach.
And now by this the noble Conqueresse
Her self came in, her glory to partake;
Where though reuengefull vow she did profess,
Yet when she saw the heaps, which he did make,
Of slaughtred carcasses, her heart did quake
For very ruth, which did it almost riue,
That she his fury willed him to slake:
For else he sure had left not one alive,
But all in his revenge of spirit would deprive.
Tho when she had his execution stayed,
She for that iron prison did enquire,
In which her wretched love was captive laid:
Which breaking open with indignant ire,
She entered into all the parts entire.
Where when she saw that lothly uncouth sight,
Of men disguised in womanishe attire,
Her heart began grudge, for very deep despite
Of so unmanly mask, in misery misdight.
At last when as to her own Love she came,
Whom like disguize no less deformed had,
At sight thereof abasht with secret shame,
She turned her head aside, as nothing glad,
To have beheld a spectacle so bad:
And then too well believed, that which tofore
Jealous suspect as true untruly drad,
Which vain conceit now nourishing no more,
She sought with ruth to salve his sad misfortunes sore.
Not so great wonder and astonishment,
Did the most chaste Penelope possess,
To see her Lord, that was reported drent,
And dead long since in dolorous distress,
Come home to her in piteous wretchedness,
After long travel of full twenty years,
That she knew not his favors likelynesse,
For many scarres and many hoary hears,
But stood long staring on him, among uncertain fears.
Ah my dear Lord, what sight is this (quoth she)
What May Game has misfortune made of you?
Where is that dreadful manly look? where be
Those mighty palms, the which ye wont t'embrew
In blood of Kings, and great hoastes to subdew?
Could ought on earth so wondrous change have wrought,
As to have robde you of that manly hew?
Could so great courage stouped have to ought?
Then farewell fleshly force; I see thy pride is naught.
Thenceforth she straight into a bower him brought,
And causd him those uncomely weeds vndight;
And in their steed for other raiment sought,
Whereof there was great store, and armors bright,
Which had been reft from many a noble Knight;
Whom that proud Amazon subdewed had,
Whilst Fortune favored her success in fight,
In which when as she him anew had clad,
She was revived, and ioyd much in his semblance glad.
So there a while they afterward remained,
Him to refresh, and her late wounds to heal:
During which space she there as Princes rained,
And changing all that form of common weal,
The liberty of women did repeal,
Which they had long usurped; and them restoring
To men's subjection, did true Justice deal:
That all they as a Goddess her adoring,
Her wisdom did admire, and hearkened to her loring.
For all those Knights, which long in captive shade
Had shrouded been, she did from thraldom free;
And magistrates of all that city made,
And gave to them great living and large fee:
And that they should for ever faithful be,
Made them swear fealty to Artegall.
Who when him self now well recur'd did see,
He purposd to proceed, what so be fall,
Upon his first adventure, which him forth did call.
Full sad and sorrowful was Britomart
For his departure, her new cause of grief;
Yet wisely moderated her own smart,
Seeing his honor, which she tendered chief,
Consisted much in that adventures priefe.
The care whereof, and hope of his success
Gave unto her great comfort and relief,
That womanish complaints she did repress,
And tempred for the time her present heaviness.
There she continued for a certain space,
Till through his want her woe did more increase:
Then hoping that the change of air and place
Would change her pain, and sorrow somewhat ease,
She parted thence, her anguish to appease.
Mean while her noble Lord sir Artegall
Went on his way, ne ever hour did cease,
Till he redeemed had that Lady thrall:
That for another Canto will more fitly fall.
Cant. VIII.
Prince Arthure and Sir Artegall,
Free Samient from fear:
They slay the Soudan, drive his wife,
A dicia to despair.
Naught under heaven so strongly does allure
The sense of man, and all his mind possess,
As beauties lonely bait, that does procure
Great warriors often their rigor to repress,
And mighty hands forget their manliness;
Drawn with the power of an heart-robbing eye,
And wrapped in fetters of a golden tresse,
That can with melting pleasaunce mollifye
Their hardened hearts, enured to blood and cruelty.
So whylome learnd that mighty Jewish swain,
Each of whose locks did match a man in might,
To lay his spoils before his lemans train:
So also did that great Octean Knight
For his loves sake his Lions skin vndight:
And so did warlike Antony neglect
The worlds whole rule for Cleopatras sight.
Such wondrous power has wemens fair aspect,
To captive men, and make them all the world reject.
Yet could it not stern Artegall retain,
Nor hold from suite of his auowed quest,
Which he had vndertane to Gloriane;
But left his love, albe her strong request,
Fair Britomart in languor and unrest,
And rode him self upon his first intent:
Ne day nor night did ever idly rest;
Ne wight but only Talus with him went,
The true guide of his way and virtuous government.
So traveling, he chaunst far off to heed
A Damzell, flying on a palfrey fast
Before two Knights, that after her did speed
With all their power, and her full fiercely chaste
In hope to have her ouerhent at last:
Yet fled she fast, and both them far outwent,
Carried with wings of fear, like foul aghast,
With locks all loose, and raiment all to rent;
And ever as she rode, her eye was backward bent.
Soon after these he saw another Knight,
That after those two former rode apace,
With spear in rest, and pricked with all his might:
So ran they all, as they had been at bace,
They being chased, that did others chase.
At length he saw the hindmost overtake
One of those two, and force him turn his face;
How ever loath he were his way to slake,
Yet mote he algates now abide, and answer make.
But the other still pursued the fearful Maid;
Who still from him as fast away did fly,
Ne once for ought her speedy passage stayed,
Till that at length she did before her spy
Sir Artegall, to whom she straight did hie
With gladfull have, in hope of him to get
Succor against her greedy enemy:
Who seeing her approach began forward set,
To save her from her fear, and him from force to let.
But he like hound full greedy of his pray,
Being impatient of impediment,
Continued still his course, and by the way
Thought with his spear him quight have ouerwent.
So both together ylike felly bent,
Like fiercely met. But Artegall was stronger,
And better skild in Tilt and Turnament,
And bore him quite out of his saddle, longer
Then two spears length; So mischief ouermatcht the wronger.
And in his fall misfortune hm mistook;
For on his head unhappily he pight,
That his own weight his neck asunder broke,
And left there dead. Mean while the other Knight
Defeated had the other faytour quight,
And all his bowels in his body brast:
Whom leaving there in that dispiteous plight,
He ran still on, thinking to follow fast
His other fellow Pagan, which before him past.
In stead of whom finding there ready pressed
Sir Artegall, without discretion
He at him ran, with ready spear in rest:
Who seeing him come still so fiercely on,
Against him made again. So both anon
Together met, and strongly either struck
And broke their spears; yet neither has forgon
His horses back, yet to and fro long shook,
And tottred like two towers, which through a tempest quooke.
But when again they had recovered sense,
They drew their swords, in mind to make amends
For what their spears had fayld of their pretense.
Which when the Damzell, who those deadly ends
Of both her foes had seen, and now her friends
For her beginning a more fearful fray,
She to them runs in have, and her hair rends,
Crying to them their cruel hands to stay,
Until they both do hear, what she to them will say.
They stayed their hands, when she thus began to speak;
Ah gentle Knights, what mean ye thus unwise
Upon your selves another wrong to wreake?
I am the wronged, whom ye did enterprise
Both to redress, and both redrest likewise:
Witness the Paynims both, whom ye may see
There dead on ground. What do ye then devise
Of more revenge? if more, then I am she,
Which was the root of all, end your revenge on me.
Whom when they heard so say, they looked about,
To weete if it were true, as she had told;
Where when they saw their foes dead out of doubt,
Eftsoons they began their wrothfull hands to hold,
And Ventailes rear, each other to behold.
Tho when as Artegall did Arthure view,
So fair a creature, and so wondrous bold,
He much admired both his heart and hew,
And touched with entire affection, nigh him drew.
Saying, sir Knight, of pardon I you pray,
That all vnweeting have you wronged thus sore,
Suffering my hand against my heart to stray:
Which if ye please forgive, I will therefore
Yield for amends my self yours evermore,
Or what so penance shall by you be red.
To whom the Prince; Certes me needs more
To crave the same, whom error so misled,
As that I did mistake the living for the ded.
But since ye please, that both our blames shall die,
Amends may for the trespass soon be made,
Since neither is endamadg'd much thereby.
So can they both them selves full eath persuade
To fair accordaunce, and both faults to shade,
Either embracing other lovingly,
And swearing faith to either on his blade,
Never thenceforth to nourish enmity,
But either others cause to maintain mutually.
Then Artegall began of the Prince enquire,
What were those knights, which there on ground were laid,
And had received their follies worthy hire,
And for what cause they chased so that Maid.
Certes I wot not well (the Prince then said)
But by adventure found them faring so,
As by the way vnweetingly I strayd,
And lo the Damzell self, whence all did grow,
Of whom we may at will the whole occasion know.
Then they that Damzell called to then nie,
And asked her, what were those two her fone,
From whom she erst so fast away did fly;
And what was she her self so woe begone,
And for what cause pursued of them atone.
To whom she thus; Then wot ye well, that I
Do serve a Queen, that not far hence does wone,
A Princess of great power and majesty,
Famous through all the world, and honored far and nie.
Her name Mercilla most men use to call;
That is a maiden Queen of high renown,
For her great bounty known over all,
And sovereign grace, with which her royal crown
She does support, and strongly beats down
The malice of her foes, which her envy,
And at her happiness do fret and frown:
Yet she her self the more does magnify,
And even to her foes her mercies multiply.
Among many which malign her happy state,
There is a mighty man, which wonnes here by
That with most fell despite and deadly hate,
Seeks to subvert her Crown and dignity,
And all his power does thereunto apply:
And her good Knights, of which so brave a band
Serves her, as any Princess under sky,
He either spoils, if they against him stand,
Or to his part allures, and bribeth under hand.
Ne him suffices all the wrong and ill,
Which he unto her people does each day,
But that he seeks by traytrous trains to spill
Her person, and her sacred self to slay:
That o ye heavens defend, and turn away
From her, unto the miscreant him self,
That neither has religion nor fay,
But makes his God of his ungodly pelf,
And Idols serves; so let his Idols serve the Elfe.
To all which cruel tyranny they say,
He is prouokt, and stird up day and night
By his bad wife, that hight Adicia,
Who counsels him through confidence of might,
To break all bonds of law, and rules of right.
For she her self professes mortal foe
To Justice, and against her still does fight,
Working to all, that love her, deadly woe,
And making all her Knights and people to do so.
Which my liege Lady seeing, thought it best,
With that his wife in friendly wise to deal,
For stint of strife, and stablishment of rest
Both to her self, and to her common weal,
And all forepast displeasures to repeal.
So me in message unto her she sent,
To treat with her by way of enterdeale,
Of final peace and fair atonement,
Which might concluded be by mutual consent.
All times have wont safe passage to afford
To messengers, that come for causes just:
But this proud Dame disdayning all accord,
Not only into bitter terms forth brust,
Reuiling me, and railing as she Just,
But lastly to make proof of utmost shame,
Me like a dog she out of doors did thrust,
Miscalling me by many a bitter name,
That never did her ill, ne once deserved blame.
And lastly, that no shame might wanting be,
When I was gone, soon after me she sent
These two false Knights, whom there ye lying see,
To be by them dishonored and shent:
But thankt be God, and your good hardiment,
They have the price of their own folly paid.
So said this Damzell, that hight Samient,
And to those knights, for their so noble aid,
Her self most grateful showed, and heaped thanks repayd.
But they now having thoroughly heard, and seen
Al those great wrongs, the which that maid complained.
To have been done against her Lady Queen,
By that proud dame, which her so much disdained,
Were moved much thereat, and twixt them fained,
With all their force to work auengement strong
Upon the Souldanselfe, which it mayntained,
And on his Lady, the author of that wrong,
And upon all those Knights, that did to her belong.
But thinking best by counterfeit disguise
To their deseigne to make the easier way,
They did this complot twixt them selves devise,
First that sir Artegall should him array,
Like one of those two Knights, which dead there lay.
And then that Damzell, the sad Samient,
Should as his purchased prize with him convey
Unto the Souldans court, her to present
Unto his scornful Lady, that for her had sent.
So as they had deuiz'd, sir Artegall
Him clad in th'armour of a Pagan knight,
And taking with him, as his vanquished thrall,
That Damzell, led her to the Souldans right.
Where soon as his proud wife of her had sight,
Forth of her window as she looking lay,
She weened straight, it was her Paynim Knight,
Which brought that Damzell, as his purchased pray;
And sent to him a Page, that mote direct his way.
Who bringing them to their appointed place,
Offered his service to disarme the Knight;
But he refusing him to let unlace,
For doubt to be discovered by his sight,
Kept himself still in his strange armor dight.
Soon after whom the Prince arrived there,
And sending to the Souldan in despite
A bold defyance, did of him requere
That Damzell, whom he held as wrongful prisonere.
Wherewith the Souldan all with fury fraught,
Swearing, and banning most blasphemously,
Commanded straight his armor to be brought,
And mounting straight upon a charret hye,
With iron wheels and hooks armed dreadfully,
And drawn of cruel steedes, which he had fed
With flesh of men, whom through fell tyranny
He slaughtred had, and ere they were half ded,
Their bodies to his beasts for prouender did spread.
So forth he came all in a cote of plate,
Burnisht with bloody rust, whiles on the green
The Briton Prince him ready did awayte,
In glistering arms right goodly well beseene,
That shone as bright, as does the heaven sheene;
And by his stirrup Talus did attend,
Playing his pages part, as he had been
Before directed by his Lord; to the end
He should his flale to final execution bend.
Thus go they both together to their gear,
With like fierce minds, but meanings different:
For the proud Souldan with presumpteous cheer,
And countenance sublime and insolent,
Sought only slaughter and auengement:
But the brave Prince for honor and for right,
Against tortious power and lawless regiment,
In the behalf of wronged weak did fight:
More in his causes truth he trusted then in might.
Like to the Thracian Tyrant, who they say
Unto his horses gave his guests for meat,
Till he himself was made their greedy pray,
And torn in pieces by Alcides great.
So thought the Souldan in his follies threat,
Either the Prince in pieces to have torn
With his sharp wheels, in his first rages heat,
Or under his fierce horses feet have borne
And trampled down in dust his thoughts disdained scorn.
But the bold child that peril well espying,
If he too rashly to his charet drew,
Gave way unto his horses speedy flying,
And their resistlesse rigor did eschew.
Yet as he passed by, the Pagan threw
A shiuering dart with so impetuous force,
That had he not it shunned with heedfull view,
It had himself transfixed, or his horse,
Or made them both one mass withouten more remorse.
Often drew the Prince unto his charret nigh,
In hope some stroke to fasten on him near;
But he was mounted in his seat so high,
And his wingfooted coursers him did bear
So fast away, that ere his ready spear
He could advance, he far was gone and past.
Yet still he him did follow every where,
And followed was of him likewise full fast;
So long as in his steedes the flaming breath did last.
Again the Pagan threw another dart,
Of which he had with him abundant store,
On every side of his embatteld cart,
And of all other weapons less or more,
Which warlike uses had deuiz'd of yore.
The wicked shaft guyded through th'ayrie wide,
By some bad spirit, that it to mischief bore,
Stayed not, till through his curat it did glyde,
And made a griesly wound in his enriuen side.
Much was he grieved with that hapless throe,
That opened had the welspring of his blood;
But much the more that to his hateful foe
He mote not come, to wreake his wrathful mood.
That made him rave, like to a Lion wood,
Which being wounded of the huntsmans hand
Can not come near him in the covert wood,
Where he with boughs has built his shady stand,
And fenst himself about with many a flaming brand.
Still when he sought t'approch unto him ny,
His charret wheels about him whirled round,
And made him back again as fast to fly;
And eke his steedes like to an hungry hound,
That hunting after game has carrion found,
So cruelly did him pursew and chase,
That his good steed, all were he much renound
For noble courage, and for hardy race,
Durst not endure their sight, but fled from place to place.
Thus long they trast, and trauerst to and fro,
Seeking by every way to make some breach,
Yet could the Prince not nigh unto him go,
That one sure stroke he might unto him reach,
Whereby his strengthes assay he might him teach.
At last from his victorious shield he drew
The veil, which did his powrefull light empeach;
And coming full before his horses view,
As they upon him pressed, it plain to them did show.
Like lightening flash, that has the gazet burned,
So did the sight thereof their sense dismay,
That back again upon themselves they turned,
And with their ryder ran perforce away:
Ne could the Souldan them from flying stay,
With raynes, or wonted rule, as well he knew.
Naught feared they, what he could do, or say,
But the only fear, that was before their view;
From which like mazed dear, dismayfully they flew.
Fast did they fly, as them their feet could bear,
High over hills, and lowly over dales,
As they were followed of their former fear.
In vain the Pagan bannes, and swears, and rayles,
And back with both his hands unto him hayles
The resty raynes, regarded now no more:
He to them calls and speaks, yet naught auayles;
They hear him not, they have forgot his lore,
But go, which way they list, their guide they have forlore.
As when the firie-mouthed steeds, which drew
The Suns bright wayne to Phaetons decay,
Soon as they did the monstrous Scorpion view,
With ugly craples crawling in their way,
The dreadful sight did them so sore affray,
That their well known courses they forwent,
And leading th'euer-burning lamp astray,
This lower world nigh all to ashes brent,
And left their scorched path yet in the firmament.
Such was the fury of these headstrong steeds,
Soon as the infants sunlike shield they saw,
That all obedience both to words and deeds
They quite forgot, and scornd all former law;
Through woods, and rocks, and mountains they did draw
The iron charet, and the wheels did tear,
And tossed the Paynim, without fear or awe;
From side to side they tossed him here and there,
Crying to them in vain, that nould his crying hear.
Yet still the Prince pursew'd him close behind,
Often making offer him to smite, but found
No easy means according to his mind.
At last they have all overthrown to ground
Quite topside turuey, and the pagan hound
Amongst the iron hooks and graples keen,
Torn all to rags, and rent with many a wound,
That no whole piece of him was to be seen,
But scattred all about, and strow'd upon the green.
Like as the cursed son of Theseus,
That following his chase in dewy morn,
To fly his stepdames loves outrageous,
Of his own steedes was all to pieces torn,
And his fair limbs left in the woods forlorn;
That for his sake Diana did lament,
And all the woody Nymphs did wayle and mourn.
So was this Souldan rapt and all to rent,
That of his shape appeared no little moniment.
Only his shield and armor, which there lay,
Though nothing whole, but all to brusd and broken,
He up did take, and with him brought away,
That mote remain for an eternal token
To all, among whom this story should be spoken,
How worthily, by heavens high decree,
Justice that day of wrong her self had wroken,
That all men which that spectacle did see,
By like ensample mote for ever warned be.
So on a tree, before the Tyrants door,
He caused them be hung in all men's sight,
To be a moniment for evermore.
Which when his Lady from the castles hight
Beheld, it much appald her troubled spright:
Yet not, as women wont in doleful fit,
She was dismayed, or faynted through affright,
But gathered unto her her troubled wit,
And began eftsoons deuize to be aueng'd for it.
Straight down she ran, like an enraged cow,
That is berobbed of her youngling dear,
With knife in hand, and fatally did vow,
To wreake her on that maiden messengere,
Whom she had causd be kept as prisonere,
By Artegall, misween'd for her own Knight,
That brought her back. And coming present there,
She at her ran with all her force and might,
All flaming with revenge and furious despite.
Like raging Ino, when with knife in hand
She threw her husbands murdered infant out,
Or fell Medea, when on Colchicke strand
Her brothers bones she scattered all about;
Or as that madding mother, among the rout
Of Bacchus Priests her own dear flesh did tear.
Yet neither Ino, nor Medea stout,
Nor all the Moenades so furious were,
As this bold woman, when she saw that Damzell there.
But Artegall being thereof aware,
Did stay her cruel hand, ere she her raught,
And as she did her self to strike prepare,
Out of her fist the wicked weapon caught:
With that like one enfelon'd or distraught,
She forth did rome, whether her rage her bore,
With frantic passion, and with fury fraught;
And breaking forth out at a posterne door,
Unto the wyld wood ran, her dolours to deplore.
As a mad bytch, when as the frantic fit
Her burning tongue with rage inflamed has,
Does run at randon, and with furious bit
Snatching at every thing, does wreake her wrath
On man and beast, that comes in her path.
There they do say, that she transformed was
Into a Tygre, and that Tygres scath
In cruelty and outrage she did pas,
To prove her surname true, that she imposed has.
Then Artegall himself discovering plain,
Did issue forth against all that warlike rout
Of knights and armed men, which did maintain
That Ladies part, and to the Souldan lout:
All which he did assault with courage stout,
All were they nigh an hundred knights of name,
And like wyld Goats them chaced all about,
Flying from place to place with cowheard shame,
So that with final force them all he overcame.
Then caused he the gates be opened wide,
And there the Prince, as victour of that day,
With triumph entertayn'd and glorifyde,
Presenting him with all the rich array,
And royal pomp, which there long hidden lay,
Purchased through lawless power and tortious wrong
Of that proud Souldan, whom he erst did slay.
So both for rest there having stayed not long,
Marched with that maid, fit matter for another song.
Cant. IX.
Arthur and Artegall catch Guyle
whom Talus does dismay,
They to Mercillaes palace come,
and see her rich array.
WHat Tygre, or what other saluage wight
Is so exceeding furious and fell,
As wrong, when it has armed it self with might?
Not fit among men, that do with reason mell,
But among wyld beasts and saluage woods to dwell;
Where still the stronger does the weak devour,
And they that most in boldness do excel,
Are dreadded most, and feared for their power:
Fit for Adicia, there to build her wicked bower.
There let her won far from resort of men,
Where righteous Artegall her late exyled;
There let her ever keep her damned den,
Where none may be with her lewd parts defiled,
Nor none but beasts may be of her despoyled:
And turn we to the noble Prince, where late
We did him leave, after that he had foiled
The cruel Souldan, and with dreadful fate
Had utterly subverted his unrighteous state.
Where having with Sir Artegall a space
Well solast in that Souldans late delight,
They both resolving now to leave the place,
Both it and all the wealth therein behight
Unto that Damzell in her Ladies right,
And so would have departed on their way.
But she them wooed by all the means she might,
And earnestly besought, to wend that day
With her, to see her Lady thence not far away.
By whose entreatie both they ouercommen,
Agree to go with her, and by the way,
(As often falls) of sundry things did commen.
Among which that Damzell did to them bewray
A strange adventure, which not far thence lay;
To weet a wicked villain, bold and stout,
Which wonned in a rock not far away,
That robbed all the country there about,
And brought the pillage home, whence none could get it out,
Thereto both his own wily wit, (she said)
And eke the fastness of his dwelling place,
Both vnassaylable, gave him great aid:
For he so crafty was to forge and face,
So light of hand, and nymble of his pace,
So smooth of tongue, and subtle in his tale,
That could deceive one looking in his face;
Therefore by name Malengin they him call,
Well known by his feats, and famous over all.
Through these his slights he many does confound,
And eke the rock, in which he wonts to dwell,
Is wondrous strong, and hewn far under ground
A dreadful depth, how deep no man can tell;
But some do say, it goes down to hell.
And all within, it full of wyndings is,
And hidden ways, that scarce an hound by smell
Can follow out those false footsteps of his,
Ne none can back return, that once are gone amiss.
Which when those knights had heard, their hearts began earne,
To understand that villeins dwelling place,
And greatly it desired of her to learn,
And by which way they toward it should trace.
Were not (said she) that it should let your pace
Toward my Ladies presence by you meant,
I would you guide directly to the place.
Then let not that (said they) stay your intent;
For neither will one foot, till we that carle have hent.
So forth they past, till they approached ny
Unto the rock, where was the villains won,
Which when the Damzell near at hand did spy,
She warned the knights thereof: who thereupon
Began to aduize, what best were to be done.
So both agreed, to send that maid before,
Where she might sit nigh to the den alone,
Wayling, and raising pitiful uproar,
As if she did some great calamity deplore.
With noise whereof when as the caytiue carle
Should issue forth, in hope to find some spoil,
They in awayt would closely him ensnarle,
Ere to his den he backward could recoyle,
And so would hope him easily to foil.
The Damzell straight went, as she was directed,
Unto the rock, and there upon the soil
Having her self in wretched wize abiected,
Began weep and wayle, as if great grief had her affected.
The cry whereof entering the hollow cave,
Eftsoons brought forth the villain, as they meant,
With hope of her some wishfull boot to have.
Full dreadful wight he was, as ever went
Upon the earth, with hollow eyes deep pent,
And long curld locks, that down his shoulders shagged,
And on his back an uncouth vestiment
Made of strange stuff, but all to worn and ragged,
And underneath his breech was all to torn and iagged.
And in his hand an huge long staff he held,
Whose top was armed with many an iron hook,
Fit to catch hold of all that he could weld,
Or in the compass of his clouches took;
And ever round about he cast his look.
Als at his back a great wide net he bore,
With which he seldom fished at the brook,
But vsd to fish for fools on the dry shore,
Of which he in fair weather wont to take great store.
Him when the damzell saw fast by her side,
So ugly creature, she was nigh dismayed,
And now for help aloud in earnest cride.
But when the villain saw her so affrayd,
He began with guilefull words her to persuade,
To banish fear, and with Sardonian smyle
Laughing on her, his false intent to shade,
Began forth to lay his bayte her to beguyle,
That from her self unawares he might her steal the while.
Like as the fouler on his guilefull pype
Charms to the birds full many a pleasant lay,
That they the whiles may take less heedie keep,
How he his nets does for their ruin lay:
So did the villain to her prate and play,
And many pleasant tricks before her show,
To turn her eyes from his intent away:
For he in slights and iugling feats did flow,
And of legierdemayne the mysteries did know.
To which whilst she lent her intentive mind,
He suddenly his net upon her threw,
That ouersprad her like a puff of wind;
And snatching her soon up, ere well she knew,
Ran with her fast away unto his mew,
Crying for help aloud. But when as ny
He came unto his cave, and there did view
The armed knights stopping his passage by,
He threw his burden down, and fast away did fly.
But Artegall him after did pursew,
The whiles the Prince there kept the entrance still:
Up to the rock he ran, and thereon flew
Like a wyld Got, leaping from hill to hill,
And dancing on the craggy cliffes at will;
That deadly danger seemed in all men's sight,
To tempt such steps, where footing was so ill:
Ne ought auayled for the armed knight,
To think to follow him, that was so swift and light.
Which when he saw, his iron man he sent,
To follow him; for he was swift in chase.
He him pursewd, where ever that he went,
Both over rocks, and hills, and every place,
Where so he fled, he followd him apace:
So that he shortly forced him to forsake
The hight, and down descend unto the base.
There he him courst a fresh, and soon did make
To leave his proper form, and other shape to take.
Into a Fox himself he first did turn;
But he him hunted like a Fox full fast:
Then to a bush himself he did transform,
But he the bush did beat, till that at last
Into a bird it chaung'd, and from him past,
Flying from tree to tree, from wand to wand:
But he then stones at it so long did cast,
That like a stone it fell upon the land,
But he then took it up, and held fast in his hand.
So he it brought with him unto the knights,
And to his Lord Sir Artegall it lent,
Warning him hold it fast, for fear of slights.
Who whilst in hand it gryping heart he hent,
Into a Hedgehogge all unawares it went,
And pricked him so, that he away it threw.
Then began it run away incontinent,
Being returned to his former hew:
But Talus soon him ouertooke, and backward drew.
But when as he would to a snake again
Have turned himself, he with his iron flayle
Began drive at him, with so huge might and maine,
That all his bones, as small as sandy grayle
He broke, and did his bowels disentrayle;
Crying in vain for help, when help was past.
So did deceit the self deceiuer fail,
There they him left a carrion outcast;
For beasts and fowls to feed upon for their repast.
Thence forth they passed with that gentle Maid,
To see her Lady, as they did agree.
To which when she approached, thus she said;
Lo now, right noble knights, arrived ye be
Nigh to the place, which ye desired to see:
There shall ye see my sovereign Lady Queen
Most sacred wight, most debonayre and free,
That ever yet upon this earth was seen,
Or that with Diadem has ever crowned been.
The gentle knights rejoiced much to hear
The praises of that Prince so manifold,
And passing little further, commen were,
Where they a stately palace did behold,
Of pompous show, much more then she had told;
With many towers, and tarras mounted hye,
And all their tops bright glittering with gold,
That seemed to out shine the dimmed sky,
And with their brightness daz'd the strange beholders eye.
There they alighting, by that Damzell were
Directed in, and showed all the sight:
Whose porch, that most magnificke did appear,
Stood open wide to all men day and night;
Yet warded well by one of mickle might,
That sat thereby, with gyantlike resemblance,
To keep out guyle, and malice, and despite,
That under show oftimes of feigned semblance,
Are wont in Princes courts to work great scath and hindrance.
His name was Awe; by whom they passing in
Went up the hall, that was a large wide room,
All full of people making troublous din,
And wondrous noise, as if that there were some,
Which unto them was dealing righteous doom.
By whom they passing, through the thickest preasse,
The marshall of the hall to them did come;
His name hight Order, who commanding peace,
Them guyded through the throng, that did their clamors cease.
They ceast their clamors upon them to gaze;
Whom seeing all in armor bright as day,
Strange there to see, it did them much amaze,
And with unwonted terror half affray.
For never saw they there the like array.
Ne ever was the name of war there spoken,
But joyous peace and quietness always,
Dealing just judgments, that mote not be broken
For any brybes, or threats of any to be wroken.
There as they entered at the Scriene, they saw
Some one, whose tongue was for his trespass vile
Nayld to a post, adjudged so by law:
For that therewith he falsely did reuyle,
And foul blaspheme that Queen for forged guyle,
Both with bold speeches, which he blazed had,
And with lewd poems, which he did compyle;
For the bold title of a Poet bad
He on himself had taken, and railing rymes had sprad.
Thus there he stood, whylest high over his head,
There written was the purport of his sin,
In ciphers strange, that few could rightly read,
BON FONS: but bon that once had written bin,
Was raced out, and Mal was now put in.
So now Malfont was plainly to be red;
Either for the evil, which he did therein,
Or that he likened was to a welhed
Of evil words, and wicked sclaunders by him shed.
They passing by, were guyded by degree
Unto the presence of that gracious Queen:
Who sat on high, that she might all men see,
And might of all men royally be seen,
Upon a throne of gold full bright and sheene,
Adorned all with gemmes of endless price,
As either might for wealth have gotten been,
Or could be framed by workmans rare device;
And all embost with Lions and with Flourdelice.
All over her a cloth of state was spread,
Not of rich tissew, nor of cloth of gold,
Nor of ought else, that may be richest red,
But like a cloud, as likest may be told,
That her broad spreading wings did wide unfold;
Whose skirts were bordred with bright sunny beams,
Glistring like gold, amongst the plights enrold,
And here and there shooting forth silver streams,
Among which crept little Angels through the glittering gleames.
Seemed those little Angels did uphold
The cloth of state, and on their purpled wings
Did bear the pendants, through their nimblesse bold:
Besides a thousand more of such, as sings
Hymns to high God, and carols heavenly things,
Encompassed the throne, on which she sat:
She Angel-like, the heir of ancient kings
And mighty Conquerors, in royal state,
Whylest kings and kesars at her feet did them prostrate.
Thus she did fit in sovereign Majesty,
Holding a Scepter in her royal hand,
The sacred pledge of peace and clemency,
With which high God had blessed her happy land,
Maugre so many foes, which did withstand.
But at her feet her sword was likewise laid,
Whose long rest rusted the bright steely brand;
Yet when as foes enforst, or friends sought aid,
She could it sternely draw, that all the world dismayde.
And round about, before her feet there sat
A beuie of fair Virgins clad in white,
That goodly seemed t'adorne her royal state,
All lovely daughters of high Jove, that hight,
Litae by him begot in loves delight,
Upon the righteous Themis: those they say
Upon Jove's judgment seat wayt day and night,
And when in wrath he threats the worlds decay,
They do his anger calm, and cruel vengeance stay.
They also do by his divine permission
Upon the thrones of mortal Princes tend,
And often treat for pardon and remission
To suppliants, through frayltie which offend.
Those did upon Mercillaes throne attend:
Just Dice, wise Eunomie, myld Eirene,
And them amongst, her glory to commend,
Sat goodly Temperance in garments clean,
And sacred Reverence, yborne of heavenly strene.
Thus did she sit in royal rich estate,
Admyr'd of many, honored of all,
Whylest underneath her feet, there as she sat,
An huge great Lion lay, that mote appall
An hardy courage, like captiued thrall,
With a strong iron chain and collar bound,
That once he could not move, nor quich at all;
Yet did he murmr with rebellions sound,
And softly royne, when saluage choler began redound.
So sitting high in dreaded souerayntie,
Those two strange knights were to her presence brought;
Who bowing low before her Majesty,
Did to her myld obeisance, as they ought,
And meekest boon, that they imagine might.
To whom she eke inclyning her withal,
As a fair stoop of her high soaring thought,
A cheerful countenance on them let fall,
Yet tempred with some majesty imperial.
As the bright sun, what time his fiery teme
Toward the western brim begins to draw,
Gins to abate the brightness of his beme,
And fervor of his flames somewhat adaw:
So did this mighty Lady, when she saw
Those two strange knights such homage to her make,
Bate somewhat of that Majesty and awe,
That whylome wont to do so many quake,
And with more myld aspect those two to entertake.
Now at that instant, as occasion fell,
When these two stranger knights arrived in place,
She was about affairs of common well,
Dealing of Justice with indifferent grace,
And hearing pleas of people mean and base.
Among which as then, there was for to be heard
The trial of a great and weighty case,
Which on both sides was then debating hard:
But at the sight of these, those were a while debard.
But after all her princely entertayne,
To th'hearing of that former cause in hand,
Her self eftsoons she began convert again;
Which that those knights likewise mote understand,
And witness forth aright in foreign land,
Taking them up unto her stately throne,
Where they mote hear the matter thoroughly scand
On either part, she placed the one on the one,
The other on the other side, and near them none.
Then was there brought, as prisoner to the bar,
A Lady of great countenance and place,
But that she it with foul abuse did mar;
Yet did appear rare beauty in her face,
But blotted with condition vile and base,
That all her other honor did obscure,
And titles of nobility deface:
Yet in that wretched semblant, she did sure
The peoples great compassion unto her allure.
Then up arose a person of deep reach,
And rare in-sight, hard matters to reuele;
That well could charm his tongue, and time his speech
To all assayes; his name was called Zele:
He began that Lady strongly to appele
Of many heinous crimes, by her enured,
And with sharp reasons rang her such a pele,
That those, whom she to pity had allured,
He now t'abhorre and loath her person had procured.
First began he tell, how this that seemed so fair
And royally arayd, Duessa hight
That false Duessa, which had wrought great care,
And mickle mischief unto many a knight,
By her beguyled, and confounded quight:
But not for those she now in question came,
Though also those mote questioned be aright,
But for vyld treasons, and outrageous shame,
Which she against the dred Mercilla often did frame.
For she whylome (as ye mote yet right well
Remember) had her counsels false conspyred,
With faithless Blandamour and Paridell,
(Both two her paramours, both by her hired,
And both with hope of shadows vain inspyred.)
And with them practiced, how for to depryue
Mercilla of her crown, by her aspyred,
That she might it unto her self deryue,
And triumph in their blood, who^ she to death did drive.
But through high heavens grace, which favor not
The wicked driftes of traiterous desynes,
Against loiall Princes, all this cursed plot,
Ere proof it took, discovered was betymes,
And th'actours won the meede meet for their crimes.
Such be the meede of all, that by such mean
Unto the type of kingdoms title clymes.
But false Duessa now vntitled Queen,
Was brought to her sad doom, as here was to be seen.
Strongly did Zele her heinous fact enforce,
And many other crimes of foul defame
Against her brought, to banish all remorse,
And aggrauate the horror of her blame.
And with him to make part against her, came
Many grave persons, that against her pled;
First was a sage old Sire, that had to name
The Kingdoms care, with a white silver head,
That many high regards and reasons against her red.
Then began Authority her to appose
With peremptory power, that made all mute;
And then the law of Nations against her rose,
And reasons brought, that no man could refute;
Next began Religion against her to impute
High Gods beheast, and power of holy laws;
Then began the Peoples cry and Commons suit,
Importune care of their own public cause;
And lastly Justice charged her with breach of laws.
But then for her, on the contrary part,
Rose many advocates for her to plead:
First: there came Pity, with full tender heart,
And with her joined Regard of womanhead;
And then came Danger threatening hidden dread,
And high alliance unto foreign power;
Then came Nobility of birth, that bread
Great ruth through her misfortunes tragic stowre;
And lastly Grief did plead, and many tears forth power.
With the near touch whereof in tender heart
The Briton Prince was sore empassionate,
And woxe inclined much unto her part,
Through the sad terror of so dreadful fate,
And wretched ruin of so high estate,
That for great ruth his courage began relent.
Which when as Zele perceived to abate,
He began his earnest fervor to augment,
And many fearful objects to them to present.
He began t'efforce the evidence anew,
And new accusements to produce in place:
He brought forth that old hag of hellish hew,
The cursed Ate, brought her face to face,
Who privy was, and party in the case:
She, glad of spoil and ruinous decay,
Did her appeach, and to her more disgrace,
The plot of all her practice did display,
And all her traynes, and all her treasons forth did lay.
Then brought he forth, with griesly grim aspect,
Abhorred Murder, who with bloody knyfe
Yet dropping fresh in hand did her detect,
And there with guilty bloodshed charged ryfe:
Then brought he forth Sedition, breeding strife
In troublous wits, and mutinous uproar:
Then brought he forth Incontinence of life,
Even foul Adultery her face before,
And lewd Impiety, that her accused sore.
All which when as the Prince had heard and seen,
His former fancies ruth he began repent,
And from her party eftsoons was drawn cleene.
But Artegall with constant firm intent,
For zeal of Justice was against her bent.
So was she guilty deemed of them all.
Then Zele began to urge her punishment,
And to their Queen for judgment loudly call,
Unto Mercilla myld for Justice against the thrall.
But she, whose Princely breast was touched nere
With piteous ruth of her so wretched plight,
Though plain she saw by all, that she did hear,
That she of death was guilty found by right,
Yet would not let just vengeance on her light;
But rather let in stead thereof to fall
Few perling drops from her fair lamps of light;
The which she covering with her purple pall
Would have the passion hid, and up arose withal.
Cant. X.
Prince Arthur takes the enterprise
for Belgee for to fight,
Gerioneos Seneschall
he slayes in Belges right.
SOme Clerks do doubt in their deuicefull art,
Whether this heavenly thing, whereof I treat,
To weeten Mercy be of Justice part,
Or drawn forth from her by divine extreate.
This well I wot, that sure she is as great,
And meriteth to have as high a place,
Since in The Almighty's everlasting seat
She first was bred, and borne of heavenly race;
From thence poured down on men, by influence of grace.
For if that Virtue be of so great might,
Which from just verdict will for nothing start,
But to preserve inuiolated right,
Often spilles the principal, to save the part;
So much more then is that of power and art,
That seeks to save the subject of her skill,
Yet never does from doom of right depart:
As it is greater praise to save, then spill,
And better to reform, then to cut off the ill.
Who then can thee, Mercilla, thoroughly praise,
That herein do all earthly Princes pas?
What heavenly Muse shall thy great honor raise
Up to the skies, whence first derived it was,
And now on earth it self enlarged has,
From the utmost brinke of the Armericke shore,
Unto the margent of the Molucas?
Those Nations far thy justice do adore:
But thine own people do thy mercy praise much more.
Much more it praised was of those two knights;
The noble Prince, and righteous Artegall,
When they had seen and heard her doom a rights
Against Duessa, damned by them all;
But by her tempred without grief or gall,
Till strong constraint did her thereto enforce.
And yet even then ruing her wilful fall,
With more then needful natural remorse,
And yielding the last honor to her wretched corse.
During all which, those knights continued there,
Both doing and receiving courtesies,
Of that great Lady, who with goodly chere
Them entertayn'd, fit for their dignities,
Approving daily to their noble eyes
Royal examples of her mercies rare,
And worthy paterns of her clemencies;
Which till this day among many living are,
Who them to their posterities do still declare.
Amongst the rest, which in that space befell,
There came two Springals of full tender years,
Far thence from foreign land, where they did dwell,
To seek for succor of her and of her Pears,
With humble prayers and intreatfull tears;
Sent by their mother, who a widow was,
Wrapped in great dolours and in deadly fears,
By a strong Tyrant, who invaded has
Her land, and slain her children ruefully alas.
Her name was Belgae, who in former age
A Lady of great worth and wealth had been,
And mother of a fruitful heritage,
Even seventeen goodly sons; which who had seen
In their first flower, before this fatal teene
Them ouertooke, and their fair blossoms blasted,
More happy mother would her surely ween,
Then famous Niobe, before she tasted
Latonaes childrens wrath, that all her issue wasted.
But this fell Tyrant, through his tortious power,
Had left her now but five of all that brood:
For twelve of them he did by times devour,
And to his Idols sacrifice their blood,
Whylest he of none was stopped, nor withstood.
For soothly he was one of matchless might,
Of horrible aspect, and dreadful mood,
And had three bodies in one wast empight,
And the arms and legs of three, to succor him in fight.
And sooth they say, that he was borne and bred
Of Giants race, the son of Geryon,
He that whylome in Spain so sore was dred,
For his huge power and great oppression,
Which brought that land to his subjection,
Through his three bodies power, in one combynd;
And eke all strangers in that region
Arryuing, to his kyne for food assynd;
The fairest kyne alive, but of the fiercest kind.
For they were all, they say, of purple hew,
Kept by a cowheard, hight Eurytion,
A cruel carle, the which all strangers slew,
Ne day nor night did sleep, to attend them on,
But walked about them ever and anon,
With his two headed dog, that Orthrus hight;
Orthrus begotten by great Typhaon,
And foul Echidna, in the house of night;
But Hercules them all did overcome in fight.
His son was this, Geryoneo hight;
Who after that his monstrous father fell
Under Alcides club, straight took his flight
From that sad land, where he his sire did quell,
And came to this, where Belge then did dwell,
And flourish in all wealth and happiness,
Being then new made widow (as befell)
After her Noble husbands late decesse;
Which gave beginning to her woe and wretchedness.
Then this bold Tyrant, of her widowhed
Taking advantage, and her yet fresh woes,
Himself and service to her offered,
Her to defend against all foreign foes,
That should their power against her right oppose.
Whereof she glad, now needing strong defense,
Him entertayn'd, and did her champion chose:
Which long he vsd with careful diligence,
The better to confirm her fearelesse confidence.
By means whereof, she did at last commit
All to his hands, and gave him sovereign power
To do, what ever he thought good or fit.
Which having got, he began forth from that hour
To stir up strife, and many a Tragic stowre,
Giving her dearest children one by one
Unto a dreadful Monster to devour,
And setting up an Idol of his own,
The image of his monstrous parent Geryone.
So tyrannizing, and oppressing all,
The woeful widow had no means now left,
But unto gracious great Mercilla call
For aid, against that cruel Tyrants theft,
Ere all her children he from her had reft.
Therefore these two, her eldest sons she sent,
To seek for succor of this Ladies gieft:
To whom their suit they humbly did present,
In th'hearing of full many Knights and Ladies gent.
Amongst the which then fortuned to be
The noble Briton Prince, with his brave Pear;
Who when he none of all those knights did see
Hastily bent, that enterprise to hear,
Nor undertake the same, for cowheard fear,
He stepped forth with courage bold and great,
Admyr'd of all the rest in presence there,
And humbly began that mighty Queen entreat,
To grant him that adventure for his former feat.
She gladly granted it: then he straight way
Himself unto his journey began prepare,
And all his armours ready dight that day,
That naught the morrow next mote stay his fare.
The morrow next appeared, with purple hair
Yet dropping fresh out of the Indian fount,
And bringing light into the heavens fair,
When he was ready to his steed to mount;
Unto his way, which now was all his care and count.
Then taking humble leave of that great Queen,
Who gave him royal gifts and riches rare,
As tokens of her thankful mind beseene,
And leaving Artegall to his own care;
Upon his voyage forth he began to fare,
With those two gentle youths, which him did guide,
And all his way before him still prepare.
Ne after him did Artigall abide,
But on his first adventure forward forth did ride.
It was not long, till that the Prince arrived
Within the land, where dwelt that Lady sad,
Whereof that Tyrant had her now deprived,
And into moors and marshes banished had,
Out of the pleasant soil, and cities glad,
In which she wont to harbor happily:
But now his cruelty so sore she drad,
That to those fennes for fastness she did fly,
And there her self did hyde from his hard tyranny.
There he her found in sorrow and dismay,
All solitary without living wight;
For all her other children, through affray,
Had hid themselves, or taken further flight:
And eke her self through sudden strange affright,
When one in arms she saw, began to fly;
But when her own two sons she had in sight,
She began take heart, and look up joyfully:
For well she wist this knight came, succor to supply.
And running unto them with greedy joys,
Fell straight about their necks, as they did kneel,
And bursting forth in tears; Ah my sweet boys,
(Said she) yet now I gin new life to feel,
And feeble spirits, that began faint and reele,
Now rise again, at this your joyous sight.
Already seems that fortunes headlong wheel
Begins to turn, and sun to shine more bright,
Then it was wont, through comfort of this noble knight.
Then turning unto him; And you Sir knight
(Said she) that taken have this toylesome pain
For wretched woman, miserable wight,
May you in heaven immortal guerdon gain
For so great travel, as you do sustain:
For other meede may hope for none of me,
To whom naught else, but bare life does remain,
And that so wretched one, as ye do see
Is liker lingering death, then loathed life to be.
Much was he moved with her piteous plight,
And low dismounting from his lofty steed,
Began to recomfort her all that he might,
Seeking to drive away deep rooted dreede,
With hope of help in that her greatest need.
So thence he wished her with him to wend,
Unto some place, where they mote rest and feed,
And she take comfort, which God now did send:
Good heart in evils does the evils much amend.
Ay me (said she) and whether shall I go?
Are not all places full of foreign powers?
My palaces possessed of my foe,
My cities sacked, and their sky-threating towers
Raced, and made smooth fields now full of flowers?
Only these marshes, and myrie bogs,
In which the fearful ewftes do build their bowres,
Yield me an hostry among the croking frogs,
And harbor here in safety from those ravenous dogs.
Nathlesse (said he) dear Lady with me go,
Some place shall us receive, and harbor yield;
If not, we will it force, maugre your foe,
And purchase it to us with spear and shield:
And if all fail, yet farewell open field:
The earth to all her creatures lodging lends.
With such his cheerful speeches he does wield
Her mind so well, that to his will she bends
And bynding up her locks and weeds, forth with him wends.
They came unto a City far up land,
The which whylome that Ladies own had been;
But now by force extort out of her hand,
By her strong foe, who had defaced cleene
Her stately towers, and buildings sunny sheene;
Shut up her haven, mard her merchants trade,
Robbed her people, that full rich had been,
And in her neck a Castle huge had made,
The which did her command, without needing persuade.
That Castle was the strength of all that state,
Until that state by strength was pulled down,
And that same city, so now ruinate,
Had been the keye of all that kingdoms crown;
Both goodly Castle, and both goodly Town,
Till that the offended heavens list to lowre
Upon their bliss, and balefull fortune frown.
When those against states and kingdoms do conjure,
Who then can think their hedlong ruin to recure.
But he had brought it now in servile bond,
And made it bear the yoke of inquisition,
Stryuing long time in vain it to withstond;
Yet glad at last to make most base submission,
And life enjoy for any composition.
So now he has new laws and orders new
Imposd on it, with many a hard condition,
And forced it, the honor that is dew
To God, to do unto his Idol most untrue.
To him he has, before this Castle green,
Built a fair Chapel, and an Altar framed
Of costly Iuory, full rich beseene,
On which that cursed Idol far proclaimed,
He has set up, and him his God has named,
Offering to him in sinful sacrifice
The flesh of men, to Gods own likeness framed,
And pouring forth their blood in brutishe wize,
That any iron eyes, to see it would agrize.
And for more horror and more cruelty,
Under that cursed Idols altar stone;
An hideous monster does in darkness lie,
Whose dreadful shape was never seen of none
That lives on earth; but unto those alone
The which unto him sacrificed be.
Those he deuoures, they say, both flesh and bone:
What else they have, is all the Tyrants fee;
So that no whit of them remaining one may see.
There eke he placed a strong garrisone,
And set a Seneschall of dreaded might,
That by his power oppressed every one,
And vanquished all ventrous knights in fight;
To whom he wont show all the shame he might,
After that them in battle he had won.
To which when now they began approach in sight,
The Lady counseld him the place to shonne,
Whereas so many knights had foully been fordonne.
Her fearful speeches naught he did regard,
But ryding straight under the Castle wall,
Called aloud unto the watchful ward,
Which there did wait, willing them forth to call
Into the field their Tyrants Seneschall.
To whom when tidings thereof came, he straight
Calls for his arms, and arming him withal,
Eftsoons forth pricked proudly in his might,
And began with courage fierce address him to the fight.
They both encounter in the middle plain,
And their sharp spears do both together smite
Amid their shields, with so huge might and maine,
That seemed their souls they would have ryuen quight
Out of their breasts, with furious despite.
Yet could the Seneschals no entrance find
Into the Princes shield, where it empight;
So pure the metal was, and well refynd,
But shiuered all about, and scattered in the wynd.
Not so the Princes, but with restless force,
Into his shield it ready passage found,
Both through his haberieon, and eke his corse:
Which tombling down upon the senseless ground,
Gave leave unto his ghost from thraldom bound,
To wander in the griesly shades of night.
There did the Prince him leave in deadly swound,
And thence unto the castle marched right,
To see if entrance there as yet obtain he might.
But as he nigher drew, three knights he spyde,
All armed to point, issuing forth a pace,
Which toward him with all their power did ride,
And meeting him right in the middle race,
Did all their spears attonce on him enchace.
As three great Culuerings for battrie bent,
And leueld all against one certain place,
Do all attonce their thunders rage forth rent,
That makes the walls to stagger with astonishment.
So all attonce they on the Prince did thonder;
Who from his saddle swarued naught aside,
Ne to their force gave way, that was great wonder,
But like a bulwark, firmly did abide,
Rebutting him, which in the midst did ride,
With so huge rigor, that his mortal spear
Past through his shield, and pierst through either side,
That down he fell upon his mother dear,
And powered forth his wretched life in deadly dreare.
Whom when his other fellows saw, they fled
As fast as feet could carry them away;
And after them the Prince as swiftly sped,
To be aueng'd of their vnknightly play.
There whilst they entering, the one did the other stay,
The hindmost in the gate he ouerhent,
And as he pressed in, him there did slay:
His carcass tumbling on the threshold, sent
His groaning soul unto her place of punishment.
The other which was entered, labored fast
To sperre the gate; but that same lump of clay,
Whose grudging ghost was thereout fled and past;
Right in the midst of the threshold lay,
That it the Posterne did from closing stay:
The whiles the Prince hard preased in between,
And entrance won. Straight the other fled away,
And ran into the Hall, where he did ween
Him self to save: but he there slew him at the skreene.
Then all the rest which in that Castle were,
Seeing that sad ensample them before,
Durst not abide, but fled away for fear,
And them conuayd out at a Posterne door.
Long sought the Prince, but when he found no more
To Oppose against his power, he forth issued
Unto that Lady, where he her had lore,
And her began cheer, with what she there had vewed,
And what she had not seen, within unto her showed.
Who with right humble thanks him goodly greeting,
For so great prowess, as he there had proved,
Much greater then was ever in her weeting,
With great admiraunce inwardly was moved,
And honored him, with all that her behooved.
Thenceforth into that Castle he her led,
With her two sons, right dear of her beloved,
Where all that night them selves they cherished,
And from her balefull mind all care he banished.
Cant. XI
Prince Arthure ouercomes the great
Gerioneo in fight:
Does slay the Monster, and restore
Belge unto her right.
IT often falls in course of common life,
That right long time is ouerborne of wrong,
Through avarice, or power, or guile, or strife,
That weakens her, and makes her party strong:
But Justice, though her dome she do prolong,
Yet at the last she will her own cause right.
As by sad Belge seems, whose wrongs though long
She suffered, yet at length she did requight,
And sent redress thereof by this brave Briton Knight.
Whereof when news was to that Tyrant brought,
How that the Lady Belge now had found
A Champion, that had with his Champion fought,
And laid his Seneschall low on the ground,
And eke him self did threaten to confound,
He began to burn in rage, and friese in fear,
Doubting sad end of principle unsound:
Yet since he heard but one, that did appear,
He did him self encourage, and take better cheer.
Nathelesse him self he armed all in have,
And forth he fared with all his many bad,
Ne stayed step, till that he came at last
Unto the Castle, which they conquered had.
There with huge terror, to be more ydrad,
He sternely marched before the Castle gate,
And with bold vaunts, and idle threatening bad
Deliver him his own, ere yet too late,
To which they had no right, nor any wrongful state.
The Prince staid not his answer to deuize,
But opening straight the Sparre, forth to him came,
Full nobly mounted in right warlike wize;
And asked him, if that he were the same,
Who all that wrong unto that woeful Dame
So long had done, and from her native land
Exiled her, that all the world spoke shame.
He boldly aunswerd him, he there did stand
That would his doings justify with his own hand.
With that so furiously at him he flew,
As if he would have ouerrun him straight,
And with his huge great iron axe began hew
So hideously upon his armor bright,
As he to pieces would have chopped it quight:
That the bold Prince was forced foot to give
To his first rage, and yield to his despite;
The whilst at him so dreadfully he drive,
That seemed a marble rock asunder could have riue.
Thereto a great advantage eke he has
Through his three double hands thrice multiplyde,
Besides the double strength, which in them was:
For still when fit occasion did betyde,
He could his weapon shift from side to side,
From hand to hand, and with such nimblesse sly
Could wield about, that ere it were espide,
The wicked stroke did wound his enemy,
Behind, beside, before, as he it list apply.
Which uncouth use when as the Prince perceived,
He began to watch the wielding of his hand,
Least by such slight he were unawares deceived;
And ever ere he saw the stroke to land,
He would it meet, and warily withstand.
One time, when he his weapon faynd to shift,
As he was wont, and changed from hand to hand,
He met him with a counterstroke so swift,
That quite smit off his arm, as he it up did lift.
Therewith, all fraught with fury and disdain,
He brayd aloud for very fell despite,
And suddenly t'auenge him self again,
Began into one assemble all the might
Of all his hands, and heaued them on hight,
Thinking to pay him with that one for all:
But the sad steel seizd not, where it was hight,
Upon the child, but somewhat short did fall,
And lighting on his horses head, him quite did mall.
Down straight to ground fell his astonished steed,
And eke to the earth his burden with him bare:
But he him self full lightly from him freed,
And began him self to fight on foot prepare.
Whereof when as the Giant was aware,
He wox right blyth, as he had got thereby,
And laughed so loud, that all his teeth wide bare
One might have seen enraung'd disorderly,
Like to a rank of piles, that pitched are awry.
Eftsoons again his axe he raught on hie,
Ere he were thoroughly buckled to his gear,
And can let drive at him so dreadfullie,
That had he chanced not his shield to rear,
Ere that huge stroke arrived on him near,
He had him surely cloven quite in twain.
But th'Adamantine shield, which he did bear,
So well was tempred, that for all his maine,
It would no passage yield unto his purpose vain.
Yet was the stroke so forcibly applide,
That made him stagger with uncertain sway,
As if he would have tottered to one side.
Wherewith full wroth, he fiercely began assay,
That curt'sie with like kindness to repay;
And smote at him with so importune might,
That two more of his arms did fall away,
Like fruitless branches, which the hatchets slight
Has pruned from the native tree, and cropped quight.
With that all mad and furious he grew,
Like a fell mastiffe through enraging heat,
And cursed, and band, and blasphemies forth threw,
Against his Gods, and fire to them did threat,
And hell unto him self with horror great.
Thenceforth he cared no more, which way he struck,
Nor where it light, but began to chaufe and sweat,
And gnasht his teeth, and his head at him shook,
And sternely him beheld with grim and ghastly look.
Naught feared the child his looks, ne yet his threats,
But only wexed now the more aware,
To save him self from those his furious heats,
And watch advantage, how to work his care:
The which good Fortune to him offered fair.
For as he in his rage him ouerstrooke,
He ere he could his weapon back repair,
His side all bare and naked ouertooke,
And with his mortal steel quite through the body struck.
Through all three bodies he him struck attonce;
That all the three attonce fell on the plain:
Else should he thrice have needed, for the nonce
Them to have stricken, and thrice to have slain.
So now all three one senseless lump remain,
Enwallow'd in his own black bloody gore,
And biting the earth for very deaths disdain;
Who with a cloud of night him covering, bore
Down to the house of dole, his days there to deplore.
Which when the Lady from the Castle saw,
Where she with her two sons did looking stand,
She toward him in have her self did draw,
To greet him the good fortune of his hand:
And all the people both of town and land,
Which there stood gazing from the Cities wall
Upon these warriors, greedy t'vnderstand,
To whether should the victory befall,
Now when they saw it fallen, they eke him greeted all.
But Belge with her sons prostrated low
Before his feet, in all that peoples sight;
Among joys mixing some tears, among well, some woe,
Him thus bespake; O most redoubted Knight,
The which have me, of all most wretched wight,
That erst was dead, restored to life again,
And these weak impes replanted by thy might;
What guerdon can I give thee for thy pain,
But even that which thou sauedst, thine still to remain?
He took her up for by the lilly hand,
And her recomforted the best he might,
Saying; Dear Lady, deeds ought not be scand
By the authors manhood, nor the doers might,
But by their truth and by the causes right:
That same is it, which fought for you this day.
What other meed then need me to requight,
But that which yields virtues meed always?
That is the virtue self, which her reward does pay.
She humbly thankt him for that wondrous grace,
And further said; Ah Sir, but mote ye please,
Since ye thus far have tendered my poor case,
As from my chiefest foe me to release,
That your victorious arm will not yet cease,
Till ye have rooted all the relickes out
Of that vilde race, and stablished my peace.
What is there else (said he) left of their rout?
Declare it boldly Dame, and do not stand in dout.
Then wot you, Sir, that in this Church hereby,
There stands an Idol of great note and name,
The which this Giant reared first on hie,
And of his own vain fancies thought did frame:
To whom for endless horror of his shame,
He offered up for daily sacrifize
My children and my people, burnt in flame;
With all the tortures, that he could deuize,
The more t'aggrate his God with such his blouddy guize.
And underneath this Idol there does lie
An hideous monster, that does it defend,
And feeds on all the carcasses, that die
In sacrifize unto that cursed feend:
Whose ugly shape none ever saw, nor kend,
That ever escaped: for of a man they say
It has the voice, that speeches forth does send,
Even blasphemous words, which she does bray
Out of her poysnous entrails, fraught with dire decay.
Which when the Prince heard tell, his heart began earne
For great desire, that Monster to assay,
And prayed the place of her abode to learn.
Which being showed, he began him self straight way
Thereto address, and his bright shield display.
So to the Church he came, where it was told,
The Monster underneath the Altar lay;
There he that Idol saw of massy gold
Most richly made, but there no Monster did behold.
Upon the Image with his naked blade
Three times, as in defiance, there he struck;
And the third time out of an hidden shade,
There forth issewd, from under th'Altars smooke,
A dreadful feend, with foul deformed look,
That stretched it self, as it had long lain still;
And her long tail and feathers strongly shook,
That all the Temple did with terror fill;
Yet him naught terrifide, that feared nothing ill.
An huge great Beast it was, when it in length
Was stretched forth, that nigh filled all the place,
And seemed to be of infinite great strength;
Horrible, hideous, and of hellish race,
Borne of the brooding of Echidna base,
Or other like infernal furies kind:
For of a Maid she had the outward face,
To hide the horror, which did lurk behind,
The better to beguile, whom she so fond did find.
Thereto the body of a dog she had,
Full of fell rauin and fierce greediness;
A Lions claws, with power and rigor clad,
To rend and tear, what so she can oppress;
A Dragons tail, whose sting without redress
Full deadly wounds, where so it is empight;
And Eagles wings, for scope and speediness,
That nothing may escape her reaching might,
Whereto she ever list to make her hardy flight.
Much like in foulness and deformity
Unto that Monster, whom the Theban Knight,
The father of that fatal progeny,
Made kill her self for very hearts despite,
That he had red her Riddle, which no wight
Could ever loose, but suffered deadly doole.
So also did this Monster use like slight
To many a one, which came unto her school,
Whom she did put to death, deceived like a fool.
She coming forth, when as she first beheld
The armed Prince, with shield so blazing bright,
Her ready to assail, was greatly queld,
And much dismayed with that dismayfull sight,
That back she would have turned for great affright.
But he began her with courage fierce assay,
That forced her turn again in her despite,
To save her self, least that he did her slay:
And sure he had her slain, had she not turned her way.
Tho when she saw, that she was forced to fight,
She flew at him, like to an hellish feend,
And on his shield took hold with all her might,
As if that it she would in pieces rend,
Or reaue out of the hand, that did it hend.
Strongly he strove out of her greedy gripe
To loose his shield, and long while did contend:
But when he could not quite it, with one stripe
Her Lions claws he from her feet away did wipe.
With that aloude she began to bray and yell,
And foul blasphemous speeches forth did cast,
And bitter curses, horrible to tell,
That even the Temple, wherein she was plast,
Did quake to hear, and nigh asunder brast.
Tho with her huge long tail she at him struck,
That made him stagger, and stand half aghast
With trembling joints, as he for terror shook;
Who naught was terrifide, but greater courage took.
As when the Mast of some well timbred hulke
Is with the blast of some outrageous storm
Blown down, it shakes the bottom of the bulk,
And makes her ribs to crack, as they were torn,
Whilst still she stands as stonisht and forlorn:
So was he stound with stroke of her huge tail.
But ere that it she back again had borne,
He with his sword it struck, that without fail
He ioynted it, and mard the swinging of her flaile.
Then began she cry much louder then before,
That all the people there without it heard,
And Belge self was therewith stonied sore,
As if the only sound thereof she feared.
But then the feend her self more fiercely reard
Upon her wide great wings, and strongly flew
With all her body at his head and beard,
That had he not foreseen with heedfull view,
And thrown his shield atween, she had him done to rue.
But as she pressed on him with heavy sway,
Under her womb his fatal sword he thrust,
And for her entrails made an open way,
To issue forth; the which once being brust,
Like to a great Mill damb forth fiercely gusht,
And powered out of her infernal sink
Most ugly filth, and poison therewith rusht,
That him nigh choked with the deadly stink:
Such loathly matter were small lust to speak, or think.
Then down to ground fell that deformed Mass,
Breathing out clouds of sulphur foul and black,
In which a puddle of contagion was,
More loathd then Lerna, or then Stygian lake,
That any man would nigh awhaped make.
Whom when he saw on ground, he was full glad,
And straight went forth his gladness to partake
With Belge, who watched all this while full sad,
Waiting what end would be of that same danger drad.
Whom when she saw so ioyously come forth,
She began rejoice, and show triumphant chere,
Lauding and praising his renowned worth,
By all the names that honorable were.
Then in he brought her, and her showed there
The present of his pains, that Monsters spoil,
And eke that Idol deemed so costly dear;
Whom he did all to pieces break and foil
In filthy dirt, and left so in the loathely soil.
Then all the people, which beheld that day,
Began shout aloud, that unto heaven it rong;
And all the damzels of that town in ray,
Came dancing forth, and joyous carrols song:
So him they led through all their streets along,
Crowned with girlonds of immortal baies,
And all the vulgar did about them throng,
To see the man, whose everlasting praise
They all were bound to all posterities to raise.
There he with Belgae did a while remain,
Making great feast and joyous merriment,
Until he had her settled in her rain,
With safe assurance and establishment.
Then to his first emprize his mind he lent,
Full loath to Belgae, and to all the rest:
Of whom yet taking leave, thenceforth he went
And to his former journey him addressed,
On which long way he rode, ne ever day did rest.
But turn we now to noble Artegall;
Who having left Mercilla, straight way went
On his first quest, the which him forth did call,
To weet to work Irenaes franchisement,
And eke Grantortoes worthy punishment.
So forth he fared as his manner was,
With only Talus waiting diligent,
Through many perils and much way did pas,
Till nigh unto the place at length approcht he has.
There as he traueld by the way, he met
An aged wight, wayfaring all alone,
Who through his years long since aside had set
The use of arms, and battle quite forgone:
To whom as he approcht, he knew anon,
That it was he which whilome did attend
On fair Irene in her affliction,
When first to Faery court he saw her wend,
Unto his sovereign Queen her suite for to commend.
Whom by his name saluting, thus he began;
Hail good Sir Sergis, truest Knight alive,
Well tried in all thy Ladies troubles than,
When her that Tyrant did of Crown deprive;
What new ocasion does thee hither drive,
Whiles she alone is left, and thou here found?
Or is she thrall, or does she not survive?
To whom he thus; She lives sure and sound;
But by that Tyrant is in wretched thraldom bound.
For she presuming on the appointed tide,
In which ye promised, as ye were a Knight,
To meet her at the saluage Islands side,
And then and there for trial of her right
With her vnrigteous enemy to fight,
Did thither come, where she afraid of naught,
By guilefull treason and by subtle slight
Surprised was, and to Grantorto brought,
Who her imprisond has, and her life often sought.
And now he has to her prefixed a day,
By which if that no champion do appear,
Which will her cause in battailous array
Against him justify, and prove her clear
Of all those crimes, that he against her does rear
She death shall by. Those tidings sad
Did much abash Sir Artegall to hear,
And grieved sore, that through his fault she had
Fallen into that Tyrants hand and usage bad.
Then thus replide; Now sure and by my life,
Too much am I too blame for that fair Maid,
That have her drawn to all this troublous strife,
Through promise to afford her timely aid,
Which by default I have not yet defraide.
But witness unto me, ye heavens, that knew
How clear I am from blame of this vpbraide:
For ye into like thraldom me did throw,
And kept from complishing the faith, which I did owe.
But now aread, Sir Sergis, how long space,
Has he her lent, a Champion to provide:
Ten days (quoth he) he granted has of grace,
For that he weeneth well, before that tide
None can have tidings to assist her side.
For all the shores, which to the sea accoste,
He day and night does ward both far and wide,
That none can there arrive without an host:
So her he deemes already but a damned ghost.
Now turn again (Sir Artegall then said)
For if I live till those ten days have end,
Assure your self, Sir Knight, she shall have aid,
Though I this dearest life for her do spend;
So backward he atone with him did wend.
Tho as they rode together on their way,
A rout of people they before them kend,
Flocking together in confusde array,
As if that there were some tumultuous affray.
To which as they approcht, the cause to know,
They saw a Knight in dangerous distress
Of a rude rout him chasing to and fro,
That sought with lawless power him to oppress,
And bring in bondage of their brutishness:
And far away, amid their rakehell bands,
They spide a Lady left all succourlesse,
Crying, and holding up her wretched hands
To him for aid, who long in vain their rage withstands.
Yet still he strives, ne any peril spares,
To reskue her from their rude violence,
And like a Lion wood amongst them fares,
Dealing his dreadful blows with large dispense,
Against which the pallid death finds no defense.
But all in vain, their numbers are so great,
That naught may boot to banishe them from thence:
For soon as he their outrage back does beat,
They turn afresh, and often renew their former threat.
And now they do so sharply him assay,
That they his shield in pieces battred have,
And forced him to throw it quite away,
Fro dangers dread his doubtful life to save;
Albe that it most safety to him gave,
And much did magnify his noble name.
For from the day that he thus did it leave,
Amongst all Knights he blotted was with blame,
And counted but a recreant Knight, with endless shame.
Whom when they thus distressed did behold,
They drew unto his aid; but that rude rout
Them also began assail with outrage bold,
And forced them, how ever strong and stout
They were, as well approved in many a doubt,
Back to recule; until that iron man
With his huge flaile began to lay about,
From whose stern presence they diffused ran,
Like scattred chafe, the which the wind away does fan.
So when that Knight from peril clear was freed,
He drawing near, began to greet them fair,
And yield great thanks for their so goodly deed,
In saving him from dangerous despair
Of those, which sought his life for to empaire.
Of whom Sir Artegall began then enquire
The whole occasion of his late misfare,
And who he was, and what those villains were,
The which with mortal malice him pursued so nere.
To whom he thus; My name is Burbon hight,
Well known, and far renowned heretofore,
Until late mischief did upon me light,
That all my former praise has blemished sore;
And that fair Lady, which in that uproar
Ye with those caytiues saw, Flourdelis hight,
Is mine own love, though me she have forlore,
Whether withheld from me by wrongful might,
Or with her own good will, I cannot read aright.
But sure to me her faith she first did plight,
To be my love, and take me for her Lord,
Till that a Tyrant, which Grandtorto hight,
With golden gifts and many a guilefull word
Entyced her, to him for to accord.
O who may not with gifts and words be tempted?
Since which she has me ever since abhord,
And to my foe has guilefully consented:
Ay me, that ever guyle in women was invented.
And now he has this troop of villains sent,
By open force to fetch her quite away:
Against whom my self I long in vain have bent,
To rescue her, and daily means assay,
Yet rescue her thence by no means I may:
For they do me with multitude oppress,
And with unequal might do ouerlay,
That often I driven am to great distress,
And forced to forgo the attempt remediless.
But why have ye (said Artegall) forborne
Your own good shield in dangerous dismay?
That is the greatest shame and foulest scorn,
Which unto any knight behappen may
To loose the badge, that should his deeds display.
To whom Sir Burbon, blushing half for shame,
That shall I unto you (quoth he) bewray;
Least ye therefore mote happily me blame,
And deem it done of will, that through inforcement came.
True is, that I at first was dubbed knight
By a good knight, the knight of the Redcrosse;
Who when he gave me arms, in field to fight,
Gave me a shield, in which he did endosse
His dear Redeemers badge upon the bosse:
The same long while I bore, and therewithal
Fought many battles without wound or loss;
Therewith Grandtorto self I did appall,
And made him oftentimes in field before me fall.
But for that many did that shield envy,
And cruel enemies increased more;
To stint all strife and troublous enmity,
That bloody scutchin being battered sore,
I laid aside, and have of late forbore,
Hoping thereby to have my love obtained:
Yet can I not my love have nathemore;
For she by force is still fro me detayned,
And with corruptfull brybes is to untruth mis-trayned.
To whom thus Artegall; Certes Sir knight,
Hard is the case, the which ye do complain;
Yet not so hard (for naught so hard may light,
That it to such a straight mote you constrain)
As to abandon, that which does contain
Your honors style, that is your warlike shield.
All peril ought be less, and less all pain
Then loss of fame in disauentrous field;
Dye rather, then do ought, that mote dishonor yield.
Not so; (quoth he) for yet when time does serve,
My former shield I may resume again:
To temporize is not from truth to swerue,
Ne for advantage term to entertain,
When as necessity does it constrain.
Fie on such forgerie (said Artegall)
Under one hood to shadow faces twain.
Knights ought be true, and truth is one in all:
Of all things to dissemble foully may befall.
Yet let me you of courtesy request,
(Said Burbon) to assist me now at need
Against these pesants, which have me oppressed,
And forced me to so infamous deed,
That yet my love may from their hands be freed.
Sir Artegall, albe he erst did wit
His wavering mind, yet to his aid agreed,
And buckling him eftsoons unto the fight,
Did set upon those troops withal his power and might.
Who flocking round about them, as a swarm
Of flies upon a birchen bough does cluster,
Did them assault with terrible alarm,
And over all the fields themselves did muster,
With bills and glayues making a dreadful luster;
That forced at first those knights back to retire:
As when the wrathful Boreas does bluster,
Naught may abide the tempest of his ire,
Both man and beast do fly, and succor do inquyre.
But when as ouerblowen was that brunt,
Those knights began a fresh them to assail,
And all about the fields like Squirrels hunt;
But chiefly Talus with his iron flayle,
Against which no flight nor rescue mote avail,
Made cruel havoc of the baser crew,
And chaced them both over hill and dale:
The rascal many soon they overthrew,
But the two knights themselves their captains did subdew.
At last they came whereas that Lady bode,
Whom now her keepers had forsaken quight,
To save themselves, and scattered were abroad:
Her half dismayed they found in doubtful plight,
As neither glad nor sorry for their sight;
Yet wondrous fair she was, and richly clad
In royal robes, and many Jewels dight,
But that those villens through their usage bad
Them foully rent, and shamefully defaced had.
But Burbon straight dismounting from his steed,
Unto her ran with greedy great desire,
And catching her fast by her ragged weed,
Would have embraced her with heart entyre.
But she backstarting with disdainefull ire,
Bad him auaunt, ne would unto his lore
Allured be, for prayer nor for meed.
Whom when those knights so forward and forlore
Beheld, they her rebuked and vpbrayded sore.
Said Artegall; what foul disgrace is this,
To so fair Lady, as ye seem in sight,
To blot your beauty, that unblemished is,
With so foul blame, as breach of faith once plight,
Or change of love for any worlds delight?
Is ought on earth so precious or dear,
As praise and honor? Or is ought so bright
And beautiful, as glories beams appear,
Whose goodly light then Phoebus lamp does shine more clear?
Why then will ye, fond Dame, attempted be
Unto a strangers love, so lightly placed,
For guiftes of gold, or any worldly glee,
To leave the love, that ye before embraced,
And let your fame with falsehood be defaced.
Fie on the pelf, for which good name is sold,
And honor with indignity debased:
Dearer is love then life, and fame then gold;
But dearer the^ them both, your faith once plighted hold;
Much was the Lady in her gentle mind
Abasht at his rebuke, that bit her near,
Ne ought to answer thereunto did find;
But hanging down her head with heavy cheer,
Stood long amazed, as she amated wear.
Which Burbon seeing, her again assayd,
And clasping twixt his arms, her up did rear
Upon his steed, whiles she no whit gainesayd,
So bore her quite away, nor well nor ill apayd.
Nathlesse the iron man did still pursew
That rascal many with vnpittied spoil,
Ne ceased not, till all their scattred crew
Into the sea he drove quite from that soil,
The which they troubled had with great turmoyle.
But Artegall seeing his cruel deed,
Commanded him from slaughter to recoyle,
And to his voyage began again proceed:
For that the term approaching fast, required speed.
Cant. XII.
Artegall does Sir Burbon aid,
And blames for changing shield:
He with the great Grantorto fights,
And slaieth him in field.
O Sacred hunger of ambitious minds,
And impotent desire of men to rain,
Whom neither dread of God, that devils binds,
Nor laws of men, that commonweals contain,
Nor bands of nature, that wild beasts restrain,
Can keep from outrage, and from doing wrong,
Where they may hope a kingdom to obtain.
No faith so firm, no trust can be so strong,
No love so lasting then, that may endure long.
Witness may Burbon be, whom all the bands,
Which may a Knight assure, had surely bound,
Until the love of Lordship and of lands
Made him become most faithless and unsound:
And witness be Gerioneo found,
Who for like cause fair Belge did oppress,
And right and wrong most cruelly confound:
And so be now Grantorto, who no less
Then all the rest burst out to all outragiousnesse.
Against whom Sir Artegall, long having since
Taken in hand th'exploit, being theretoo
Appointed by that mighty Faerie Prince,
Great Gloriane, that Tyrant to fordoo,
Through other great adventures hethertoo
Had it forslackt. But now time drawing ny,
To him assynd, her high beheast to do,
To the sea shore he began his way apply,
To weete if shipping ready he mote there descry.
Tho when they came to the sea coast, they found
A ship all ready (as good fortune fell)
To put to sea, with whom they did compound,
To pass them over, where them list to tell:
The wind and weather served them so well,
That in one day they with the coast did fall;
Whereas they ready found them to repel,
Great hosts of men in order martial,
Which them forbad to land, and footing did forstall.
But nathemore would they from land refrain,
But when as nigh unto the shore they drew,
That foot of man might sound the bottom plain,
Talus into the sea did forth issew,
Though darts from shore and stones they at him threw;
And wading through the waves with steadfast sway,
Maugre the might of all those troops in view,
Did win the shore, whence he them chaste away,
And made to fly, like doves, whom the Eagle does affray.
The whiles Sir Artegall, with that old knight
Did forth descend, there being none them near,
And forward marched to a town in sight.
By this came tidings to the Tyrants ear,
By those, which erst did fly away for fear
Of their arrival: wherewith troubled sore,
He all his forces straight to him did rear,
And forth issuing with his scouts before,
Meant them to have incountred, ere they left the shore.
But ere he marched far, he with them met,
And fiercely charged them with all his force;
But Talus sternely did upon them set,
And brusht, and battred them without remorse,
That on the ground he left full many a corse;
Ne any able was him to withstand,
But he them overthrew both man and horse,
That they lay scattred over all the land,
As thick as does the seed after the sowers hand.
Till Artegall him seeing so to rage,
Willd him to stay, and sign of truce did make:
To which all harkning, did a while assuage
Their forces fury, and their terror slake;
Till he an Herald called, and to him spoke,
Willing him wend unto the Tyrant straight,
And tell him that not for such slaughters sake
He thither came, but for to try the right
Of fair Irenaes cause with him in single fight.
And willed him for to reclayme with speed
His scattred people, ere they all were slain,
And time and place convenient to areed,
In which they two the combat might darraine.
Which message when Grantorto heard, full feign
And glad he was the slaughter so to stay,
And pointed for the combat twixt them twain
The morrow next, ne gave him longer day.
So sounded the retraite, and drew his folk away.
That night Sir Artegall did cause his tent
There to be pitched on the open plain;
For he had given straight commandment,
That none should dare him once to entertain:
Which none durst break, though many would right feign
For fair Irena, whom they loved dear.
But yet old Sergis did so well him pain,
That from close friends, that dared not to appear,
He all things did puruay, which for them needful wear.
The morrow next, that was the dismal day,
Appointed for Irenas death before,
So soon as it did to the world display
His cheerful face, and light to men restore,
The heavy Maid, to whom none tidings bore
Of Artegals arryuall, her to free,
Looked up with eyes full sad and heart full sore;
Weening her life's last hour then near to be,
Since no redemption nigh she did nor hear nor see.
Then up she rose, and on her self did dight
Most squalid garments, fit for such a day,
And with dull countenance, and with doleful spright,
She forth was brought in sorrowful dismay,
For to receive the doom of her decay.
But coming to the place, and finding there
Sir Artegall, in battailous array
Waiting his foe, it did her dead heart cheer,
And new life to her lent, in midst of deadly fear.
Like as a tender Rose in open plain,
That with untimely drought nigh withered was,
And hung the head, soon as few drops of rain
Thereon distill, and deaw her dainty face,
Gins to look up, and with fresh wonted grace
Dispreds the glory of her leaves gay;
Such was Irenas countenance, such her case,
When Artegall she saw in that array,
There waiting for the Tyrant, till it was far day.
Who came at length, with proud presumpteous gate,
Into the field, as if he fearelesse were,
All armed in a cote of iron plate,
Of great defense to ward the deadly fear,
And on his head a steel cap he did wear
Of color rustie brown, but sure and strong;
And in his hand an huge Polaxe did bear,
Whose steal was iron studded, but not long,
With which he wont to fight, to justify his wrong.
Of stature huge and hideous he was,
Like to a Giant for his monstrous hight,
And did in strength most sorts of men surpas,
Ne ever any found his match in might;
Thereto he had great skill in single fight:
His face was ugly, and his countenance stern,
That could have frayd one with the very sight,
And gaped like a gulf, when he did gerne,
That whether man or monster one could scarce discern.
Soon as he did within the listes appear,
With dreadful look he Artegall beheld,
As if he would have daunted him with fear,
And grinning griesly, did against him weld
His deadly weapon, which in hand he held.
But th'Elfin swayne, that often had seen like fight,
Was with his ghastly countenance nothing queld,
But began him straight to buckle to the fight,
And cast his shield about, to be in ready plight.
The trompets sound, and they together go,
With dreadful terror, and with fell intent;
And their huge strokes full daungerously bestow,
To do most damage, where as most they meant.
But with such force and fury violent,
The tyrant thundered his thick blows so fast,
That through the iron walls their way they rent,
And even to the vital parts they past,
Ne ought could them endure, but all they cleft or brast.
Which cruel outrage when as Artegall
Did well auize, thenceforth with wary heed
He shund his strokes, where ever they did fall,
And way did give unto their graceless speed:
As when a skillful Mariner does reed
A storm approaching, that does peril threat,
He will not bide the danger of such dread,
But strikes his sails, and vereth his mainsheat,
And lends unto it leave the empty air to beat.
So did the Faerie knight himself abeare,
And stouped often his head from shame to shield;
No shame to stoop, ones head more high to rear,
And much to gain, a little for to yield;
So stoutest knights done oftentimes infield.
But still the tyrant sternely at him laid,
And did his iron axe so nimbly wield,
That many wounds into his flesh it made,
And with his burdenous blows him sore did ouerlade.
Yet when as fit advantage he did spy,
The whiles the cursed felon high did rear
His cruel hand, to smite him mortally,
Under his stroke he to him stepping near,
Right in the flank him struck with deadly dreare,
That the gore blood thence gushing grievously,
Did underneath him like a pond appear,
And all his armor did with purple dye;
Thereat he brayed loud, and yelled dreadfully.
Yet the huge stroke, which he before intended,
Kept on his course, as he did it direct,
And with such monstrous poise adowne descended,
That seemed naught could him from death protect:
But he it well did ward with wise respect,
And twixt him and the blow his shield did cast,
Which thereon seizing, took no great effect,
But biting deep therein did stick so fast,
That by no means it back again he forth could wrast.
Long while he tug'd and strove, to get it out,
And all his power applied thereunto,
That he therewith the knight drew all about:
Nathlesse, for all that ever he could do,
His axe he could not from his shield undo.
Which Artegall perceiving, struck no more,
But loosing soon his shield, did it forgo,
And whiles he combred was therewith so sore,
He began at him let drive more fiercely then before.
So well he him pursew'd, that at the last,
He stroke him with Chrysaor on the head,
That with the souse thereof full sore aghast,
He staggered to and fro in doubtful sted.
Again whiles he him saw so ill bested,
He did him smite with all his might and maine,
That falling on his mother earth he fed:
Whom when he saw prostrated on the plain,
He lightly reft his head, to ease him of his pain.
Which when the people round about him saw,
They shouted all for joy of his success,
Glad to be quit from that proud Tyrants awe,
Which with strong power did the^ long time oppress;
And running all with greedy ioyfulnesse
To fair Irena, at her feet did fall,
And her adored with due humbleness,
As their true Liege and Princess natural;
And eke her champions glory sounded over all.
Who straight her leading with meet majesty
Unto the palace, where their kings did rain,
Did her therein establish peaceably,
And to her kingdoms seat restore again;
And all such persons, as did late maintain
That Tyrants part, with close or open aid,
He sorely punished with heavy pain;
That in short space, whiles there with her he stayed,
Not one was left, that durst her once have disobayd.
During which time, that he did there remain,
His study was true Justice how to deal,
And day and night employed his busy pain
How to reform that ragged commonweal:
And that same iron man which could reveal
All hidden crimes, through all that realm he sent,
To search out those, that vsd to rob and steal,
Or did rebel against lawful government;
On whom he did inflict most grievous punishment.
But ere he could reform it thoroughly,
He through occasion called was away,
To Faerie Court, that of necessity
His course of Justice he was forced to stay,
And Talus to revoke from the right way,
In which he was that Realm for to redress.
But enuies cloud still dimmeth virtues ray.
So having freed Irena from distress,
He took his leave of her, there left in heaviness.
Tho as he back returned from that land,
And there arrived again, whence forth he set,
He had not passed far upon the strand,
When as two old ill favored Hags he met,
By the way side being together set,
Two griesly creatures; and, to that their faces
Most foul and filthy were, their garments yet
Being all raged and tattered, their disgraces
Did much the more augment, and made most ugly cases.
The one of them, that elder did appear,
With her dull eyes did seem to look askew,
That her mis-shape much helped; and her foul hear
Hung loose and loathsomely: Thereto her hew
Was wan and lean, that all her teeth arew,
And all her bones might through her cheeks be red;
Her lips were like raw lether, pale and blew,
And as she spoke, therewith she slauered;
Yet spoke she seldom, but thought more, the less she sed.
Her hands were foul and durtie, never washed
In all her life, with long nails over raught,
Like puttocks claws: with the one of which she scracht
Her cursed head, although it itched naught;
The other held a snake with venime fraught,
On which she fed, and gnawed hungrily,
As if that long she had not eaten ought;
That round about her jaws one might descry
The bloody gore and poison dropping lothsomely.
Her name was Envy, known well thereby;
Whose nature is to grieve, and grudge at all,
That ever she sees done prays-worthily,
Whose sight to her is greatest cross, may fall,
And vexes so, that makes her eat her gall.
For when she wants other thing to eat,
She feeds on her own maw unnatural,
And of her own foul entrayles makes her meat;
Meat fit for such a monsters monsterous dyeat.
And if she hapt of any good to hear,
That had to any happily betid,
Then would she inly fret, and grieve, and tear
Her flesh for felnesse, which she inward hid:
But if she heard of ill, that any did,
Or harm, that any had, then would she make
Great cheer, like one unto a banquet bid;
And in another loss great pleasure take,
As she had got thereby, and gained a great stake.
The other nothing better was, then she;
Agreeing in bad will and cancred kind,
But in bad manner they did disagree:
For what so Envy good or bad did find,
She did conceal, and murder her own mind;
But this, what ever evil she conceived,
Did spread abroad, and throw in the open wynd.
Yet this in all her words might be perceived,
That all she sought, was men's good name to have bereaved.
For whatsoever good by any said,
Or done she heard, she would streightwayes invent,
How to deprave, or slanderously upbraid,
Or to misconstrue of a man's intent,
And turn to ill the thing, that well was meant.
Therefore she used often to resort,
To common haunts, and companies frequent,
To hark what any one did good report,
To blot the same with blame, or wrest in wicked sort.
And if that any ill she heard of any,
She would it eeke, and make much worse by telling,
And take great joy to publish it to many,
That every matter worse was for her melling.
Her name was hight Detraction, and her dwelling
Was near to Envy, even her neighbor next;
A wicked hag, and Envy self excelling
In mischief: for her self she only vexed;
But this same both her self, and others eke perplexed.
Her face was ugly, and her mouth distort,
Foming with poison round about her gils,
In which her cursed tongue full sharp and short
Appeared like Aspis sting, that closely kills,
Or cruelly does wound, whom so she wills:
A distaffe in her other hand she had,
Upon the which she little spinnes, but spils,
And faynes to weaue false tales and leasings bad,
To throw amongst the good, which others had disprad.
These two now had themselves combynd in one,
And linckt together against Sir Artegall,
For whom they waited as his mortal fone,
How they might make him into mischief fall,
For freeing from their snares Irena thrall,
Besides unto themselves they gotten had
A monster, which the Blatant beast men call,
A dreadful feend of gods and men ydrad,
Whom they by slights allured, and to their purpose lad.
Such were these Hags, and so unhandsome dressed:
Who when they nigh approaching, had espyde
Sir Artegall returned from his late quest,
They both arose, and at him loudly cryde,
As it had been two shepherds curres, had scryde
A ravenous Wolf amongst the scattered flocks.
And Envy first, as she that first him eyde,
Toward him runs, and with rude flaring locks
About her ears, does beat her breast, and forhead knockes.
Then from her mouth the gobbet she does take,
The which whyleare she was so greedily
Devouring, even that halfe-gnawen snake,
And at him throws it most despightfully.
The cursed Serpent, though she hungrily
Erst chawd thereon, yet was not all so dead,
But that some life remained secretly,
And as he past before withouten dread,
Bit him behind, that long the mark was to be read.
Then the other coming near, began him revile,
And foully rail, with all she could invent;
Saying, that he had with unmanly guile,
And foul abusion both his honor blent,
And that bright sword the sword, of Justice lent
Had stained with reproachful cruelty,
In guiltless blood of many an innocent:
As for Grandtorto, him with treachery
And traynes having surpised, he foully did to die.
Thereto the Blatant beast by them set on
At him began aloud to bark and bay,
With bitter rage and fell contention,
That all the woods and rocks nigh to that way,
Began to quake and tremble with dismay;
And all the air rebellowed again.
So dreadfully his hundred tongues did bray,
And evermore those hags them selves did pain,
To sharpen him, and their own cursed tongs did strain.
And still among most bitter words they spoke,
Most shameful, most unrighteous, most untrue,
That they the mildest man alive would make
Forget his patience, and yield vengeance dew
To her, that so false sclaunders at him threw.
And more to make the^ pierce and wound more deep,
She with the sting, which in her vile tongue grew,
Did sharpen them, and in fresh poison steep:
Ye the past on, and seemed of them to take no keep.
But Talus hearing her so lewdly rail,
And speak so ill of him, that well deserved,
Would her have chastised with his iron flaile,
If her Sir Artegall had not preserved,
And him forbidden, who his heast observed.
So much the more at him still did she scold,
And stones did cast, yet he for naught would swerue
From his right course, but still the way did hold
To Faery Court, where what him fell shall else be told.
THE SIXTE BOOK OF THE FAERIE QVEENE. Containing THE LEGEND OF S. CALIDORE OR
OF COVRTESIE.
THe ways, through which my weary steps I guide,
In this delightful land of Faery,
Are so exceeding spacious and wide,
And sprinkled with such sweet variety,
Of all that pleasant is to ear or eye,
That I nigh ravished with rare thoughts delight,
My tedious travel do forget thereby;
And when I gin to feel decay of might,
tI strength to me supplies, and chears my dulled spright.
Such secret comfort, and such heavenly pleasures,
Ye sacred imps, that on Parnasso dwell,
And there the keeping have of learnings threasures,
Which do all worldly riches far excel,
Into the minds of mortal men do well,
And goodly fury into them infuse;
Guide ye my footing, and conduct me well
In these strange ways, where never foot did use,
Ne none can find, but who was taught them by the Muse.
Reuele to me the sacred noursery
Of virtue, which with you does there remain,
Where it in silver bower does hidden ly
From view of men, and wicked worlds disdain.
Since it at first was by the Gods with pain
Planted in earth, being derived at furst
From heavenly seeds of bounty sovereign,
And by them long with careful labor nursed,
Till it to ripeness grew, and forth to honor burst.
Amongst them all grows not a fayrer flower,
Then is the bloosme of comely courtesy,
Which though it on a lowly stalk do bower,
Yet brancheth forth in brave nobility,
And spreds it self through all civility:
Of which though present age do plenteous seem,
Yet being matched with plain Antiquity,
Ye will them all but feigned shows esteem,
Which carry colors fair, that feeble eyes misdeeme.
But in the trial of true courtesy,
Its now so far from that, which then it was,
That it indeed is naught but forgerie,
Fashioned to please the eyes of them, that pas,
Which see not perfect things but in a glass:
Yet is that glass so gay, that it can blind
The wisest sight, to think gold that is bras.
But virtues seat is deep within the mind,
And not in outward shows, but inward thoughts defynd.
But where shall I in all Antiquity
So fair a pattern find, where may be seen
The goodly praise of Princely courtesy,
As in your self, O sovereign Lady Queen,
In whose pure mind, as in a mirror sheene,
It shows, and with her brightness does inflame
The eyes of all, which thereon fixed been;
But meriteth indeed an higher name:
Yet so from low to high vplifted is your name.
Then pardon me, most dreaded Sovereign,
That from your self I do this virtue bring,
And to your self do it return again:
So from the Ocean all rivers spring,
And tribute back repay as to their King.
Right so from you all goodly virtues well
Into the rest, which round about you ring,
Fair Lords and Ladies, which about you dwell,
And do adorn your Court, where courtesies excel.
Cant. I.
Calidore saues from Maleffort,
A Damzell used vylde:
Does vanquish Crudor, and does make
Briana wexe more mylde.
OF Court it seems, men Courtesy do call,
For that it there most uses to abound;
And well beseems that in Princes hall
That virtue should be plentifully found,
Which of all goodly manners is the ground,
And root of civil conversation.
Right so in Faery court it did redound,
Where courteous Knights and Ladies most did won
Of all on earth, and made a matchless paragon.
But among them all was none more courteous Knight,
Then Calidore, beloved over all,
In whom it seems, that gentleness of spright
And manners mylde were planted natural;
To which he adding comely guize withal,
And gracious speech, did steal men's hearts away.
Nathlesse thereto he was full stout and tall,
And well approved in batteilous affray,
That him did much renown, and far his fame display.
Ne was there Knight, ne was there Lady found
In Faery court, but him did dear embrace,
For his fair usage and conditions sound,
The which in all men's liking gained place,
And with the greatest purchased greatest grace:
Which he could wisely use, and well apply,
To please the best, and the evil to embase.
For he loathd leasing, and base flattery,
And loved simple truth and steadfast houesty.
And now he was in travel on his way,
Upon an hard adventure sore bestad,
Whenas by chance he met upon a day
With Artegall, returning yet half sad
From his late conquest, which he gotten had.
Who whenas each of other had a sight,
They knew them selves, and both their persons rad:
When Calidore thus first; Hail noblest Knight
Of all this day on ground, that breathen living spright.
Now tell, if please you, of the good success,
Which ye have had in your late enterprise.
To whom Sir Artegall began to express
His whole exploite, and valorous emprize,
In order as it did to him arize.
Now happy man (said then Sir Calidore)
Which have so goodly, as ye can deuize,
Atchieu'd so hard a quest, as few before;
That shall you most renowned make for evermore.
But where ye ended have, now I begin
To tread an endless trace, withouten guide,
Or good direction, how to enter in,
Or how to issue forth in ways vntryde,
In perils strange, in labors long and wide,
In which although good Fortune me befall,
Yet shall it not by none be testifyde.
What is that quest (quoth then Sir Artegall)
That you into such perils presently does call?
The Blattant Beast (quoth he) I do pursew,
And through the world incessantly do chase,
Till I him overtake, or else subdew:
Yet know I not or how, or in what place
To find him out, yet still I forward trace.
What is that Blattant Beast? (then he replide)
It is a Monster bred of hellishe race,
(Then answered he) which often has annoyd
Good Knights and Ladies true, and many else destroyed.
Of Cerberus whilome he was begot,
And fell Chimaera in her darkesome den,
Through foul commixture of his filthy blot;
Where he was fostred long in Stygian fen,
Till he to perfect ripeness grew, and then
Into this wicked world he forth was sent,
To be the plague and scourge of wretched men:
Whom with vile tongue and venomous intent
He sore does wound, and bite, and cruelly torment.
Then since the saluage Island I did leave
Said Artegall, I such a Beast did see,
The which did seem a thousand tongues to have,
That all in spite and malice did agree,
With which he bayd and loudly barkt at me,
As if that he attonce would me devour.
But I that knew my self from peril free,
Did naught regard his malice nor his power,
But he the more his wicked poison forth did pour.
That surely is that Beast (said Calidore)
Which I pursue, of whom I am right glad
To hear these tidings, which of none before
Through all my weary travel I have had:
Yet now some hope your words unto me add.
Now God you speed (quoth then Sir Artegall)
And keep your body from the danger drad:
For ye have much ado to deal withal,
So both took goodly leave, and parted several.
Sir Calidore thence traveled not long,
When as by chance a comely Squire he found,
That thorough some more mighty enemies wrong,
Both hand and foot unto a tree was bound:
Who seeing him from far, with piteous sound
Of his shrill cries him called to his aid.
To whom approaching, in that painful stound
When he him saw, for no demands he staide,
But first him losde, and afterward thus to him said.
Unhappy Squire, what hard mishap thee brought
Into this bay of peril and disgrace?
What cruel hand thy wretched thraldom wrought,
And thee captyued in this shameful place?
To whom he answered thus; My hapless case
Is not occasiond through my misdesert,
But through misfortune, which did me abase
Unto this shame, and my young hope subvert,
Ere that I in her guilefull trains was well expert.
Not far from hence, upon yond rocky hill,
Hard by a straight there stands a castle strong,
Which does observe a custom lewd and ill,
And it has long mayntaind with mighty wrong:
For may no Knight nor Lady pass along
That way, (and yet they needs must pass that way,)
By reason of the straight, and rocks among,
But they that Ladies locks do shave away,
And that knights berd for toll, which they for passage pay
A shameful use as ever I did hear,
Said Calidore, and to be overthrown.
But by what means did they at first it rear,
And for what cause, tell if thou have it known.
Said then that Squire: The Lady which does own
This Castle, is by name Briana hight.
Then which a prouder Lady lives none:
She long time has dear loved a doughty Knight,
And sought to win his love by all the means she might.
His name is Crudor, who through high disdain
And proud despite of his self pleasing mind,
Refused has to yield her love again,
Until a Mantle she for him do find,
With beards of Knights and locks of Ladies lynd.
Which to provide, she has this Castle dight,
And therein has a Seneschall assynd,
Called Maleffort, a man of mickle might,
Who executes her wicked will, with worse despite.
He this same day, as I that way did come
With a fair Damzell, my beloved dear,
In execution of her lawless doom,
Did set upon us flying both for fear:
For little boots against him hand to rear.
Me first he took, unable to withstond;
And whiles he her pursued every where,
Till his return unto this tree he bond:
Ne wot I surely, whether her he yet have fond.
Thus whiles they spoke, they heard a ruefull shrieke
Of one loud crying, which they straight way ghest,
That it was she, the which for help did seek.
Tho looking up unto the cry to lest,
They saw that Carle from far, with hand unblessed
Hayling that maiden by the yellow hear,
That all her garments from her snowy breast,
And from her head her locks he nigh did tear,
Ne would he spare for pity, nor refrain for fear.
Which heinous sight when Calidore beheld,
Eftsoons he loosd that Squire, and so him left,
With hearts dismay and inward dolor queld,
For to pursue that villain, which had reft
That piteous spoil by so injurious theft.
Whom ouertaking, loud to him he cryde;
Leave faytor quickly that misgotten weft
To him, that has it better iustifyde,
And turn thee soon to him, of whom thou art defyde.
Who harkening to that voice, him self vpreard,
And seeing him so fiercely toward make,
Against him stoutly ran, as naught afeard,
But rather more enraged for those words sake;
And with stern count'naunce thus unto him spoke.
Art thou the caytiue, that defyest me,
And for this Maid, whose party thou do take,
Wilt give thy beard, though it but little be?
Yet shall it not her locks for ransom fro me free.
With that he fiercely at him flew, and laid
On hideous strokes with most importune might,
That often he made him stagger as vnstayd,
And often recuile to shun his sharp despite.
But Calidore, that was well skild in fight,
Him long forbore, and still his spirit spared,
Lying in wait, how him he damadge might.
But when he felt him shrink, and come to ward,
He greater grew, and began to drive at him more hard.
Like as a water stream, whose swelling sourse
Shall drive a Mill, within strong bancks is pent,
And long restrained of his ready course;
So soon as passage is unto him lent,
Breaks forth, and makes his way more violent.
Such was the fury of Sir Calidore,
When once he felt his foeman to relent;
He fiercely him pursued, and pressed sore,
Who as he still decayed, so he increased more.
The heavy burden of whose dreadful might
When as the Carle no longer could sustain,
His heart began faint, and straight he took his flight
Toward the Castle, where if need constrain,
His hope of refuge used to remain.
Whom Calidore perceiving fast to fly,
He him pursued and chaced through the plain,
That he for dread of death began loud to cry
Unto the ward, to open to him hastily.
They from the wall him seeing so aghast,
The gate soon opened to receive him in,
But Calidore did follow him so fast,
That even in the Porch he him did win,
And cleft his head asunder to his chin.
The carkarsse tumbling down within the door,
Did choke the entrance with a lump of sin,
That it could not be shut, whilst Calidore
Did enter in, and slew the Porter on the flore.
With that the rest, the which the Castle kept,
About him flockt, and hard at him did lay;
But he them all from him full lightly swept,
As does a Steare, in heat of summers day.
With his long tail the bryzes brush away.
Thence passing forth, into the hall he came,
Where of the Lady self in sad dismay
He was ymett, who with uncomely shame
Began him salute, and foul upbraid with faulty blame.
False traitor Knight, (said she) no Knight at all,
But scorn of arms that have with guilty hand
Murdered my men, and slain my Seneschall;
Now come thou to rob my house vnmand,
And spoil my self, that can not thee withstand?
Yet doubt thou not, but that some better Knight
Then thou, that shall thy treason understand,
Will it avenge, and pay thee with thy right:
And if none do, yet shame shall thee with shame requight
Much was the Knight abashed at that word;
Yet answered thus; Not unto me the shame,
But to the shameful doer it afford.
Blood is no blemish; for it is no blame
To punish those, that do deserve the same;
But they that break bands of civility,
And wicked customs make, those do defame
Both noble arms and gentle courtesy.
No greater shame to man then inhumanitie.
Then do your self, for dread of shame, forgo
This evil manner, which ye here maintain,
And do in stead thereof mild curt'sie show
To all, that pass. That shall you glory gain
More then his love, which thus ye seek t'obtaine.
Wherewith all full of wrath, she thus replyde;
Vile recreant, know that I do much disdain
Thy courteous lore, that do my love deride,
Who scorns thy idle scoff, and bids thee be defyde.
To take defiaunce at a Ladies word
(Quoth he) I hold it no indignity;
But were he here, that would it with his sword
Abett, perhaps he mote it dear aby.
Cowherd (quoth she) were not, that thou would fly,
Ere thou do come, he should be soon in place.
If I do so, (said he) then liberty
I leave to you, for aye me to disgrace
With all those shames, that erst ye spoke me to deface.
With that a Dwarf she called to her in have,
And taking from her hand a ring of gould,
A privy token, which between them past,
Bad him to fly with all the speed he could,
To Crudor, and desire him that he would
Vouchsafe to reskue her against a Knight,
Who through strong power had now her self in hold,
Having late slain her Seneschall in fight,
And all her people murdered with outrageous might.
The Dwarf his way did have, and went all night;
But Calidore did with her there abide
The coming of that so much threatened Knight,
Where that discourteous Dame with scornful pride,
And foul entreaty him indignifyde,
That iron heart it hardly could sustain:
Yet he, that could his wrath full wisely guide,
Did well endure her womanish disdain,
And did him self from frail impatience refrain.
The morrow next, before the lamp of light,
Above the earth vpreard his flaming head,
The Dwarf, which bore that message to her knight,
Brought answer back, that ere he tasted bread,
He would her succor, and alive or dead
Her foe deliver up into her hand:
Therefore he wild her do away all dread;
And that of him she mote assured stand,
He sent to her his basenet, as a faithful band.
Thereof full blyth the Lady straight became,
And began t'augment her bitterness much more:
Yet no whit more appalled for the same,
Ne ought dismayed was Sir Calidore,
But rather did more cheerful seem therefore.
And having soon his arms about him dight,
Did issue forth, to meet his foe before;
Where long he stayed not, when as a Knight
He spide come pricking on with all his power and might.
Well weend he straight, that he should be the same,
Which took in hand her quarrel to maintain;
Ne stayed to ask if it were he by name,
But coucht his spear, and ran at him amain.
They been ymett in midst of the plain,
With so fell fury, and dispiteous forse,
That neither could the others stroke sustain,
But rudely rowld to ground both man and horse,
Neither of other taking pity nor remorse.
But Calidore vprose again full light,
Whiles yet his foe lay fast in senseless sound,
Yet would he not him hurt, although he might:
For shame he weend a sleeping wight to wound.
But when Briana saw that drery stound,
There where she stood upon the Castle wall,
She deemed him sure to have been dead on ground,
And made such piteous mourning therewithal,
That from the battlements she ready seemed to fall.
Nathlesse at length him self he did vpreare
In lustlesse wise, as if against his will,
Ere he had slept his fill, he wakened were,
And began to stretch his limbs; which feeling ill
Of his late fall, a while he rested still:
But when he saw his foe before in view,
He shook off luskishnesse, and courage chill
Kindling a fresh, began battle to renew,
To prove if better foot then horseback would ensew.
There then began a fearful cruel fray
Betwixt them two, for maystery of might.
For both were wondrous practicke in that play,
And passing well expert in single fight,
And both inflamed with furious despite:
Which as it still encreast, so still increast
Their cruel strokes and terrible affright;
Ne once for ruth their rigor they releast,
Ne once to breath a while their angers tempest ceast.
Thus long they traced and trauerst to and fro,
And tryde all ways, how each mote entrance make
Into the life of his malignant foe;
They hewed their helmes, and plates asunder brake,
As they had potshares been; for naught mote slake
Their greedy vengeaunces, but goary blood,
That at the last like to a purple lake
Of bloody gore congealed about them stood,
Which from their riuen sides forth gushed like a flood.
At length it chaunst, that both their hands on hie,
At once did heave, with all their power and might,
Thinking the utmost of their force to try,
And prove the final fortune of the fight:
But Calidore, that was more quick of sight,
And nimbler handed, then his enemy,
Prevented him before his stroke could light,
And on the helmet smote him formerlie,
That made him stoop to ground with meek humility.
And ere he could recover foot again,
He following that fair advantage fast,
His stroke redoubled with such might and maine,
That him upon the ground he groueling cast;
And leaping to him light, would have vnlast
His Helm, to make unto his vengeance way.
Who seeing, in what danger he was plast,
Cryde out, Ah mercy Sir, do me not slay,
But save my life, which lot before your foot does lay.
With that his mortal hand a while he stayed,
And having somewhat calmed his wrathful heat
With goodly patience, thus he to him said;
And is the boast of that proud Ladies threat,
That menaced me from the field to beat,
Now brought to this? By this now may ye learn,
Strangers no more so rudely to entreat,
But put away proud look, and usage stern,
The which shall naught to you but foul dishonor yearne.
For nothing is more blamefull to a knight,
That court'sie does as well as arms profess,
How ever strong and fortunate in fight,
Then the reproach of pride and cruelnesse.
In vain he seeks others to suppress,
Who has not learnd him self first to subdew:
All flesh is frail, and full of fickleness,
Subject to fortunes chance, still changing new;
What haps to day to me, to morrow may to you.
Who will not mercy unto others show,
How can he mercy ever hope to have?
To pay each with his own is right and dew.
Yet since ye mercy now do need to crave,
I will it grant, your hopeless life to save;
With these conditions, which I will propound:
First, that ye better shall your self behave
Unto all errant knights, whereso on ground;
Next that ye Ladies aid in every stead and stound.
The wretched man, that all this while did dwell
In dread of death, his heasts did gladly hear,
And promised to perform his precept well,
And whatsoever else he would requere.
So suffering him to rise, he made him swear
By his own sword, and by the cross thereon,
To take Briana for his loving fere,
Withouten dowre or composition;
But to release his former foul condition.
All which accepting, and with faithful oath
Bynding himself most firmly to obey,
He up arose, how ever liefe or loath,
And swore to him true fealty for aye.
Then forth he called from sorrowful dismay
The sad Briana, which all this beheld:
Who coming forth yet full of late affray,
Sir Calidore vpcheard, and to her teld
All this accord, to which he Crudor had compeld.
Whereof she now more glad, then sorry erst,
All overcome with infinite affect,
For his exceeding courtesy, that pearst
Her stubborn heart with inward deep effect,
Before his feet her self she did project,
And him adoring as her lives dear Lord,
With all due thanks, and dutiful respect,
Her self acknowledged bound for that accord,
By which he had to her both life and love restord.
So all returning to the Castle glad,
Most joyfully she them did entertain,
Where goodly glee and feast to them she made,
To show her thankful mind and meaning feign,
By all the means she mote it best explain:
And after all, unto Sir Calidore
She freely gave that Castle for his pain,
And her self bound to him for evermore;
So wondrously now chaung'd, from that she was before.
But Calidore himself would not retain
Nor land nor fee, for hyre of his good deed,
But gave them straight unto that Squire again,
Whom from her Seneschall he lately freed,
And to his damzell as their rightful meed,
For recompense of all their former wrong:
There he remaind with them right well agreed,
Till of his wounds he wexed hole and strong,
And then to his first quest he passed forth along.
Cant. II.
Calidore sees young Tristram slay
A proud discourteous knight,
He makes him Squire, and of him learnes
his state and present plight.
WHat virtue is so fitting for a knight,
Or for a Lady, whom a knight should love,
As Courtesy, to bear themselves aright
To all of each degree, as does behoue?
For whether they be placed high above,
Or low beneath, yet ought they well to know
Their good, that none them rightly may reprove
Of rudeness, for not yielding what they owe:
Great skill it is such duties timely to bestow.
Thereto great help dame Nature self does lend:
For some so goodly gracious are by kind,
That every action does them much commend,
And in the eyes of men great liking find;
Which others, that have greater skill in mind,
Though they enforce themselves, cannot attain.
For every thing, to which one is inclined,
Does best become, and greatest grace does gain:
Yet praise likewise deserve good thewes, enforst with pain.
That well in courteous Calidore appears,
Whose every act and deed, that he did say,
Was like enchantment, that through both the eyes,
And both the ears did steal the heart away.
He now again is on his former way,
To follow his first quest, when as he spyde
A tall young man from thence not far away,
Fighting on foot, as well he him descryde,
Against an armed knight, that did on horseback ride.
And them beside a Lady fair he saw,
Standing alone on foot, in foul array:
To whom himself he hastily did draw,
To weet the cause of so uncomely fray,
And to depart them, if so be he may.
But ere he came in place, that youth had killed
That armed knight, that low on ground he lay;
Which when he saw, his heart was inly child
With great amazement, and his thought with wonder filled.
Him steadfastly he marked, and saw to be
A goodly youth of amiable grace,
Yet but a slender slip, that scarce did see
Yet seventeen years, but tall and fair of face
That sure he deemed him borne of noble race.
All in a woodmans iacket he was clad
Of lincoln green, belayd with silver lace;
And on his head an hood with aglets sprad,
And by his side his hunters horn he hanging had.
Buskins he wore of costliest cordwayne,
Pinckt upon gold, and paled part per part,
As then the guize was for each gentle swayne;
In his right hand he held a trembling dart,
Whose fellow he before had sent apart;
And in his left he held a sharp borespeare,
With which he wont to launch the saluage heart
Of many a Lion, and of many a Bear
That first unto his hand in chase did happen near.
Whom Calidore a while well having vewed,
At length bespake; what means this, gentle swain?
Why has thy hand too bold it self embrewed
In blood of knight, the which by thee is slain,
By thee no knight; which arms impugneth plain?
Certes (said he) loath were I to have broken
The law of arms; yet break it should again,
Rather then let my self of wight be stricken,
So long as these two arms were able to be wroken.
For not I him as this his Lady here
May witness well, did offer first to wrong,
Ne surely thus unarmed I likely were;
But he me first, through pride and puissance strong
Assayld, not knowing what to arms does long.
Perdie great blame, (then said Sir Calidore)
For armed knight a wight unarmed to wrong.
But then aread, thou gentle child, wherefore
Betwixt you two began this strife and stern uproar.
That shall I sooth (said he) to you declare.
I whose vnryper years are yet unfit
For thing of weight, or work of greater care,
Do spend my days, and bend my careless wit
To saluage chase, where I thereon may hit
In all this forest, and wyld wooddie rain:
Where, as this day I was enraunging it,
I chaunst to meet this knight, who there lies slain,
Together with this Lady, passing on the plain.
The knight, as ye did see, on horseback was,
And this his Lady, (that him ill became,)
On her fair feet by his horse side did pas
Through thick and thin, unfit for any Dame.
Yet not content, more to increase his shame,
When so she lagged, as she needs mote so,
He with his spear, that was to him great blame,
Would thumpe her forward, and enforce to go,
Weeping to him in vain, and making piteous woe.
Which when I saw, as they me passed by,
Much was I moved in indignant mind,
And began to blame him for such cruelty
Toward a Lady, whom with usage kind
He rather should have taken up behind.
Wherewith he wroth, and full of proud disdain,
Took in foul scorn, that I such fault did find,
And me in lieu thereof reuil'd again,
Threatening to chastize me, as does t'a child pertain.
Which I no less disdayning, back returned
His scornful taunts unto his teeth again,
That he straight way with haughty choler burned,
And with his spear struck me one stroke or twain;
Which I enforst to bear though to my pain,
Cast to requite, and with a slender dart,
Fellow of this I bear, thrown not in vain,
Struck him, as seems, underneath the heart,
That through the wound his spirit shortly did depart.
Much did Sir Calidore admyre his speech
Tempred so well, but more admyr'd the stroke
That through the mayles had made so strong a breach
Into his heart, and had so sternely wroke
His wrath on him, that first occasion broke.
Yet rested not, but further began inquire
Of that same Lady, whether what he spoke,
Were soothly so, and that th'vnrighteous ire
Of her own knight, had given him his own due hire.
Of all which, when as she could naught deny,
But cleard that stripling of th'imputed blame,
Said then Sir Calidore; neither will I
Him charge with guilt, but rather do quite clame:
For what he spoke, for you he spoke it, Dame;
And what he did, he did him self to save:
Against both which that knight wrought knightlesse shame.
For knights and all men this by nature have,
Toward all womenkind them kindly to behave.
But since that he is gone irreuocable,
Please it you Lady, to us to aread,
What cause could make him so dishonorable,
To drive you so on foot unfit to tread,
And lackey by him, against all womanhead?
Certes Sir knight (said she) full loath I were
To raise a living blame against the dead:
But since it me concerns, my self to clear,
I will the truth discover, as it chaunst whylere.
This day, as he and I together road
Upon our way, to which we weren bent,
We chaunst to come foreby a covert glade
Within a wood, whereas a Lady gent
Sat with a knight in joyous iolliment,
Of their frank loves, free from all gealous spies:
Fair was the Lady sure, that mote content
An heart, not carried with too curious eyes,
And unto him did show all lovely courtesyes.
Whom when my knight did see so lovely fair,
He inly began her lover to envy,
And wish, that he part of his spoil might share.
Whereto when as my presence he did spy
To be a let, he bad me by and by
For to alight: but when as I was loath,
My loves own part to leave so suddenly,
He with strong hand down from his steed me throw'th,
And with presumpteous power against that knight straight go'th.
Unarmed all was the knight, as then more meet
For Ladies service, and for loves delight,
Then fearing any foeman there to meet:
Whereof he taking odds, straight bids him dight
Himself to yield his love, or else to fight.
Whereat the other starting up dismayed,
Yet boldly answered, as he rightly might;
To leave his love he should be ill apayd,
In which he had good right gaynst all, that it gainesayd.
Yet since he was not presently in plight
Her to defend, or his to justify,
He him requested, as he was a knight,
To lend him day his better right to try,
Or stay till he his arms, which were thereby,
Might lightly fetch. But he was fierce and whot,
Ne time would give, nor any terms aby,
But at him flew, and with his spear him smot;
From which to think to save himself, it booted not.
Mean while his Lady, which this outrage saw,
Whilst they together for the quarrey strove,
Into the covert did her self withdraw,
And closely hid her self within the grove.
My knight hers soon, as seems, to danger drove
And left sore wounded: but when her he mist,
He woxe half mad, and in that rape began roue
And range through all the wood, where so he wist
She hidden was, and sought her so long, as him list.
But when as her he by no means could find,
After long search and chauff, he turned back
Unto the place, where me he left behind:
There began he me to curse and ban, for lack
Of that fair booty, and with bitter wrack
To wreake on me the guilt of his own wrong.
Of all which I yet glad to bear the pack,
Strove to appease him, and persuaded long:
But still his passion grew more violent and strong.
Then as it were t'auenge his wrath on me,
When forward we should fare, he flat refused
To take me up (as this young man did see)
Upon his steed, for no just cause accused,
But forced to trot on foot, and foul misused,
Pounching me with the butt end of his spear,
In vain complaining, to be so abused.
For he regarded neither playnt nor tear,
But more enforst my pain, the more my plaints to hear.
So passed we, till this young man us met,
And being moved with pity of my plight,
Spoke, as was meet, for ease of my regret:
Whereof befell, what now is in your sight.
Now sure (then said Sir Calidore) and right
Me seems, that him befell by his own fault:
Or through support of countenance proud and hault
To wrong the weaker, often falls in his own assault.
Then turning back unto that gentle boy,
Which had himself so stoutly well acquit;
Seeing his face so lovely stern and coy,
And hearing th'answeres of his pregnant wit,
He praysd it much, and much admyred it;
That sure he weend him borne of noble blood,
With whom those graces did so goodly fit:
And when he long had him beholding stood,
He burst into these words, as to him seemed good.
Fair gentle swayne, and yet as stout as fair,
That in these woods amongst the Nymphs do won,
Which daily may to thy sweet looks repair,
As they are wont unto Latonaes son,
After his chase on woodie Cynthus done:
Well may I certes such an one thee read,
As by thy worth thou worthily have won,
Or surely borne of some Heroicke sead,
That in thy face appears and gracious goodly head.
But should it not displease thee it to tell;
(Unless thou in these woods thy self conceal,
For love amongst the woodie Gods to dwell;)
I would thy self require thee to reveal,
For dear affection and unfeigned zeal,
Which to thy noble personage I bear,
And wish thee grow in worship and great weal.
For since the day that arms I first did rear,
I never saw in any greater hope appear.
To whom then thus the noble youth; may be
Sir knight, that by discovering my estate,
Harm may arise vnweeting unto me;
Nathelesse, since ye so courteous seemed late,
To you I will not fear it to relate.
Then wot ye that I am a Briton borne,
Son of a King, how ever thorough fate
Or fortune I my country have forlorn,
And lost the crown, which should my head by right adorn.
And Tristram is my name, the only heir
Of good king Meliogras which did rain
In Cornewale, till that he through lives despeire
Untimely did, before I did attain
Ripe years of reason, my right to maintain.
After whose death, his brother seeing me
An infant, weak a kingdom to sustain,
Upon him took the royal high degree,
And sent me, where him list, instructed for to be.
The widow Queen my mother, which then hight
Fair Emiline, conceiving then great fear
Of my frail safety, resting in the might
Of him, that did the kingly Scepter bear,
Whose gealous dread enduring not a pear,
Is wont to cut off all, that doubt may breed,
Thought best away me to remove somewhere
Into some foreign land, where as no need
Of dreaded danger might his doubtful humor feed.
So taking counsel of a wise man red,
She was by him aduiz'd, to send me quight
Out of the country, wherein I was bred,
The which the fertile Lioness is hight,
Into the land of Faerie, where no wight
Should weet of me, nor work me any wrong
To whose wise read she harkening, sent me straight
Into this land, where I have wond thus long,
Since I was ten years old, now grown to stature strong.
All which my days I have not lewdly spent,
Nor spilt the blossom of my tender years
In ydlesse, but as was convenient,
Have trained been with many noble feres
In gentle thewes, and such like seemly leres.
Among which my most delight has always been,
To hunt the saluage chase amongst my peers,
Of all that raungeth in the forest green;
Of which none is to me unknown, that eu'r was seen.
Ne is there hawk, which mantleth her on perch,
Whether high towering, or accoasting low,
But I the measure of her flight do search,
And all her pray, and all her diet know.
Such be our joys, which in these forests grow:
Only the use of arms, which most I joy,
And fitteth most for noble swayne to know,
I have not tasted yet, yet past a boy,
And being now high time these strong joints to employ.
Therefore, good Sir, since now occasion fit
Does fall, whose like hereafter seldom may,
Let me this crave, unworthy though of it,
That ye will make me Squire without delay,
That from henceforth in batteilous array
I may bear arms, and learn to use them right;
The rather since that fortune has this day
Given to me the spoil of this dead knight,
These goodly gilden arms, which I have won in fight.
All which when well Sir Calidore had heard,
Him much more now, then erst he began admire,
For the rare hope which in his years appeared,
And thus replide; fair child, the high desire
To love of arms, which in you does aspire,
I may not certes without blame deny;
But rather wish, that some more noble hire,
(Though none more noble then is cheualrie,)
I had, you to reward with greater dignity.
There him he causd to kneel, and made to swear
Faith to his knight, and truth to Ladies all,
And never to be recreant, for fear
Of peril, or of ought that might befall:
So he him dubbed, and his Squire did call.
Full glad and joyous then young Tristram grew,
Like as a flower, whose silken leaves small,
Long shut up in the bud from heavens view,
At length breaks forth, and broad displayes his smyling hew.
Thus when they long had treated to and fro,
And Calidore betook him to depart,
Child Tristram prayed, that he with him might go
On his adventure, vowing not to start,
But wayt on him in every place and part.
Whereat Sir Calidore did much delight,
And greatly joyed at his so noble heart,
In hope he sure would prove a doughtie knight:
Yet for the time this answer he to him behight.
Glad would I surely be, thou courteous Squire,
To have thy presence in my present quest,
That mote thy kindled courage set on fire,
And flame forth honor in thy noble breast:
But I am bound by vow, which I professed
To my dread Sovereign, when I it assayd,
That in atchieuement of her high behest,
I should no creature join unto mine aid,
For thy I may not grant, that ye so greatly prayde.
But since this Lady is all desolate,
And needs safeguard now upon her way,
Ye may do well in this her needful state
To succor her, from danger of dismay;
That thankful guerdon may to you repay.
The noble ympe of such new service feign,
It gladly did accept, as he did say.
So taking courteous leave, they parted twain,
And Calidore forth passed to his former pain.
But Tristram then despoyling that dead knight
Of all those goodly implements of praise,
Long fed his greedy eyes with the fair sight
Of the bright metal, shyning like Sun rays;
Handling and turning them a thousand ways.
And after having them upon him dight,
He took that Lady, and her up did raise
Upon the steed of her own late dead knight,
So with her marched forth, as she did him behight.
There to their fortune leave we them awhile,
And turn we back to good Sir Calidore;
Who ere he thence had traueild many a mile,
Came to the place, whereas ye heard before
This knight, whom Tristram slew, had wounded sore
Another knight in his despiteous pride;
There he that knight found lying on the flore,
With many wounds full perilous and wide,
That all his garments, and the grass in vermeill did.
And there beside him sat upon the ground
His woeful Lady, piteously complaining
With loud laments that most unlucky stound,
And her sad self with careful hand constrayning
To wype his wounds, and ease their bitter payning.
Which sorry sight when Calidore did view
With heavy eyne, from tears uneath refrayning,
His mighty heart their mournful case can rue,
And for their better comfort to them nigher drew.
Then speaking to the Lady, thus he said:
Ye doleful Dame, let not your grief empeach
To tell, what cruel hand has thus arayd
This knight unarmed, with so vnknightly breach
Of arms, that if I yet him nigh may reach,
I may avenge him of so foul despite.
The Lady hearing his so courteous speech,
Began rear her eyes as to the cheerful light,
And from her sorry heart few heavy words forth sight.
In which she showed, how that discourteous knight
(Whom Tristram slew) them in that shadow found,
Ioying together in vnblam'd delight,
And him unarmed, as now he lay on ground,
Charged with his spear and mortally did wound,
Withouten cause, but only her to reaue
From him, to whom she was for ever bound:
Yet when she fled into that covert greaue,
He her not finding, both them thus nigh dead did leave.
When Calidore this ruefull story had
Well understood, he began of her demand,
What manner wight he was, and how yclad,
Which had this outrage wrought with wicked hand.
She then, like as she best could understand,
Him thus described, to be of stature large,
Clad all in gilden arms, with azure band
Quartred athwart, and bearing in his targe
A Lady on rough waves, rowed in a summer barge.
Then began Sir Calidore to guess straight way
By many signs, which she described had,
That this was he, whom Tristram erst did slay,
And to her said; Dame be no longer sad:
For he, that has your Knight so ill bestad,
Is now him self in much more wretched plight;
These eyes him saw upon the cold earth sprad,
The meede of his desert for that despite,
Which to your self he wrought, and to your loved knight.
Therefore fair Lady lay aside this grief,
Which ye have gathered to your gentle heart,
For that displeasure; and think what relief
Were best devise for this your lovers smart,
And how ye may him hence, and to what part
Convey to be recur'd. She thankt him dear,
Both for that news he did to her impart,
And for the courteous care, which he did bear
Both to her love; and to her self in that sad dreare.
Yet could she not devise by any wit,
How thence she might convey him to some place.
For him to trouble she it thought unfit,
That was a stranger to her wretched case;
And him to bear, she thought it thing too base.
Which when as he perceived, he thus bespake;
Fair Lady let it not you seem disgrace,
To bear this burden on your dainty back;
My self will bear a part, coportion of your pack.
So off he did his shield, and downward laid
Upon the ground, like to an hollow bear;
And pouring balm, which he had long puruayd,
Into his wounds, him up thereon did rear,
And twixt them both with parted pains did bear,
Twixt life and death, not knowing what was done.
Thence they him carried to a Castle near,
In which a worthy ancient Knight did won:
Where what ensued, shall in next Canto be begone.
Cant. III.
Calidore brings Priscilla home,
Pursues the Blatant Beast:
Saues Serena whilst Calepine
By Turpine is oppressed.
TRue is, that whiLome that good Poet said,
The gentle mind by gentle deeds is known.
For a man by nothing is so well bewrayd,
As by his manners, in which plain is shown
Of what degree and what race he is grown.
For seldom seen, a trotting Stalion get
An ambling Colt, that is his proper own:
So seldom seen, that one in baseness set
Does noble courage show, with courteous manners met.
But evermore contrary has been tryde,
That gentle blood will gentle manners breed;
As well may be in Calidore descryde,
By late ensample of that courteous deed,
Done to that wounded Knight in his great need,
Whom on his back he bore, till he him brought
Unto the Castle where they had decreed.
There of the Knight, the which that Castle ought,
To make abode that night he greatly was besought.
He was to weete a man of full ripe years,
That in his youth had been of mickle might,
And borne great sway in arms amongst his pears:
But now weak age had dimd his candle light.
Yet was he courteous still to every wight,
And loved all that did to arms incline.
And was the father of that wounded Knight,
Whom Calidore thus carried on his chine,
And Aldus was his name, and his sons Aladine.
Who when he saw his son so ill bedight,
With bleeding wounds, brought home upon a Bear,
By a fair Lady, and a stranger Knight,
Was inly touched with compassion dear,
And dear affection of so doleful dreare,
That he these words burst forth; Ah sorry boy,
Is this the hope that to my hoary hear
Thou brings? aie me, is this the timely joy,
Which I expected long, now turned to sad annoy?
Such is the weakness of all mortal hope;
So tickle is the state of earthly things,
That ere they come unto their aimed scope,
They fall too short of our frail reckonings,
And bring us bale and bitter sorrowings,
In stead of comfort, which we should embrace:
This is the state of Keasars and of Kings.
Let none therefore, that is in meaner place,
Too greatly grieve at any his unlucky case.
So well and wisely did that good old Knight
Temper his grief, and turned it to cheer,
To cheer his guests, whom he had stayed that night,
And make their welcome to them well appear:
That to Sir Calidore was easy gear;
But that fair Lady would be cheard for naught,
But sighed and sorrow'd for her lover dear,
And inly did afflict her pensive thought,
With thinking to what case her name should now be brought.
For she was daughter to a noble Lord,
Which dwelt thereby, who sought her to affy
To a great pere; but she did disaccord,
Ne could her liking to his love apply,
But loved this fresh young Knight, who dwelt her ny,
The lusty Aladine, though meaner borne,
And of less liuelood and hability,
Yet full of valor, the which did adorn
His meanness much, and make her the others riches scorn.
So having both found fit occasion,
They met together in that luckelesse glade;
Where that proud Knight in his presumption
The gentle Aladine did erst invade,
Being unarmed, and set in secret shade.
Whereof she now bethinking, began t'aduize,
How great a hazard she at erst had made
Of her good fame, and further began deuize,
How she the blame might salve with colored disguize.
But Calidore with all good courtesy
Feigned her to frolic, and to put away
The pensive fit of her melancholy;
And that old Knight by all means did assay,
To make them both as merry as he may.
So they the evening past, till time of rest,
When Calidore in seemly good array
Unto his bower was brought, and there undressed,
Did sleep all night through weary travel of his quest.
But fair Priscilla (so that Lady hight)
Would to no bed, nor take no kindly sleep,
But by her wounded love did watch all night,
And all the night for bitter anguish weep,
And with her tears his wounds did wash and steep.
So well she washed them, and so well she wacht him,
That of the deadly swound, in which full deep
He drenched was, she at the length dispacht him,
And drove away the stound, which mortally attacht him.
The morrow next, when day began to vplooke,
He also began vplooke with drery eye,
Like one that out of deadly dream awooke:
Where when he saw his fair Priscilla by,
He deeply sighed, and groaned inwardly,
To think of this ill state, in which she stood,
To which she for his sake had weetingly
Now brought her self, and blamed her noble blood:
For first, next after life, he tendered her good.
Which she perceiving, did with plenteous tears
His care more then her own compassionate,
Forgetful of her own, to mind his fears:
So both conspiring, began to intimate
Each others grief with zeal affectionate,
And twixt them twain with equal care to cast,
How to save hole her hazarded estate;
For which the only help now left them last
Seemed to be Calidore: all other helps were past.
Him they did deem, as sure to them he seemed,
A courteous Knight, and full of faithful trust:
Therefore to him their cause they best esteemed
Whole to commit, and to his dealing just.
Early, so soon as Titans beams forth brust
Through the thick clouds, in which they steeped lay
All night in darkness, duld with iron rust.
Calidore rising up as fresh as day,
Began freshly him address unto his former way.
But first him seemed fit, that wounded Knight
To visit, after this nights perilous pass,
And to salute him, if he were in plight,
And eke that Lady his fair lovely less.
There he him found much better then he was,
And moved speech to him of things of course,
The anguish of his pain to ouerpasse:
Among which he namely did to him discourse,
Of former days mishap, his sorrows wicked sourse.
Of which occasion Aldine taking hold,
Began break to him the fortunes of his love,
And all his disaduentures to unfold;
That Calidore it dearly deep did move.
In the end his kyndly courtesy to prove,
He him by all the bands of love besought,
And as it mote a faithful friend behoue,
To safeconduct his love, and not for ought
To leave, till to her fathers house he had her brought.
Sir Calidore his faith thereto did plight,
It to perform: so after little stay,
That she her self had to the journey dight,
He passed forth with her in fair array,
Fearelesse, who ought did think, or ought did say,
Since his own thought he knew most clear from wite.
So as they past together on their way,
He can deuize this counter-cast of slight,
To give fair color to that Ladies cause in sight.
Straight to the carcass of that Knight he went,
The cause of all this evil, who was slain
The day before by just auengement
Of noble Tristram, where it did remain:
There he the neck thereof did cut in twain,
And took with him the head, the sign of shame.
So forth he passed thorough that days pain,
Till to that Ladies fathers house he came,
Most pensive man, through fear, what of his child became.
There he arriving boldly, did present
The fearful Lady to her father dear,
Most perfect pure, and guiltless innocent
Of blame, as he did on his Knighthood swear,
Since first he saw her, and did free from fear
Of a discourteous Knight, who her had reft,
And by outrageous force away did bear:
Witness thereof he showed his head there left,
And wretched life forlorn for vengement of his theft.
Most joyful man her sire was her to see,
And hear th'aduenture of her late mischaunce;
And thousand thanks to Calidore for fee
Of his large pains in her deliverance
Did yield; Ne less the Lady did advance.
Thus having her restored trustily,
As he had vowed, some small continuance
He there did make, and then most carefully
Unto his first exploite he did him self apply.
So as he was pursuing of his quest
He chaunst to come whereas a jolly Knight,
In covert shade him self did safely rest,
To solace with his Lady in delight:
His warlike arms he had from him vndight;
For that him self he thought from danger free,
And far from envious eyes that mote him spite.
And eke the Lady was full fair to see,
And courteous withal, becoming her degree.
To whom Sir Calidore approaching nigh,
Ere they were well aware of living wight,
Them much abasht, but more him self thereby,
That he so rudely did upon them light,
And troubled had their quiet loves delight.
Yet since it was his fortune, not his fault,
Him self thereof he labored to acquit,
And pardon craved for his so rash default,
That he against courtesy so fowly did default.
With which his gentle words and goodly wit
He soon allayd that Knights conceived displeasure,
That he besought him down by him to sit,
That they mote treat of things abroad at leisure;
And of adventures, which had in his measure
Of so long ways to him befallen late.
So down he sat, and with delightful pleasure
His long adventures began to him relate,
Which he endured had through dangerous debate.
Of which whilst they discoursed both together,
The fair Serena (so his Lady hight)
Allured with myldnesse of the gentle wether,
And pleasaunce of the place, the which was dight
With diverse flowers distinct with rare delight;
Wandered about the fields, as liking led
Her wavering lust after her wandering sight,
To make a garland to adorn her head,
Without suspect of ill or dangers hidden dred.
All suddenly out of the forest nere
The Blatant Beast forth rushing unaware,
Caught her thus loosely wandering here and there,
And in his wide great mouth away her bare.
Crying aloud in vain, to show her sad misfare
Unto the Knights, and calling often for aid,
Who with the horror of her hapless care
Hastily starting up, like men dismayde,
Ran after fast to reskue the distressed maid.
The Beast with their pursuit incited more,
Into the wood was bearing her apace
For to have spoiled her, when Calidore
Who was more light of foot and swift in chase,
Him ouertooke in midst of his race:
And fiercely charging him with all his might,
Forced to forgo his pray there in the place,
And to betake him self to fearful flight;
For he durst not abide with Calidore to fight.
Who nathelesse, when he the Lady saw
There left on ground, though in full evil plight,
Yet knowing that her Knight now near did draw,
Staide not to succor her in that affright,
But followed fast the Monster in his flight:
Through woods and hills he followed him so fast,
That he nould let him breath nor gather spright,
But forced him gape and gasp, with dread aghast,
As if his lungs and lites were nigh a sunder brast.
And now by this Sir Calepine (so hight)
Came to the place, where he his Lady found
In dolorous dismay and deadly plight,
All in gore blood there tumbled on the ground,
Having both sides through grypt with griesly wound.
His weapons soon from him he threw away,
And stouping down to her in drery swound,
Vprear'd her from the ground, whereon she lay,
And in his tender arms her forced up to stay.
So well he did his busy pains apply,
That the faint sprite he did revoke again,
To her frail mansion of mortality.
Then up he took her twixt his arms twain,
And setting on his steed, her did sustain
With careful hands softing foot her beside,
Till to some place of rest they mote attain,
Where she in safe assurance mote abide,
Till she recured were of those her wounds wide.
Now when as Phoebus with his fiery waine
Unto his Inn began to draw apace;
Tho wexing weary of that toylesome pain,
In traveling on foot so long a space,
Not wont on foot with heavy arms to trace,
Down in a dale forby a rivers side,
He chaunst to spy a fair and stately place,
To which he meant his weary steps to guide,
In hope there for his love some succor to provide.
But coming to the rivers side, he found
That hardly passable on foot it was:
Therefore there still he stood as in a stound,
Ne wist which way he through the foord mote pas.
Thus whilst he was in this distressed case,
Devising what to do, he nigh espyde
An armed Knight approaching to the place,
With a fair Lady lincked by his side,
The which themselves prepared through the foord to ride
Whom Calepine saluting (as became)
Besought of courtesy in that his need,
For safe conducting of his sickely Dame,
Through that same perilous foord with better heed,
To take him up behind upon his steed,
To whom that other did this taunt return.
Perdy thou peasant Knight, might rightly reed
Me then to be full base and evil borne,
If I would bear behind a burden of such scorn.
But as thou have thy steed forlorn with shame,
So fare on foot till thou another gain,
And let thy Lady likewise do the same,
Or bear her on thy back with pleasing pain,
And prove thy manhood on the billows vain.
With which rude speech his Lady much displeased,
Did him reprove, yet could him not restrain,
And would on her own Palfrey him have eased,
For pity of his Dame, whom she saw so diseased.
Sir Calepine her thanckt, yet inly wroth
Against her Knight, her gentleness refused,
And carelessly into the river goth,
As in despite to be so foul abused
Of a rude churl, whom often he accused
Of foul discourtesie, unfit for Knight
And strongly wading through the waves unused,
With spear in the one hand, stayed him self upright,
With the other staide his Lady up with steady might.
And all the while, that same discourteous Knight,
Stood on the further bancke beholding him,
At whose calamity, for more despite
He laughed, and mocked to see him like to swim.
But when as Calepine came to the brim,
And saw his carriage past that peril well,
Looking at that same Carle with countenance grim,
His heart with vengeance inwardly did swell,
And forth at last did break in speeches sharp and fell.
Vnknightly Knight, the blemish of that name,
And blot of all that arms upon them take,
Which is the badge of honor and of fame,
Lo I defy thee, and here challenge make,
That thou for ever do those arms forsake;
And be for ever held a recreant Knight,
Unless thou dare for thy dear Ladies sake,
And for thine own defense on foot alight,
To justify thy fault against me in equal fight.
The dastard, that did hear him self defyde,
Seemed not to weigh his threatfull words at all,
But laughed them out, as if his greater pride,
Did scorn the challenge of so base a thrall:
Or had no courage, or else had no gall.
So much the more was Calepine offended,
That him to no revenge he forth could call,
But both his challenge and him self contemned,
Ne cared as a coward so to be condemned.
But he naught weighing what he said or did,
Turned his steed about another way,
And with his Lady to the Castle rid,
Where was his won; ne did the other stay,
But after went directly as he may,
For his sick charge some harbor there to seek;
Where he arriving with the fall of day,
Drew to the gate, and there with prayers meek,
And myld entreaty lodging did for her beseeke.
But the rude Porter that no manners had,
Did shut the gate against him in his face,
And entrance boldly unto him forbad.
Nathelesse the Knight now in so needy case,
Began him entreat even with submission base,
And humbly praid to let them in that night:
Who to him aunswer'd, that there was no place
Of lodging fit for any errant Knight,
Unless that with his Lord he formerly did fight.
Full loath am I (quoth he) as now at erst,
When day is spent, and rest us needs most,
And that this Lady, both whose sides are pearst
With wounds, is ready to forgo the ghost:
Ne would I gladly combat with mine host,
That should to me such courtesy afford,
Unless that I were thereunto enforst.
But yet aread to me, how hight thy Lord,
That does thus strongly ward the Castle of the ford.
His name (quoth he) if that thou list to learn,
Is hight Sir Turpine, one of mickle might,
And manhood rare, but terrible and stearne
In all assaies to every errant Knight,
Because of one, that wrought him foul despite.
Ill seems (said he) if he so valiant be,
That he should be so stern to stranger wight:
For seldom yet did living creature see,
That courtesy and manhood ever disagree.
But go thy ways to him, and fro me say,
That here is at his gate an errant Knight,
That house-rome craves, yet would be loath t'assay
The proof of battle, now in doubtful night,
Or courtesy with rudeness to requite:
Yet if he needs will fight, crave leave till morn,
And tell with all, the lamentable plight,
In which this Lady languisheth forlorn,
That pity craves, as he of woman was yborne.
The groom went straight way in, and to his Lord
Declared the message, which that Knight did move;
Who sitting with his Lady then at board,
Not only did not his demand reprove,
But both himself reuil'd, and eke his love;
Albe his Lady, that Blandina hight,
Him of ungentle usage did approve
And earnestly entreated that they might
Find favor to be lodged there for that same night.
Yet would he not persuaded be for ought,
Ne from his currish will awhit reclame.
Which answer when the groom returning, brought
To Calepine, his heart did inly flame
With wrathful fury for so foul a shame,
That he could not thereof avenged be:
But most for pity of his dearest Dame,
Whom now in deadly dannger he did see;
Yet had no means to comfort, nor procure her glee.
But all in vain; for why, no remedy
He saw, the present mischief to redress,
But the utmost end perforce for to aby,
Which that nights fortune would for him address.
So down he took his Lady in distress,
And laid her underneath a bush to sleep,
Covered with cold, and wrapped in wretchedness,
Whiles he him self all night did naught but weep,
And wary watch about her for her safeguard keep.
The morrow next, so soon as joyous day
Did show it self in sunny beams bedight,
Serena full of dolorous dismay,
Twixt darkness dread, and hope of living light,
Vprear'd her head to see that cheerful sight.
Then Calepine, how ever inly wroth,
And greedy to avenge that vile despite,
Yet for the feeble Ladies sake, full loath
To make there longer stay, forth on his journey goth.
He goth on foot all armed by her side,
Vpstaying still her self upon her steed,
Being unable else alone to ride;
So sore her sides, so much her wounds did bleed:
Till that at length, in his extremest need,
He chaunst far off an armed Knight to spy,
Pursuing him apace with greedy speed,
Whom well he wist to be some enemy,
That meant to make advantage of his misery.
Wherefore he stayed, till that he nearer drew,
To weet what issue would thereof betyde,
Tho whenas he approached nigh in view,
By certain signs he plainly him descryde,
To be the man, that with such scornful pride
Had him abusde, and shamed yesterday;
Therefore misdoubting, least he should misguyde
His former malice to some new assay,
He cast to keep him self so safely as he may.
By this the other came in place likewise,
And couching close his spear and all his power,
As bent to some malicious enterprise,
He bad him stand, to abide the bitter auoure
Of his sore vengeance, or to make auoure
Of the lewd words and deeds, which he had done:
With that ran at him, as he would devour
His life attonce; who naught could do, but shun
The peril of his pride, or else be ouerrun.
Yet he him still pursew'd from place to place,
With full intent him cruelly to kill,
And like a wild goat round about did chase,
Flying the fury of his bloody will.
But his best succor and refuge was still
Behind his Ladies back, who to him cryde,
And called often with prayers loud and shrill,
As ever he to Lady was affyde,
To spare her Knight, and rest with reason pacifyde.
But he the more thereby enraged was,
And with more eager felnesse him pursew'd,
So that at length, after long weary chase,
Having by chance a close advantage vew'd,
He over raught him, having long eschew'd
His violence in vain, and with his spear
Struck through his shoulder, that the blood ensew'd
In great abundance, as a well it were,
That forth out of an hill fresh gushing did appear.
Yet ceast he not for all that cruel wound,
But chaste him still, for all his Ladies cry,
Not satisfyde till on the fatal ground
He saw his life powrd forth dispiteously:
The which was certes in great ieopardy,
Had not a wondrous chance his reskue wrought,
And saved from his cruel villainy.
Such chances often exceed all human thought:
That in another Canto shall to end be brought.
Cant. IIII.
Calepine by a saluage man
from Turpine reskewed is,
And whylest an Infant from a Bear
he saues, his love does miss.
LIke as a ship with dreadful storm long tossed,
Having spent all her mastes and her ground-hold,
Now far from harbor likely to be lost,
At last some fisher bark does near behold,
That gives comfort to her courage cold.
Such was the state of this most courteous knight
Being oppressed by that faytour bold,
That he remained in most perilous plight,
And his sad Lady left in pitiful affright.
Till that by fortune, passing all foresight,
A saluage man, which in those woods did won,
Drawn with that Ladies loud and piteous shright,
Toward the same incessantly did run,
To understand what there was to be done.
There he this most discourteous crauen found,
As fiercely yet, as when he first begone,
Chasing the gentle Calepine around,
Ne sparing him the more for all his grievous wound.
The saluage man, that never till this hour
Did taste of pity, neither gentlesse knew,
Seeing his sharp assault and cruel stoure
Was much emmoued at his perils view,
That even his ruder heart began to rue,
And feel compassion of his evil plight,
Against his foe that did him so pursew:
From whom he meant to free him, if he might,
And him avenge of that so villenous despite.
Yet arms or weapon had he none to fight,
Ne knew the use of warlike instruments,
Save such as sudden rage him lent to smite,
But naked without needful vestiments,
To clad his corpse with meet habiliments,
He cared not for dint of sword nor speere,
No more then for the stroke of strawes or bents:
For from his mothers womb, which him did bear
He was invulnerable made by Magic leare.
He stayed not t'aduize, which way were best
His foe t'assayle, or how himself to guard,
But with fierce fury and with force infest
Upon him ran; who being well prepared,
His first assault full warily did ward,
And with the push of his sharp-pointed spear
Full on the breast him struck, so strong and hard,
That forced him back recoyle, and reele areare;
Yet in his body made no wound nor blood appear.
With that the wyld man more enraged grew,
Like to a Tygre that has mist his pray,
And with mad mood again upon him flew,
Regarding neither spear, that mote him slay,
Nor his fierce steed, that mote him much dismay.
The saluage nation does all dread despize:
Tho on his shield he griple hold did lay,
And held the same so hard, that by no wize
He could him force to loose, or leave his enterprise.
Long did he wrest and wring it to and fro,
And every way did try, but all in vain:
For he would not his greedy grype forgo,
But hayld and pulled with all his might and maine,
That from his steed him nigh he drew again.
Who having now no use of his long spear,
So nigh at hand, nor force his shield to strain,
Both spear and shield, as things that needless were*
He quite forsook, and fled himself away for fear.
But after him the wyld man ran apace,
And him pursewed with importune speed,
(For he was swift as any Bucke in chase)
And had he not in his extremest need,
Been helped through the swiftness of his steed,
He had him overtaken in his flight.
Who ever, as he saw him nigh succeed,
Began cry aloud with horrible affright,
And shrieked out, a thing uncomely for a knight.
But when the Saluage saw his labor vain,
In following of him, that fled so fast,
He weary woxe, and back returned again
With speed unto the place, whereas he last
Had left that couple, nere their utmost cast.
There he that knight full sorely bleeding found,
And eke the Lady fearfully aghast,
Both for the peril of the present stound,
And also for the sharpness of her rankling wound.
For though she were right glad, so rid to be
From that vile lozell, which her late offended,
Yet now no less encombrance she did see,
And peril by this saluage man pretended;
Against whom she saw no means to be defended,
By reason that her knight was wounded sore.
Therefore her self she wholly recommended
To Gods sole grace, whom she did often implore,
To send her succor, being of all hope forlore.
But the wyld man, contrary to her fear,
Came to her creeping like a fawning hound,
And by rude tokens made to her appear
His deep compassion of her doleful stound,
Kissing his hands, and crouching to the ground;
For other language had he none nor speech,
But a soft murmr, and confused sound
Of senseless words, which nature did him teach,
To Express his passions, which his reason did empeach.
And coming likewise to the wounded knight,
When he beheld the streams of purple blood
Yet flowing fresh, as moved with the sight,
He made great moan after his saluage mood,
And running straight into the thickest wood,
A certain herb from thence unto him brought,
Whose virtue he by use well understood:
The juice whereof into his wound he wrought,
And stopped the bleeding straight, ere he it staunched thought.
Then taking up that Recreants shield and spear,
Which erst he left, he signs unto them made,
With him to wend unto his wonning near:
To which he easily did them persuade
Far in the forest by a hollow glade,
Covered with mossie shrubs, which spredding broad
Did underneath them make a gloomy shade;
There foot of living creature never trod,
Ne scarce wyld beasts durst come, there was this wights abode.
Thither he brought these unacquainted guests;
To whom fair semblance, as he could, he showed
By signs, by looks, and all his other gests.
But the bare ground, with hoarie moss bestrowed,
Must be their bed, their pillow was unsown,
And the fruits of the forest was their feast:
For their bad Stuard neither plough'd nor sowed,
Ne fed on flesh, ne ever of wyld beast
Did taste the blood, obaying natures first beheast.
Yet howsoever base and mean it were,
They took it well, and thanked God for all,
Which had them freed from that deadly fear,
And saved from being to that caytiue thrall.
Here they of force (as fortune now did fall)
Compelled were themselves a while to rest,
Glad of that easement, though it were but small;
That having there their wounds awhile redrest,
They mote the abler be to pass unto the rest.
During which time, that wyld man did apply
His best endeavor, and his daily pain,
In seeking all the woods both far and nigh
For herbs to dress their wounds; still seeming feign,
When ought he did, that did their lyking gain.
So as ere long he had that knights wound
Recured well, and made him whole again:
But that same Ladies hurts no herb he found,
Which could redress, for it was inwardly unsound.
Now when as Calepine was woxen strong,
Upon a day he cast abroad to wend,
To take the air, and hear the thrushes song,
Unarmed, as fearing neither foe nor friend,
And without sword his person to defend.
There him befell, unlooked for before,
An hard adventure with unhappy end,
A cruel Bear, the which an infant bore
Betwixt his bloody jaws, besprinckled all with gore.
The little babe did loudly scrike and squall,
And all the woods with piteous plaints did fill,
As if his cry did mean for help to call
To Calepine, whose ears those shrieches shrill
Percing his heart with pities point did thrill;
That after him, he ran with zealous haste,
To rescue the infant, ere he did him kill:
Whom though he saw now somewhat ouerpast,
Yet by the cry he followed, and pursewed fast.
Well then him chaunst his heavy arms to want,
Whose burden mote empeach his needful speed,
And hinder him from liberty to pant:
For having long time, as his daily weed,
Them wont to wear, and wend on foot for need,
Now wanting them he felt himself so light,
That like an Hawk, which feeling her self freed
From bells and iesses, which did let her flight,
Him seemed his feet did fly, and in their speed delight.
So well he sped him, that the weary Bear
Ere long he ouertooke, and forced to stay,
And without weapon him assayling near,
Compeld him soon the spoil adowne to lay.
Wherewith the beast enraged to loose his pray,
Upon him turned, and with greedy force
And fury, to be crossed in his way,
Gaping full wide, did think without remorse
To be aueng'd on him, and to devour his corse.
But the bold knight no whit thereat dismayed,
But catching up in hand a ragged stone,
Which lay thereby (so fortune him did aid)
Upon him ran, and thrust it all atone
Into his gaping throat, that made him groan
And gasp for breath, that he nigh choked was,
Being unable to digest that bone;
Ne could it upward come, nor downward pass,
Ne could he brook the coldness of the stony mass.
Whom when as he thus combred did behold,
Stryuing in vain that nigh his bowels brast,
He with him closd, and laying mighty hold
Upon his throat, did gripe his gorge so fast,
That wanting breath, him down to ground he cast;
And then oppressing him with urgent pain,
Ere long enforst to breath his utmost blast,
Gnashing his cruel teeth at him in vain,
And threatening his sharp claws, now wanting power to strain.
Then took he up betwixt his arms twain
The little babe, sweet relickes of his pray;
Whom pitying to hear so sore complain,
From his soft eyes the tears he wypt away,
And from his face the filth that did it ray,
And every little limb he searched around,
And every part, that under sweathbands lay,
Least that the beasts sharp teeth had any wound
Made in his tender flesh, but whole them all he found.
So having all his bands again vptyde,
He with him thought back to return again:
But when he looked about on every side,
To weet which way were best to entertain,
To bring him to the place, where he would feign,
He could no path nor tract of foot descry,
Ne by inquiry learn, nor guess by aim.
For naught but woods and forests far and nigh,
That all about did close the compass of his eye.
Much was he then encombred, ne could tell
Which way to take: now West he went a while,
Then North; then neither, but as fortune fell.
So up and down he wandered many a mile,
With weary travel and uncertain toil,
Yet naught the nearer to his iourneys end;
And evermore his lovely little spoil
Crying for food, did greatly him offend.
So all that day in wandering vainly he did spend.
At last about the setting of the Sun,
Him self out of the forest he did wynd,
And by good fortune the plain champion won:
Where looking all about, where he mote find
Some place of succor to content his mind,
At length he heard under the forests side
A voice, that seemed of some woman kind,
Which to her self lamenting loudly cryde,
And often complayn'd of fate, and fortune often defyde.
To whom approaching, when as she perceived
A stranger wight in place, her plaint she stayed,
As if she doubted to have been deceived,
Or loath to let her sorrows be bewrayd.
Whom when as Calepine saw so dismayed,
He to her drew, and with fair blandishment
Her chearing up, thus gently to her said;
What be you woeful Dame, which thus lament,
And for what cause declare, so mote ye not repent.
To whom she thus, what need me Sir to tell,
That which your self have erst ared so right?
A woeful dame ye have me termed well;
So much more woeful, as my woeful plight
Cannot redressed be by living wight.
Nathlesse (quoth he) if need do not you bynd,
Do it disclose, to ease your grieved spright:
Oftimes it haps, that sorrows of the mind
Find remedy unsought, which seeking cannot find.
Then thus began the lamentable Dame;
Since then ye needs will know the grief I hoord,
I am th'vnfortunate Matilde by name,
The wife of bold Sir Bruin, who is Lord
Of all this land, late conquered by his sword
From a great Giant, called Cormoraunt;
Whom he did overthrow by yonder foord,
And in three battles did so deadly daunt,
That he dare not return for all his daily vaunt.
So is my Lord now seized of all the land,
As in his fee, with peaceable estate,
And quietly does hold it in his hand,
Ne any dares with him for it debate.
But to these happy fortunes, cruel fate
Has joined one evil, which does ouerthow
All these our joys, and all our bliss abate;
And like in time to further ill to grow,
And all this land with endless loss to ouerflow.
For th'heauens envying our prosperity,
Have not vouchsaft to grant unto us twain
The gladfull blessing of posterity,
Which we might see after our selves remain
In th'heritage of our unhappy pain:
So that for want of heirs it to defend,
All is in time like to return again
To that foul feend, who daily does attend
To leap into the same after our lives end.
But most my Lord is grieved herewithall,
And makes exceeding moan, when he does think
That all this land unto his foe shall fall,
For which he long in vain did sweat and swinke,
That now the same he greatly does forthinke.
Yet was it said, there should to him a son
Be gotten, not begotten, which should drink
And dry up all the water, which does run
In the next brook, by who^ that feend should be fordonne.
Well hoped he then, when this was propheside,
That from his sides some noble child should rize,
The which through fame should far be magnifide,
And this proud giant should with brave emprize
Quite overthrow, who now ginnes to despize
The good Sir Bruin, growing far in years;
Who thinks from me his sorrow all does rize.
Lo this my cause of grief to you appears;
For which I thus do mourn, and pour forth ceaselesse tears.
Which when he heard, he inly touched was
With tender ruth for her unworthy grief,
And when he had deuized of her case,
He began in mind conceive a fit relief
For all her pain, if please her make the priefe.
And having cheared her, thus said; fair Dame,
In evils counsel is the comfort chief,
Which though I be not wise enough to frame,
Yet as I well it mean, vouchsafe it without blame.
If that the cause of this your languishment
Be lack of children, to supply your place,
Low how good fortune does to you present
This little babe, of sweet and lovely face,
And spotless spirit, in which ye may enchace
What ever forms ye list thereto apply,
Being now soft and fit them to embrace;
Whether ye list him train in cheualry,
Or noursle up in lore of learned Philosophy.
And certes it has oftentimes been seen,
That of the like, whose lineage was unknown,
More brave and noble knights have raised been,
As their victorious deeds have often showen,
Being with fame through many Nations blown,
Then those, which have been dandled in the lap.
Therefore some thought, that those brave imps were sown
Here by the Gods, and fed with heavenly sap,
That made them grow so high t'all honorable hap.
The Lady harkening to his sensefull speech,
Found nothing that he said, unmeet nor geason,
Having often seen it tryde, as he did teach.
Therefore inclyning to his goodly reason,
Agreeing well both with the place and season,
She gladly did of that same babe accept,
As of her own by liuerey and seisin,
And having over it a little wept,
She bore it thence, and ever as her own it kept.
Right glad was Calepine to be so rid
Of his young charge, whereof he skilled naught:
Ne she less glad; for she so wisely did,
And with her husband under hand so wrought,
That when that infant unto him she brought,
She made him think it surely was his own,
And it in goodly thewes so well vpbrought,
That it became a famous knight well known
And did right noble deeds, the which elsewhere are shown.
But Calepine, now being left alone
Under the greenewoods side in sorry plight,
Withouten arms or steed to ride upon,
Or house to hide his head from heavens spite,
Albe that Dame by all the means she might,
Him often desired home with her to wend,
And offered him, his courtesy to requite,
Both horse and arms, and what so else to lend,
Yet he them all refusd, though thankt her as a friend.
And for exceeding grief which inly grew,
That he his love so lucklesse now had lost,
On the cold ground, maugre himself he threw,
For fell despite, to be so sorely crossed;
And there all night himself in anguish tossed,
Vowing, that never he in bed again
His limbs would rest, ne lig in ease embost,
Till that his Ladies sight he mote attain,
Or understand, that she in safety did remain.
Cant. V.
The saluage serves Matilda well
till she Prince Arthure find,
Who her together with his Squyre
with th'Hermit leaves behynd.
O What an easy thing is to descry
The gentle blood, how ever it bewrapt
In sad misfortunes foul deformity,
And wretched sorrows, which have often hapt?
For howsoever it may grow mis-shapt,
Like this wyld man, being vndisciplynd,
That to all virtue it may seem unapt,
Yet will it show some sparks of gentle mind,
And at the last break forth in his own proper kind.
That plainly may in this wyld man be red,
Who though he were still in this desert wood,
Among saluage beasts, both rudely borne and bred,
Ne ever saw fair guize, ne learned good,
Yet showed some token of his gentle blood,
By gentle usage of that wretched Dame.
For certes he was borne of noble blood,
How ever by hard hap he hither came;
As ye may know, when time shall be to tell the same.
Who when as now long time he lacked had
The good Sir Calepine, that far was strayd,
Did wexe exceeding sorrowful and sad,
As he of some misfortune were afraid:
And leaving there this Lady all dismayed,
Went forth streightway into the forest wide,
To seek, if he perchance a sleep were laid,
Or what so else were unto him betyde:
He sought him far and near, yet him no where he spyde.
Tho back returning to that sorry Dame,
He showed semblant of exceeding moan,
By speaking signs, as he them best could frame;
Now wringing both his wretched hands in one,
Now beating his hard head upon a stone,
That ruth it was to see him so lament.
By which she well perceiving, what was done,
Began tear her hair, and all her garments rent,
And beat her breast, and piteously her self torment.
Upon the ground her self she fiercely threw,
Regardlesse of her wounds, yet bleeding rife,
That with their blood did all the flore imbrew,
As if her breast new launcht with murdrous knife,
Would straight dislodge the wretched weary life.
There she long groueling, and deep groaning lay,
As if her vital powers were at strife
With stronger death, and feared their decay,
Such were this Ladies pangs and dolorous assay.
Whom when the Saluage saw so sore distressed,
He reared her up from the bloody ground,
And sought by all the means, that he could best
Her to recure out of that stony swound,
And staunch the bleeding of her dreary wound.
Yet nould she be recomforted for naught,
Ne cease her sorrow and impatient stound,
But day and night did vex her careful thought,
And ever more and more her own affliction wrought.
At length, when as no hope of his return
She saw now left, she cast to leave the place,
And wend abroad, though feeble and forlorn,
To seek some comfort in that sorry case.
His steed now strong through rest so long a space,
Well as she could, she got, and did bedight,
And being thereon mounted, forth did pace,
Withouten guide, her to conduct aright,
Or guard her to defend from bold oppressors might.
Whom when her Host saw ready to depart,
He would not suffer her alone to fare,
But began himself address to take her part.
Those warlike arms, which Calepine whyleare
Had left behind, he began eftsoons prepare,
And put them all about himself unfit,
His shield, his helmet, and his curats bare.
But without sword upon his thigh to sit:
Sir Calepine himself away had hidden it.
So forth they traueld an uneven pair,
That mote to all men seem an uncouth sight;
A saluage man matched with a Lady fair,
That rather seemed the conquest of his might,
Gotten by spoil, then purchaced aright.
But he did her attend most carefully,
And faithfully did serve both day and night,
Withouten thought of shame or villeny,
Ne ever showed sign of foul disloyalty.
Upon a day as on their way they went,
It chaunst some furniture about her steed
To be disordred by some accident:
Which to redress, she did the assistance need
Of this her groom, which he by signs did reed,
And straight his combrous arms aside did lay
Upon the ground, withouten doubt or dreed,
And in his homely wize began to assay
T'amend what was amiss, and put in right array.
Bout which whilst he was busied thus hard,
Lo where a knight together with his squire,
All armed to point came ryding thetherward,
Which seemed by their portance and attire,
To be two errant knights, that did inquire
After adventures, where they mote them get.
Those were to weet (if that ye it requre)
Prince Arthur and young Timias, which met
By strange occasion, that here needs forth be set.
After that Timias had again recured
The favor of Belphebe, (as ye heard)
And of her grace did stand again assured,
To happy bliss he was full high vprear'd,
Nether of envy, nor of change afeard,
Though many foes did him malign therefore,
And with unjust detraction him did beard;
Yet he himself so well and wisely bore,
That in her sovereign lyking he dwelt evermore.
But of them all, which did his ruin seek
Three mighty enemies did him most despite,
Three mighty ones, and cruel minded eeke,
That him not only sought by open might
To overthrow, but to supplant by slight.
The first of them by name was called Despetto,
Exceeding all the rest in power and hight;
The second not so strong but wise, Decetto;
The third nor strong nor wise, but spightfullest Defetto.
Oftimes their sundry powers they did employ,
And several deceipts, but all in vain:
For neither they by force could him destroy,
Ne yet entrap in treasons subtle train.
Therefore conspiring all together plain,
They did their counsels now in one compound;
Where singled forces fail, conioynd may gain.
The Blatant Beast the fittest means they found,
To work his utter shame, and thoroughly him confound.
Upon a day as they the time did wait,
When he did raunge the wood for saluage game,
They sent that Blatant Beast to be a bait,
To draw him from his dear beloved dame,
Unawares into the danger of defame.
For well they wist, that Squire to be so bold,
That no one beast in forest wild or tame,
Met him in chase, but he it challenge would,
And pluck the pray oftimes out of their greedy hold.
The hardy boy, as they devised had,
Seeing the ugly Monster passing by,
Upon him set, of peril naught adrad,
Ne skillful of the uncouth ieopardy;
And charged him so fierce and furiously,
That his great force unable to endure,
He forced was to turn from him and fly:
Yet ere he fled, he with his tooth impure
Him heedlesse bit, the whiles he was thereof secure.
Securely he did after him pursew,
Thinking by speed to overtake his flight;
Who through thick woods and brakes and briers him drew,
To weary him the more, and waste his spite,
So that he now has almost spent his spright.
Till that at length unto a woody glade
He came, whose covert stopped his further sight,
There his three foes shrouded in guilefull shade,
Out of their ambush broke, and began him to invade.
Sharply they all attonce did him assail,
Burning with inward rancour and despite,
And heaped strokes did round about him hail
With so huge force, that seemed nothing might
Bear off their blows, from percing thorough quite.
Yet he them all so warily did ward,
That none of them in his soft flesh did bite,
And all the while his back for best safeguard,
He lent against a tree, that backward onset bard.
Like a wild Bull, that being at a bay,
Is bayted of a mastiffe, and a hound,
And a curre-dog; that do him sharp assay
On every side, and beat about him round;
But most that curre barking with bitter sownd,
And creeping still behind, does him incomber,
That in his chauffe he digs the trampled ground,
And threats his horns, and bellows like the thonder,
So did that Squire his foes disperse, and drive asonder.
Him well behooved so; for his three foes
Sought to encompasse him on every side,
And dangerously did round about enclose.
But most of all Defetto him annoyde,
Creeping behind him still to have destroyde:
So did Decetto eke him circumuent,
But stout Despetto in his greater pride,
Did front him face to face against him bent,
Yet he them all withstood, and often made relent.
Till that at length nigh tyrd with former chase,
And weary now with careful keeping ward,
He began to shrink, and somewhat to give place,
Full like ere long to have escaped hard;
When as unawares he in the forest heard
A trampling steed, that with his neighing fast
Did warn his rider be upon his guard;
With noise whereof the Squire now nigh aghast,
Revived was, and sad despair away did cast.
Eftsoons he spide a Knight approaching nigh,
Who seeing one in so great danger set
Among many foes, him self did faster hye;
To reskue him, and his weak part abet,
For pity so to see him ouerset.
Whom soon as his three enemies did view,
They fled, and fast into the wood did get:
Him booted not to think them to pursew,
The covert was so thick, that did no passage show.
Then turning to that swain, him well he knew
To be his Timias, his own true Squire,
Whereof exceeding glad, he to him drew,
And him embracing twixt his arms entire,
Him thus bespake; My liefe, my life's desire,
Why have ye me alone thus long yleft?
Tell me what worlds despite, or heavens ire
Has you thus long away from me bereft?
Where have ye all this while bin wandering, where been weft?
With that he sighed deep for inward tyne:
To whom the Squire naught answered again,
But shedding few soft tears from tender eyne,
His dear affect with silence did restrain,
And shut up all his plaint in privy pain.
There they awhile some gracious speeches spent,
As to them seemed fit time to entertain.
After all which up to their steedes they went,
And forth together rode a comely couplement.
So now they be arrived both in sight
Of this wyld man, whom they full busy found
About the sad Serena things to dight,
With those brave armours lying on the ground,
That seemed the spoil of some right well renownd.
Which when that Squire beheld, he to them stepped,
Thinking to take them from that hylding hound:
But he it seeing, lightly to him lept,
And sternely with strong hand it from his handling kept.
Gnashing his grinded teeth with griesly look,
And sparkling fire out of his furious eyne,
Him with his fist unawares on the head he struck,
That made him down unto the earth incline;
Whence soon vpstarting much he began repine,
And laying hand upon his wrathful blade,
Thought therewithal forthwith him to have slain,
Who it perceiving, hand upon him laid,
And greedily him griping, his auengement stayed.
With that aloude the fair Serena cryde
Unto the Knight, them to dispart in twain:
Who to them stepping did them soon divide,
And did from further violence restrain,
Albe the wyld-man hardly would refrain.
Then began the Prince, of her for to demand,
What and from whence she was, and by what train
She fell into that saluage villains hand,
And whether free with him she now were, or in band.
To whom she thus; I am, as now ye see,
The wretchedst Dame, that live this day on ground,
Who both in mind, the which most grieueth me,
And body have received a mortal wound,
That has me driven to this drery stound.
I was erewhile, the love of Calepine,
Who whether he alive be to be found,
Or by some deadly chance be done to pine,
Since I him lately lost, uneath is to define.
In saluage forest I him lost of late,
Where I had surely long ere this been dead,
Or else remained in most wretched state,
Had not this wild man in that woeful stead
Kept, and delivered me from deadly dread.
In such a saluage wight, of brutish kind,
Amongst wild beasts in desert forests bred,
It is most strange and wonderful to find
So mild humanity, and perfect gentle mind.
Let me therefore this favor for him find,
That ye will not your wrath upon him wreake,
Since he cannot express his simple mind,
Ne yours conceive, ne but by tokens speak:
Small praise to prove your power on wight so weak.
With such fair words she did their heat assuage,
And the strong course of their displeasure break,
That they to pity turned their former rage,
And each sought to supply the office of her page.
So having all things well about her dight,
She on her way cast forward to proceed,
And they her forth conducted, where they might
Find harbor fit to comfort her great need.
For now her wounds corruption began to breed;
And eke this Squire, who likewise wounded was
Of that same Monster late, for lack of heed,
Now began to faint, and further could not pas
Through feebleness, which all his limbs oppressed has.
So forth they rode together all in troop,
To seek some place, the which mote yield some ease
To these sick twain, that now began to droupe,
And all the way the Prince sought to appease
The bitter anguish of their sharp disease,
By all the courteous means he could invent,
Somewhile with merry purpose fit to please,
And otherwhile with good encouragement,
To make them to endure the pains, did them torment.
Among which, Serena did to him relate
The foul discourt'sies and vnknightly parts,
Which Turpine had unto her showed late,
Without compassion of her cruel smarts,
Although Blandina did with all her arts
Him otherwise persuade, all that she might;
Yet he of malice, without her deserts,
Not only her excluded late at night,
But also traitorously did wound her weary Knight.
Wherewith the Prince sore moved, there auoud,
That soon as he returned back again,
He would avenge th'abuses of that proud
And shameful Knight, of whom she did complain.
This wize did they each other entertain,
To pass the tedious travel of the way;
Till toward night they came unto a plain,
By which a little Hermitage there lay,
Far from all neighbourhoood, the which annoy it may.
And nigh thereto a little Chapel stood,
Which being all with Yuy ouerspred,
Decked all the roof, and shadowing the roode,
Seemed like a grove fair braunched over head:
Therein the Hermit, which his life here led
In straight obseruaunce of religious vow,
Was wont his hours and holy things to bed;
And therein he likewise was praying now,
Whenas these Knights arrived, they wist not where nor how.
They stayed not there, but straight way in did pas.
Whom when the Hermit present saw in place,
From his devotion straight he troubled was;
Which breaking of he toward them did pace,
With stayed steps, and grave beseeming grace:
For well it seemed, that whilome he had been
Soome goodly person, and of gentle race,
That could his good to all, and well did ween,
How each to entertain with curt'sie well beseene.
And soothly it was said by common fame,
So long as age enabled him thereto,
That he had been a man of mickle name,
Renowned much in arms and derring do:
But being aged now and weary to
Of wars delight, and worlds contentious toil,
The name of knighthood he did disauow,
And hanging up his arms and warlike spoil,
From all this worlds incombraunce did himself assoyle.
He thence them led into his Hermitage,
Letting their steedes to graze upon the green:
Small was his house, and like a little cage,
For his own turn, yet inly neat and clean,
Decked with green boughs, and flowers gay beseene.
Therein he them full fair did entertain
Not with such forged shows, as fitter been
For courting fools, that courtesies would feign,
But with entire affection and appearaunce plain.
Yet was their fare but homely, such as he
Did use, his feeble body to sustain;
The which full gladly they did take in glee,
Such as it was, ne did of want complain,
But being well suffiz'd, them rested feign.
But fair Serene all night could take no rest,
Ne yet that gentle Squire for grievous pain
Of their late wounds, the which the Blatant Beast
Had given them, whose grief through suffraunce sore increast.
So all that night they past in great disease,
Till that the morning, bringing early light
To guide men's labors, brought them also ease,
And some asswagement of their painful plight.
Then up they rose, and began them selves to dight
Unto their journey; but that Squire and Dame
So faint and feeble were, that they ne might
Endure to travel, nor one foot to frame:
Their hearts were sick, their sides were sore, their feet were lame.
Therefore the Prince, whom great affairs in mind
Would not permit, to make their longer stay,
Was forced there to leave them both behynd,
In that good Hermits charge, whom he did pray
To tend them well. So forth he went his way,
And with him eke the saluage, that whyleare
Seeing his royal usage and array,
Was greatly grown in love of that brave pere,
Would needs depart, as shall declared be elsewhere.
Cant. VI.
The Hermit heales both Squire and dame
Of their sore maladies:
He Turpine does defeat, and shame
For his late villainies.
NO wound, which warlike hand of enemy
Inflicts with dint of sword, so sore does light,
As does the poysnous sting, which infamy
Infixeth in the name of noble wight:
For by no art, nor any leaches might
It ever can recured be again;
Ne all the skill, which that immortal spright
Of Podalyrius did in it retain,
Can remedy such hurts; such hurts are hellish pain.
Such were the wounds, the which that Blatant Beast
Made in the bodies of that Squire and Dame;
And being such, were now much more increast,
For want of taking heed unto the same,
That now corrupt and curelesse they became.
Howbe that careful Hermit did his best,
With many kinds of medicines meet, to tame
The poysnous humor, which did most infest
Their ranckling wounds, and every day them duly dressed.
For he right well in Leaches craft was seen,
And through the long experience of his days,
Which had in many fortunes tossed been,
And past through many perilous assayes,
For now her wounds corruption began to breed;
And eke this Squire, who likewise wounded was
Of that same Monster late, for lack of heed,
Now began to faint, and further could not pas
Through feebleness, which all his limbs oppressed has.
So forth they rode together all in troop,
To seek some place, the which mote yield some ease
To these sick twain, that now began to droupe,
And all the way the Prince sought to appease
The bitter anguish of their sharp disease,
By all the courteous means he could invent,
Somewhile with merry purpose fit to please,
And otherwhile with good encouragement,
To make them to endure the pains, did them torment.
Among which, Serena did to him relate
The foul discourt'sies and vnknightly parts,
Which Turpine had unto her showed late,
Without compassion of her cruel smarts,
Although Blandina did with all her arts
Him otherwise persuade, all that she might;
Yet he of malice, without her deserts,
Not only her excluded late at night,
But also traitorously did wound her weary Knight.
Wherewith the Prince sore moved, there auoud,
That soon as he returned back again,
He would avenge th'abuses of that proud
And shameful Knight, of whom she did complain.
This wize did they each other entertain,
To pass the tedious travel of the way;
Till toward night they came unto a plain,
By which a little Hermitage there lay,
Far from all neighbourhoood, the which annoy it may.
And nigh thereto a little Chapel stood,
Which being all with Yuy ouerspred,
Decked all the roof, and shadowing the roode,
Seemed like a grove fair braunched over head:
Therein the Hermit, which his life here led
In straight obseruaunce of religious vow,
Was wont his hours and holy things to bed;
And therein he likewise was praying now,
Whenas these Knights arrived, they wist not where nor how.
They stayed not there, but straight way in did pas.
Whom when the Hermit present saw in place,
From his devotion straight he troubled was;
Which breaking of he toward them did pace,
With stayed steps, and grave beseeming grace:
For well it seemed, that whilome he had been
Soome goodly person, and of gentle race,
That could his good to all, and well did ween,
How each to entertain with curt'sie well beseene.
And soothly it was said by common fame,
So long as age enabled him thereto,
That he had been a man of mickle name,
Renowned much in arms and derring do:
But being aged now and weary to
Of wars delight, and worlds contentious toil,
The name of knighthood he did disauow,
And hanging up his arms and warlike spoil,
From all this worlds incombraunce did himself assoyle.
He thence them led into his Hermitage,
Letting their steedes to graze upon the green:
Small was his house, and like a little cage,
For his own turn, yet inly neat and clean,
Decked with green boughs, and flowers gay beseene.
Therein he them full fair did entertain
Not with such forged shows, as fitter been
For courting fools, that courtesies would feign,
But with entire affection and appearaunce plain.
Yet was their fare but homely, such as he
Did use, his feeble body to sustain;
The which full gladly they did take in glee,
Such as it was, ne did of want complain,
But being well suffiz'd, them rested feign.
But fair Serene all night could take no rest,
Ne yet that gentle Squire for grievous pain
Of their late wounds, the which the Blatant Beast
Had given them, whose grief through suffraunce sore increast.
So all that night they past in great disease,
Till that the morning, bringing early light
To guide men's labors, brought them also ease,
And some asswagement of their painful plight.
Then up they rose, and began them selves to dight
Unto their journey; but that Squire and Dame
So faint and feeble were, that they ne might
Endure to travel, nor one foot to frame:
Their hearts were sick, their sides were sore, their feet were lame.
Therefore the Prince, whom great affairs in mind
Would not permit, to make their longer stay,
Was forced there to leave them both behynd,
In that good Hermits charge, whom he did pray
To tend them well. So forth he went his way,
And with him eke the saluage, that whyleare
Seeing his royal usage and array,
Was greatly grown in love of that brave pere,
Would needs depart, as shall declared be elsewhere.
Cant. VI.
The Hermit heales both Squire and dame
Of their sore maladies:
He Turpine does defeat, and shame
For his late villainies.
NO wound, which warlike hand of enemy
Inflicts with dint of sword, so sore does light,
As does the poysnous sting, which infamy
Infixeth in the name of noble wight:
For by no art, nor any leaches might
It ever can recured be again;
Ne all the skill, which that immortal spright
Of Podalyrius did in it retain,
Can remedy such hurts; such hurts are hellish pain.
Such were the wounds, the which that Blatant Beast
Made in the bodies of that Squire and Dame;
And being such, were now much more increast,
For want of taking heed unto the same,
That now corrupt and curelesse they became.
Howbe that careful Hermit did his best,
With many kinds of medicines meet, to tame
The poysnous humor, which did most infest
Their ranckling wounds, and every day them duly dressed.
For he right well in Leaches craft was seen,
And through the long experience of his days,
Which had in many fortunes tossed been,
And past through many perilous assayes,
He knew the diverse went of mortal ways,
And in the minds of men had great insight;
Which with sage counsel, when they went astray,
He could inform, and them reduce aright,
And all the passions heal, which wou^d the weaker spright.
For whylome he had been a doughty Knight,
As any one, that lived in his days,
And proved often in many perilous fight,
Of which he grace and glory won always,
And in all battles bore away the baies.
But being now attacht with timely age,
And weary of this worlds unquiet ways,
He took him self unto this Hermitage,
In which he lived alone, like careless bird in cage.
One day, as he was searching of their wounds,
He found that they had festred privily,
And ranckling inward with unruly stounds,
The inner parts now began to putrify,
That quite they seemed past help of surgery,
And rather needed to be disciplinde
With wholesome reed of sad sobriety,
To rule the stubborn rage of passion blind:
Give salues to every sore, but counsel to the mind.
So taking them apart into his cell,
He to that point fit speeches began to frame,
As he the art of words knew wondrous well,
And eke could do, as well as say the same,
And thus he to them said; fair daughter Dame,
And you fair son, which here thus long now lie
In piteous languor, since ye hither came,
In vain of me ye hope for remedy,
And I likewise in vain do salues to you apply.
For in your self your only help does lie,
To heal your selves, and must proceed alone
From your own will, to cure your malady.
Who can him cure, that will be cured of none?
If therefore health ye seek, observe this one.
First learn your outward senses to refrain
From things, that stir up frail affection;
Your eyes, your ears, your tongue, your talk restaine
From that they most affect, and in due terms contain.
For from those outward senses ill affected,
The seed of all this evil first does spring,
Which at the first before it had infected,
Mote easy be suppressed with little thing:
But being grown strong, it forth does bring
Sorrow, and anguish, and impatient pain
In the inner parts, and lastly scattering
Contagious poison close through every vain,
It never rests, till it have wrought his final bane.
For that beasts teeth, which wounded you tofore,
Are so exceeding venomous and keen,
Made all of rusty iron, ranckling sore,
That where they bite, it booteth not to ween
With salve, or antidote, or other mean
It ever to amend: ne marvel ought;
For that same beast was bred of hellish strene,
And long in darksome Stygian den vpbrought,
Begot of foul Echidna, as in books is taught.
Echidna is a Monster direful dred,
Whom Gods do hate, and heavens abhor to see;
So hideous is her shape, so huge her head,
That even the hellish fiends affrighted be
At sight thereof, and from her presence flee:
Yet did her face and former parts profess
A fair young Maiden, full of comely glee;
But all her hinder parts did plain express
A monstrous Dragon, full of fearful ugliness.
To her the Gods, for her so dreadful face,
In fearful darkness, furthest from the sky,
And from the earth, appointed have her place,
Among rocks and caves, where she enrold does lie
In hideous horror and obscurity,
Wasting the strength of her immortal age.
There did Typhaon with her company,
Cruel Typhaon, whose tempestuous rage
Make th'heauens tremble often, and him with vows assuage.
Of that commixtion they did then beget
This hellish Dog, that hight the Blatant Beast;
A wicked Monster, that his tongue does whet
Against all, both good and bad, both most and least,
And poures his poysnous gall forth to infest
The noblest wights with notable defame:
Ne ever Knight, that bore so lofty creast,
Ne ever Lady of so honest name,
But he them spotted with reproach, or secret shame.
In vain therefore it were, with medicine
To go about to salve such kind of sore,
That rather needs wise read and discipline,
Then outward salues, that may augment it more.
Aye me (said then Serena sighing sore)
What hope of help does then for us remain,
If that no salues may us to health restore?
But since we need good counsel (said the swain)
Aread good sire, some counsel, that may us sustain.
The best (said he) that I can you aduize,
Is to avoid the occasion of the ill:
For when the cause, whence evil does arize,
Removed is, the effect surceaseth still.
Abstain from pleasure, and restrain your will,
Subdue desire, and bridle loose delight,
Use scanted diet, and forbear your fill,
Shun secrecy, and talk in open sight:
So shall you soon repair your present evil plight.
Thus having said, his sickely patients
Did gladly hearken to his grave beheast,
And kept so well his wise commandments,
That in short space their malady was ceast,
And eke the biting of that harmefull Beast
Was thoroughly healed. Tho when they did perceive
Their wounds recur'd, and forces reincreast,
Of that good Hermit both they took their leave,
And went both on their way, ne each would other leave.
But each the other vowed t'accompany,
The Lady, for that she was much in dred,
Now left alone in great extremity,
The Squire, for that he courteous was indeed,
Would not her leave alone in her great need.
So both together traueld, till they met
With a fair Maiden clad in mourning weed,
Upon a mangy jade vnmeetely set,
And a lewd fool her leading thorough dry and wet.
But by what means that shame to her befell,
And how thereof her self she did acquit,
I must a while forbear to you to tell;
Till that, as comes by course, I do recite,
What fortune to the Briton Prince did lite,
Pursuing that proud Knight, the which whileare
Wrought to Sir Calidore so foul despite;
And eke his Lady, though she sickely were,
So lewdly had abusde, as ye did lately hear.
The Prince according to the former token,
Which fair Serene to him delivered had,
Pursued him straight, in mind to been ywroken
Of all the vile demean, and usage bad,
With which he had those two so ill bestad:
Ne wight with him on that adventure went,
But that wild man, whom though he often forbad,
Yet for no bidding, nor for being shent,
Would he restrained be from his attendement.
Arriving there, as did by chance befall,
He found the gate wide open, and in he rode,
Ne stayed, till that he came into the hall:
Where soft dismounting like a weary lode,
Upon the ground with feeble feet he trod,
As he unable were for very need
To move one foot, but there must make abode;
The whiles the saluage man did take his steed,
And in some stable near did set him up to feed.
Ere long to him a homely groom there came,
That in rude wise him asked, what he was,
That durst so boldly, without let or shame,
Into his Lords forbidden hall to pass.
To whom the Prince, him fayning to embase,
Mylde answer made; he was an errant Knight,
The which was fallen into this feeble case,
Through many wounds, which lately he in fight,
Received had, and prayed to pity his ill plight.
But he, the more outrageous and bold,
Sternely did bid him quickly thence auaunt,
Or dear aby, for why his Lord of old
Did hate all errant Knights, which there did haunt,
Ne lodging would to any of them grant,
And therefore lightly bad him pack away,
Not sparing him with bitter words to taunt;
And therewithal rude hand on him did lay,
To thrust him out of door, doing his worst assay.
Which when the Saluage coming now in place,
Beheld, eftsoons he all enraged grew,
And running straight upon that villain base,
Like a fell Lion at him fiercely flew,
And with his teeth and nails, in present view,
Him rudely rent, and all to pieces tore:
So miserably him all helpelesse slew,
That with the noise, whilst he did loudly rore,
The people of the house rose forth in great uproar.
Who when on ground they saw their fellow slain,
And that same Knight and Saluage standing by,
Upon them two they fell with might and maine,
And on them laid so huge and horribly,
As if they would have slain them presently.
But the bold Prince defended him so well,
And their assault withstood so mightily,
That maugre all their might, he did repel,
And beat them back, whilst many underneath him fell.
Yet he them still so sharply did pursew,
That few of them he left alive, which fled,
Those evil tidings to their Lord to show.
Who hearing how his people badly sped,
Came forth in have: where when as with the dead
He saw the ground all strow'd, and that same Knight
And saluage with their blood fresh steeming red,
He woxe nigh mad with wrath and fell despite,
And with reproachful words him thus bespake on hight.
Art thou he, traitor, that with treason vile,
Have slain my men in this unmanly manner,
And now triumphest in the piteous spoil
Of these poor folk, whose souls with black dishonor
And foul defame do deck thy bloody baner?
The meede whereof shall shortly be thy shame,
And wretched end, which still attends on her.
With that him self to battle he did frame;
So did his forty yeomen, which there with him came.
With dreadful force they all did him assail,
And round about with boystrous strokes oppress,
That on his shield did rattle like to hail
In a great tempest; that in such distress,
He wist not to which side him to address.
And evermore that crauen cowherd Knight,
Was at his back with heartlesse heedinesse,
Waiting if he unawares him murder might:
For cowardice does still in villainy delight.
Whereof whenas the Prince was well aware,
He to him turned with furious intent,
And him against his power began to prepare;
Like a fierce Bull, that being busy bent
To fight with many foes about him meant,
Feeling some curre behind his heels to bite,
Turns him about with fell auengement;
So likewise turnde the Prince upon the Knight,
And laid at him amain with all his will and might.
Who when he once his dreadful strokes had tasted,
Durst not the fury of his force abide,
But turned abacke, and to retire him hasted
Through the thick prease, there thinking him to hyde.
But when the Prince had once him plainly eyde,
He foot by foot him followed always,
Ne would him suffer once to shrink aside
But joining close, huge lode at him did lay:
Who flying still did ward, and warding fly away.
But when his foe he still so eger saw,
Unto his heels himself he did betake,
Hoping unto some refuge to withdraw:
Ne would the Prince him ever foot forsake,
Where so he went, but after him did make.
He fled from room to room, from place to place,
Whylest every joint for dread of death did quake,
Still looking after him, that did him chase;
That made him evermore increase his speedy pace.
At last he up into the chamber came,
Whereas his love was sitting all alone,
Waiting what tidings of her folk became.
There did the Prince him overtake anon,
Crying in vain to her, him to bemone;
And with his sword him on the head did smite,
That to the gound he fell in senseless swone:
Yet whether thwart or flatly it did lyte,
The tempred steel did not into his braynepan byte.
Which when the Lady saw, with great affright
She starting up, began to shrieke aloud,
And with her garment covering him from sight,
Seemed under her protection him to shroud;
And falling lowly at his feet, her bowd
Upon her knee, entreating him for grace,
And often him besought, and prayed, and vowed;
That with the ruth of her so wretched case,
He stayed his second struck, and did his hand abase.
Her weed she then withdrawing, did him discover,
Who now come to himself, yet would not rize,
But still did lie as dead, and quake, and quiver,
That even the Prince his baseness did despize,
And eke his Dame him seeing in such guize,
Began him recomfort, and from ground to rear.
Who rising up at last in ghastly wize,
Like troubled ghost did dreadfully appear,
As one that had no life him left through former fear.
Whom when the Prince so deadly saw dismayed,
He for such baseness shamefully him shent,
And with sharp words did bitterly upbraid;
Vile cowheard dog, now do I much repent,
That ever I this life unto thee lent,
Whereof thou caytiue so unworthy art;
That both thy love, for lack of hardiment,
And eke thy self, for want of manly heart,
And eke all knights have shamed with this knightlesse part.
Yet further have thou heaped shame to shame,
And crime to crime, by this thy cowheard fear.
For first it was to thee reproachful blame,
To erect this wicked custom, which I hear,
Against errant Knights and Ladies thou do rear;
Whom when thou may, thou do of arms despoile,
Or of their upper garment, which they wear:
Yet do thou not with manhood, but with guile
Maintain this evil use, thy foes thereby to foil.
And lastly in approuance of thy wrong,
To show such faintness and foul cowardice,
Is greatest shame: for often it falls, that strong
And valiant knights do rashly enterprise,
Either for fame, or else for exercize,
A wrongful quarrel to maintain by right;
Yet have, through prowess and their brave emprize,
Gotten great worship in this worlds sight.
For greater force there needs to maintain wrong, then right.
Yet since thy life unto this Lady fair
I given have, live in reproach and scorn;
Ne ever arms, ne ever knighthood dare
Hence to profess: for shame is to adorn
With so brave badges one so basely borne;
But only breath since that I did forgive.
So having from his crauen body torn
Those goodly arms, he them away did give
And only suffered him this wretched life to live.
There whilst he thus was settling things above,
Atwene that Lady myld and recreant knight,
To whom his life he granted for her love,
He began bethink him, in what perilous plight
He had behynd him left that saluage wight,
Amongst so many foes, whom sure he thought
By this quite slain in so unequal fight:
Therefore descending back in haste, he sought
If yet he were alive, or to destruction brought.
There he him found environed about
With slaughtred bodies, which his hand had slain,
And laying yet a fresh with courage stout
Upon the rest, that did alive remain;
Whom he likewise right sorely did constrain,
Like scattred sheep, to seek for safety,
After he gotten had with busy pain
Some of their weapons, which thereby did lie,
With which he laid about, and made them fast to fly.
Whom when the Prince so felly saw to rage,
Approaching to him near, his hand he stayed,
And sought, by making signs, him to assuage:
Who them perceiving, straight to him obayd,
As to his Lord, and down his weapons laid,
As if he long had to his heasts been trained.
Thence he him brought away, and up conuayd
Into the chamber, where that Dame remained
With her unworthy knight, who ill him entertained.
Whom when the Saluage saw from danger free,
Sitting beside his Lady there at ease,
He well remembered, that the same was he,
Which lately sought his Lord for to displease:
Tho all in rage, he on him straight did seize,
As if he would in pieces him have rent;
And were not, that the Prince did him appeaze,
He had not left one limb of him vnrent:
But straight he held his hand at his commandment.
Thus having all things well in peace ordained,
The Prince himself there all that night did rest,
Where him Blandina fayrely entertained,
With all the courteous glee and goodly feast,
The which for him she could imagine best.
For well she knew the ways to win good will
Of every wight, that were not too infest,
And how to please the minds of good and ill,
Through tempering of her words and looks by wondrous skill.
Yet were her words and looks but false and feigned,
To some hid end to make more easy way,
Or to allure such fondlings, whom she trained
Into her trap unto their own decay:
Thereto, when needed, she could weep and pray,
And when her listed, she could fawn and flatter;
Now smyling smoothly, like to summers day,
Now glooming sadly, so to cloak her matter;
Yet were her words but wynd, and all her tears but water.
Whether such grace were given her by kind,
As women wont their guilefull wits to guide;
Or learned the art to please, I do not find.
This well I wot, that she so well applyde
Her pleasing tongue, that soon she pacifyde
The wrathful Prince, and wrought her husbands peace.
Who nathelesse not therewith satisfyde,
His rancorous despite did not releasse,
Ne secretly from thought of fell revenge surceasse.
For all that night, the whiles the Prince did rest
In careless couch, not weeting what was meant,
He watched in close awayt with weapons pressed,
Willing to work his villenous intent
On him, that had so shamefully him shent:
Yet durst he not for very cowardice
Effect the same, whylest all the night was spent.
The morrow next the Prince did early rize,
And passed forth, to follow his first enterprise.
Cant. VII.
Turpine is baffuld, his two knights
do gain their treasons meed,
Fair Mirabellaes punishment
for loves disdain decreed.
LIke as the gentle heart it self bewrayes,
In doing gentle deeds with frank delight,
Even so the baser mind it self displayes,
In cancred malice and reuengefull spite.
For to malign, t'enuie, t'vse shifting slight,
Be arguments of a vile donghill mind,
Which what it dare not do by open might,
To work by wicked treason ways does find,
By such discourteous deeds discovering his base kind.
That well appears in this discourteous knight,
The coward Turpine, whereof now I treat;
Who notwithstanding that in former fight
He of the Prince his life received late,
Yet in his mind malicious and ingrate
He began denize, to be aueng'd anew
For all that shame, which kindled inward hate.
Therefore so soon as he was out of view,
Himself in have he armed, and did him fast pursew.
Well did he tract his steps, as he did ride,
Yet would not near approach in dangers eye,
But kept aloof for dread to be descryde,
Until fit time and place he mote espy,
Where he mote work him scath and villeny.
At last he met two knights to him unknown,
The which were armed both agreeably,
And both combynd, what ever chance were blown,
Betwixt them to divide, and each to make his own.
To whom false Turpine coming courteously,
To cloak the mischief, which he inly meant,
Began to complain of great discourtesie,
Which a strange knight, that near before him went,
Had done to him, and his dear Lady shent:
Which if they would afford him aid at need
For to avenge, in time convenient,
They should accomplish both a knightly deed,
And for their pains obtain of him a goodly meed.
The knights believed, that all he said, was true,
And being fresh and full of youthly spright,
Were glad to hear of that adventure new,
In which they mote make trial of their might,
Which never yet they had approved in fight;
And eke desirous of the offered meed,
Said then the one of them; where is that wight,
The which has done to thee this wrongful deed,
That we may it avenge, and punish him with speed?
He rides (said Turpine) there not far before,
With a wyld man soft footing by his side,
That if ye list to haste a little more,
Ye may him overtake in timely tide:
Eftsoons they pricked forth with forward pride,
And ere that little while they ridden had,
The gentle Prince not far away they spyde,
Ryding a softly pace with portance sad,
Deuizing of his love more, then of danger drad.
Then one of them aloud unto him cryde,
Bidding him turn again, false traitor knight,
Foul womanwronger, for he him defyde.
With that they both at once with equal spite
Did bend their spears, and both with equal might
Against him ran; but the one did miss his mark,
And being carried with his force forthright,
Glaunst swiftly by; like to that heavenly spark,
Which glyding through the air lights all the heavens dark.
But the other aiming better, did him smite
Full in the shield, with so impetuous power,
That all his lance in pieces shiuered quite,
And scattered all about, fell on the flower.
But the stout Prince, with much more steady stowre
Full on his beuer did him strike so sore,
That the cold steel through piercing, did deuowre
His vital breath, and to the ground him bore,
Where still he bathed lay in his own bloody gore.
As when a cast of Faulcons make their flight
At an Herneshaw, that lies aloft on wing,
The whiles they strike at him with heedlesse might,
The wary foul his bill does backward wring;
On which the first, whose force her first does bring,
Her self quite through the body does engore,
And falls down to ground like senseless thing,
But the other not so swift, as she before,
Fayles of her souse, and passing by does hurt no more.
By this the other, which was passed by,
Himself recovering, was returned to fight;
Where when he saw his fellow lifelesse ly,
He much was daunted with so dismal sight;
Yet naught abating of his former spite,
Let drive at him with so malicious mind,
As if he would have passed through him quight:
But the steele-head no steadfast hold could find,
But glauncing by, deceived him of that he desynd.
Not so the Prince: for his well learned spear
Took surer hold, and from his horses back
Above a lances length him forth did bear,
And against the cold hard earth so sore him struck,
That all his bones in pieces nigh he brake.
Where seeing him so lie, he left his steed,
And to him leaping, vengeance thought to take
Of him, for all his former follies meed,
With flaming sword in hand his terror more to breed.
The fearful swayne beholding death so nie,
Cryde out aloud for mercy him to save;
In lieu whereof he would to him descrie,
Great treason to him meant, his life to reaue.
The Prince soon hearkened, and his life forgave.
Then thus said he, There is a stranger knight,
The which for promise of great meed, us drove
To this attempt, to wreake his hid despite,
For that himself thereto did want sufficient might.
The Prince much mused at such villenie,
And said; Now sure ye well have earned your meed,
For the one is dead, and the other soon shall die,
Unless to me thou hither bring with speed
The wretch, that hyr'd you to this wicked deed,
He glad of life, and willing eke to wreake
The guilt on him, which did this mischief breed,
Swore by his sword, that neither day nor week
He would surceasse, but him, where so he were, would seek.
So up he rose, and forth straight way he went
Back to the place, where Turpine late he lore;
There he him found in great astonishment,
To see him so bedight with bloody gore,
And griesly wounds that him appalled sore.
Yet thus at length he said, how now Sir knight?
What means this, which here I see before?
How fortuneth this foul uncomely plight,
So different from that, which erst ye seemed in sight?
Perdie (said he) in evil hour it fell,
That ever I for meed did undertake
So hard a task, as life for hyre to sell;
The which I erst aduentur'd for your sake.
Witness the wounds, and this wide bloody lake,
Which ye may see yet all about me steeme.
Therefore now yield, as ye did promise make,
My due reward, the which right well I deem
I yearned have, that life so dearly did redeem.
But where then is (quoth he half wrothfully)
Where is the booty, which therefore I bought,
That cursed caytiue, my strong enemy,
That recreant knight, whose hated life I sought?
And where is eke your friend, which half it ought?
He lies (said he) upon the cold bare ground,
Slain of that errant knight, with whom he fought;
Whom afterward my self with many a wound
Did slay again, as ye may see there in the stound.
Thereof false Turpin was full glad and feign,
And needs with him straight to the place would ride,
Where he himself might see his foeman slain;
For else his fear could not be satisfyde.
So as they rode, he saw the way all did
With streams of blood; which tracting by the traile,
Ere long they came, whereas in evil tide
That other swayne, like ashes deadly pale,
Lay in the lap of death, rewing his wretched bale.
Much did the Crauen seem to moan his case,
That for his sake his dear life had forgone;
And him bewayling with affection base,
Did counterfeit kind pity, where was none:
For where is no courage, there is no ruth nor moan.
Thence passing forth, not far away he found,
Whereas the Prince himself lay all alone,
Loosely displayed upon the grassie ground,
Possessed of sweet sleep, that luld him soft in swound.
Weary of travel in his former fight,
He there in shade himself had laid to rest,
Having his arms and warlike things vndight,
Fearelesse of foes that mote his peace molest;
The whiles his saluage page, that wont be pressed,
Was wandered in the wood another way,
To do some thing, that seemed to him best,
The whiles his Lord in silver slomber lay,
Like to the Evening star adorned with deawy ray.
Whom when as Turpin saw so loosely laid,
He weened well, that he in deed was dead,
Like as that other knight to him had said:
But when he nigh approcht, he mote aread
Plain signs in him of life and liuelihead.
Whereat much grieved against that stranger knight,
That him too light of credence did mislead,
He would have back retired from that sight,
That was to him on earth the deadliest despite.
But that same knight would not once let him start,
But plainly began to him declare the case
Of all his mischief, and late lucklesse smart;
How both he and his fellow there in place
Were vanquished, and put to foul disgrace,
And how that he in lieu of life him lent,
Had vowed unto the victor, him to trace
And follow through the world, where so he went,
Till that he him delivered to his punishment.
He therewith much abashed and affrayd,
Began to tremble every limb and vain;
And softly whispering him, entyrely prayed,
T'aduize him better, then by such a train
Him to betray unto a stranger swain:
Yet rather counseld him contrarywize,
Since he likewise did wrong by him sustain,
To join with him and vengeance to deuize,
Whylest time did offer means him sleeping to surprise.
Nathelesse for all his speech, the gentle knight
Would not be tempted to such villenie,
Regarding more his faith, which he did plight,
All were it to his mortal enemy,
Then to entrap him by false treachery:
Great shame in lieges blood to be embrew'd.
Thus whylest they were debating diversely,
The Saluage forth out of the wood issew'd
Back to the place, whereas his Lord he sleeping vew'd.
There when he saw those two so near him stand,
He doubted much what mote their meaning be,
And throwing down his load out of his hand,
To weet great store of forest fruit, which he
Had for his food late gathered from the tree,
Himself unto his weapon he betook,
That was an oaken plant, which lately he
Rent by the root; which he so sternely shook,
That like an hazell wand, it quiuered and quooke.
Whereat the Prince awaking, when he spyde
The traitor Turpin with that other knight,
He started up, and snatching near his side
His trusty sword, the servant of his might,
Like a fell Lion leaped to him light,
And his left hand upon his collar laid.
Therewith the cowheard deaded with affright,
Fell flat to ground, ne word unto him said,
But holding up his hands, with silence mercy prayed.
But he so full of indignation was,
That to his prayer naught he would incline,
But as he lay upon the humbled gras,
His foot he set on his vile neck, in sign
Of servile yoke, that nobler hearts repine.
Then letting him arise like abject thrall,
He began to him object his heinous crime,
And to revile, and rate, and recreant call,
And lastly to despoyle of knightly banner all.
And after all, for greater infamy,
He by the heels him hung upon a tree,
And baffuld so, that all which passed by,
The picture of his punishment might see,
And by the like ensample warned be,
How ever they through treason do trespass.
But turn we now back to that Lady free,
Whom late we left ryding upon an Ass,
Led by a Carle and fool, which by her side did pass.
She was a Lady of great dignity,
And lifted up to honorable place,
Famous through all the land of Faerie,
Though of mean parentage and kindred base,
Yet decked with wondrous gifts of natures grace,
That all men did her person much admire,
And praise the feature of her goodly face,
The beams whereof did kindle lovely fire
In th'harts of many a knight, and many a gentle squire.
But she thereof grew proud and insolent,
That none she worthy thought to be her fere,
But scornd them all, that love unto her meant;
Yet was she loved of many a worthy pere,
Unworthy she to be beloved so dear,
That could not weigh of worthiness aright.
For beauty is more glorious bright and clear,
The more it is admired of many a wight,
And noblest she, that served is of noblest knight.
But this coy Damzell thought contrariwize,
That such proud looks would make her praised more;
And that the more she did all love despize,
The more would wretched lovers her adore.
What cared she, who sighed for her sore,
Or who did wayle or watch the weary night?
Let them that list, their lucklesse lot deplore;
She was borne free, not bound to any wight,
And so would ever live, and love her own delight.
Through such her stubborn stiffness, and hard heart,
Many a wretch, for want of remedy,
Did languish long in life consuming smart,
And at the last through dreary dolor die:
Whylest she, the Lady of her liberty,
Did boast her beauty had such sovereign might,
That with the only twinckle of her eye,
She could or save, or spill, whom she would hight.
What could the Gods do more, but do it more aright?
But lo the Gods, that mortal follies view,
Did worthily revenge this maidens pride;
And naught regarding her so goodly hew,
Did laugh at her, that many did deride,
Whilst she did weep, of no man mercifide.
For on a day, when Cupid kept his court,
As he is wont at each Saint Valentide,
Unto the which all lovers do resort,
That of their loves success they there may make report.
It fortuned then, that when the roules were red,
In which the names of all loves folk were fyled,
That many there were missing, which were ded,
Or kept in bands, or from their loves exyled,
Or by some other violence despoyled.
Which when as Cupid heard, he wexed wroth,
And doubting to be wronged, or beguyled,
He bad his eyes to be vnblindfold both,
That he might see his men, and muster them by oath.
Then found he many missing of his crew,
Which wont do suit and service to his might;
Of whom what was becomen, no man knew.
Therefore a Jury was impaneld straight,
T'enquire of them, whether by force, or slight,
Or their own guilt, they were away conuayd.
To whom foul Infamy, and fell Despite
Gave evidence, that they were all betrayed,
And murdered cruelly by a rebellious Maid.
Fair Mirabella was her name, whereby
Of all those crimes she there indicted was:
All which when Cupid heard, he by and by
In great displeasure, wild a Capias
Should issue forth, t'attach that scornful less.
The warrant straight was made, and therewithal
A Baylieffe errant forth in post did pass,
Whom they by name there Portamore did call;
He which does summon lovers to loves judgment hall.
The damzell was attacht, and shortly brought
Unto the bar, whereas she was arrayned:
But she thereto nould plead, nor answer ought
Even for stubborn pride, which her restrained.
So judgment past, as is by law ordained
In cases like, which when at last she saw,
Her stubborn heart, which love before disdayned,
Began stoop, and falling down with humble awe,
Cryde mercy, to abate the extremity of law.
The son of Venus who is myld by kind,
But where he is prouokt with peevishness,
Unto her prayers piteously enclynd,
And did the rigor of his doom repress;
Yet not so freely, but that nathelesse
He unto her a penance did impose,
Which was, that through this worlds wide wilderness
She wander should in company of those,
Till she had saved so many loves, as she did lose.
So now she had been wandering two whole years
Throughout the world, in this uncomely case,
Wasting her goodly hew in heavy tears,
And her good days in dolorous disgrace:
Yet had she not in all these two years space,
Saved but two, yet in two years before,
Through her dispiteous pride, whilst love lackt place,
She had destroyed two and twenty more.
Aie me, how could her love make half amends therefore.
And now she was upon the weary way,
When as the gentle Squire, with fair Serene,
Met her in such misseeming foul array;
The whiles that mighty man did her demean
With all the evil terms and cruel mean,
That he could make; And eeke that angry fool
Which followed her, with cursed hands unclean
Whipping her horse, did with his smarting tool
Often whip her dainty self, and much augment her doole.
Ne ought it mote avail her to entreat
The one or the other, better her to use:
For both so wilful were and obstinate,
That all her piteous plaint they did refuse,
And rather did the more her beat and bruise.
But most the former villain, which did lead
Her tyreling jade, was bent her to abuse;
Who though she were with weariness nigh dead,
Yet would not let her lite, nor rest a little stead.
For he was stern, and terrible by nature,
And eeke of person huge and hideous,
Exceeding much the measure of man's stature,
And rather like a Giant monstrous.
Forsooth he was descended of the house
Of those old Giants, which did wars darraine
Against the heaven in order battailous,
And sib to great Orgolio, which was slain
By Arthure, when as Vnas Knight he did maintain.
His looks were dreadful, and his fiery eyes
Like two great Beacons, glared bright and wide,
Glauncing askew, as if his enemies
He scorned in his ouerweening pride;
And stalking stately like a Crane, did stryde
At every step upon the tiptoes hie,
And all the way he went, on every side
He gazed about, and stared horribly,
As if he with his looks would all men terrify.
He wore no armor, ne for none did care,
As no whit dreading any living wight;
But in a Iacket quilted richly rare,
Upon checklaton he was straungely dight,
And on his head a roll of linen plight,
Like to the Mores of Malaber he wore;
With which his locks, as black as pitchy night,
Were bound about, and voyded from before,
And in his hand a mighty iron club he bore.
This was Disdain, who led that Ladies horse
Through thick and thin, through mountains and through plains,
Compelling her, where she would not by force
Haling her palfrey by the hempen raines.
But that same fool, which most increast her pains,
Was Scorn, who having in his hand a whip,
Her therewith yirks, and still when she complains,
The more he laughes, and does her closely quip,
To see her sore lament, and bite her tender lip.
Whose cruel handling when that Squire beheld,
And saw those villains her so vildely use,
His gentle heart with indignation sweld,
And could no longer bear so great abuse,
As such a Lady so to beat and bruise;
But to him stepping, such a stroke him lent,
That forced him th'halter from his hand to loose,
And maugre all his might, back to relent:
Else had he surely there been slain, or fowly shent.
The villain wroth for greeting him so sore,
Gathered him self together soon again,
And with his iron batton, which he bore,
Let drive at him so dreadfully amain,
That for his safety he did him constrain
To give him ground, and shift to every side,
Rather then once his burden to sustain:
For bootelesse thing him seemed, to abide,
So mighty blows, or prove the puissaunce of his pride.
Like as a Mastiffe having at a bay
A saluage Bull, whose cruel horns do threat
Desperate danger, if he them assay,
Traceth his ground, and round about does beat,
To spy where he may some advantage get;
The whiles the beast does rage and loudly rore,
So did the Squire, the whiles the Carle did fret,
And fume in his disdainefull mind the more,
And oftentimes by Turmagant and Mahound swore.
Nathelesse so sharply still he him pursewd,
That at advantage him at last he took,
When his foot slipped (that slip he dearly rewd,)
And with his iron club to ground him struck;
Where still he lay, ne out of swoune awooke,
Till heavy hand the Carle upon him laid,
And bound him fast: Tho when he up did look,
And saw him self captived, he was dismayed,
Ne power had to withstand, ne hope of any aid.
Then up he made himself, and forward fare,
Led in a rope, which both his hands did bynd;
Ne ought that fool for pity did him spare,
But with his whip him following behynd,
Him often scourged, and forced his feet to find:
And other whiles with bitter mockes and mowes
He would him scorn, that to his gentle mind
Was much more grievous, then the others blows:
Words sharply wound, but greatest grief of scorning grows.
The fair Serena, when she saw him fall
Under that villains club, then surely thought
That slain he was, or made a wretched thrall,
And fled away with all the speed she might,
To seek for safety, which long time she sought:
And past through many perils by the way,
Ere she again to Calepine was brought;
The which discourse as now I must delay,
Till Mirabellaes fortunes I do further say.
Cant. VIII.
Prince Arthure ouercomes Disdain,
Quites Mirabell from dreed:
Serena found of Saluages,
By Calepine is freed.
YE gentle Ladies, in whose sovereign power
Love has the glory of his kingdom left,
And th'hearts of men, as your eternal dowre,
In iron chains, of liberty bereft,
Delivered has into your hands by gift;
Be well aware, how ye the same do use,
That pride do not to tyranny you lift;
Least if men you of cruelty accuse,
He from you take that chiefedome, which ye do abuse.
And as ye soft and tender are by kind,
Adornd with goodly gifts of beauties grace,
So be ye soft and tender eeke in mind;
But cruelty and hardness from you chase,
That all your other praises will deface,
And from you turn the love of men to hate.
Ensample take of Mirabellaes case,
Who from the high degree of happy state,
Fell into wretched woes, which she repented late.
Who after thraldom of the gentle Squire,
Which she beheld with lamentable eye,
Was touched with compassion entire,
And much lamented his calamity,
That for her sake fell into misery:
Which booted naught for prayers, nor for threat
To hope for to release or mollify;
For aye the more, that she did them entreat
The more they him misust, and cruelly did beat.
So as they forward on their way did pas,
Him still reuiling and afflicting sore,
They met Prince Arthure with Sir Enias,
(That was that courteous Knight, whom he before
Having subdew'd, yet did to life restore,)
To whom as they approcht, they began augment
Their cruelty, and him to punish more,
Scourging and haling him more vehement;
As if it them should grieve to see his punishment.
The Squire him self when as he saw his Lord,
The witness of his wretchedness, in place,
Was much ashamed, that with an hempen cord
He like a dog was led in captive case,
And did his head for bashfulnesse abase,
As loath to see, or to be seen at all:
Shame would be hid. But whenas Enias
Beheld two such, of two such villains thrall,
His manly mind was much emmoued therewithal.
And to the Prince thus said; See you Sir Knight,
The greatest shame that ever eye yet saw?
Yond Lady and her Squire with foul despite
Abusde, against all reason and all law,
Without regard of pity or of awe.
See how they do that Squire beat and revile;
See how they do the Lady hale and draw.
But if ye please to lend me leave a while,
I will them soon acquit, and both of blame assoile.
The Prince assented, and then he straight way
Dismounting light, his shield about him threw,
With which approaching, thus he began to say;
Abide ye caytiue treachetours untrue,
That have with treason thralled unto you
These two, unworthy of your wretched bands;
And now your crime with cruelty pursew.
Abide, and from them lay your loathly hands;
Or else abide the death, that hard before you stands.
The villain stayed not answer to invent,
But with his iron club preparing way,
His minds sad message back unto him sent;
The which descended with such dreadful sway,
That seemed naught the course thereof could stay:
No more then lightening from the lofty sky.
Ne list the Knight the power thereof assay,
Whose doom was death, but lightly slipping by,
Unawares defrauded his intended destiny.
And to requite him with the like again,
With his sharp sword he fiercely at him flew,
And struck so strongly, that the Carle with pain
Saved him self, but that he there him slew:
Yet saved not so, but that the blood it drew,
And gave his foe good hope of victory.
Who therewith flesht, upon him set anew,
And with the second stroke, thought certainly
To have supplyde the first, and paid the usury.
But Fortune aunswerd not unto his call;
For as his hand was heaued up on hight,
The villain met him in the middle fall,
And with his club bet back his brondyron bright
So forcibly, that with his own hands might
Rebeaten back upon him self again,
He driven was to ground in self despite;
From whence ere he recovery could gain,
He in his neck had set his foot with fell disdain.
With that the fool, which did that end awayte,
Came running in, and whilst on ground he lay,
Laid heavy hands on him, and held so strayte,
That down he kept him with his scornful sway,
So as he could not weld him any way.
The whiles that other villain went about
Him to have bound, and thrald without delay;
The whiles the fool did him revile and flout,
Threatening to yoke them tow and tame their courage stout.
As when a sturdy ploughman with his hynde
By strength have overthrown a stubborn steare,
They down him hold, and fast with cords do bind,
Till they him force the buxome yoke to bear:
So did these two this Knight often tug and tear.
Which when the Prince beheld, there standing by,
He left his lofty steed to aid him near,
And buckling soon him self, began fiercely fly
Upon that Carle, to save his friend from ieopardy.
The villain leaving him unto his mate
To be captived, and handled as he list,
Himself addressed unto this new debate,
And with his club him all about so blist,
That he which way to turn him scarcely wist:
Sometimes aloft he laid, sometimes allow;
Now here, now there, and often him near he mist;
So doubtfully, that hardly one could know
Whether more wary were to give or ward the blow.
But yet the Prince so well enured was
With such huge strokes, approved often in fight,
That way to them he gave forth right to pas.
Ne would endure the danger of their might,
But wayt advantage, when they down did light.
At last the caytiue after long discourse,
When all his strokes he saw avoided quite,
Resolved in one t'assemble all his force,
And make one end of him without ruth or remorse.
His dreadful hand he heaued up aloft,
And with his dreadful instrument of ire,
Thought sure have pownded him to powder soft,
Or deep emboweld in the earth entyre:
But Fortune did not with his will conspire.
For ere his stroke attained his intent,
The noble child preventing his desire,
Under his club with wary boldness went,
And smote him on the knee, that never yet was bent.
It never yet was bent, ne bent it now,
Albe the stroke so strong and puissant were,
That seemed a marble pillour it could bow,
But all that leg, which did his body bear,
It cracked throughout, yet did no blood appear;
So as it was unable to support
So huge a burden on such broken gear,
But fell to ground, like to a lump of dirt,
Whence he assayd to rise, but could not for his hurt.
Eftsoons the Prince to him full nimbly stepped,
And least he should recover foot again,
His head meant from his shoulders to have swept.
Which when the Lady saw, she cryde amain;
Stay stay, Sir Knight, for love of God abstain,
For that unawares ye weetlesse do intend;
Slay not that Carle, though worthy to be slain:
For more on him does then him self depend;
My life will by his death have lamentable end.
He staide his hand according her desire,
Yet nathemore him suffered to arize;
But still suppressing began of her inquire,
What meaning mote those uncouth words comprize,
That in that villains health her safety lies:
That, were no might in man, nor heart in Knights,
Which durst her dreaded reskue enterprise,
Yet heavens them selves, that favor feeble rights,
Would for it self redress, and punish such despights.
Then bursting forth in tears, which gushed fast
Like many water streams, a while she stayed;
Till the sharp passion being ouerpast,
Her tongue to her restord, then thus she said;
Nor heavens, nor men can me most wretched maid
Deliver from the doom of my desert,
The which the God of love has on me laid,
And damned to endure this direful smart,
For penance of my proud and hard rebellious heart.
In prime of youthly years, when first the flower
Of beauty began to bud, and bloosme delight,
And nature me endu'd with plenteous dowre,
Of all her gifts, that pleased each living sight,
I was beloved of many a gentle Knight,
And sude and sought with all the service dew:
Full many a one for me deep groand and sight,
And to the door of death for sorrow drew,
Complaining out on me, that would not on them rue.
But let them love that list, or live or die;
Me list not die for any lovers doole:
Ne list me leave my loved liberty,
To pity him that list to play the fool:
To love my self I learned had in school.
Thus I triumphed long in lovers pain,
And sitting careless on the scorners stool,
Did laugh at those that did lament and plain:
But all is now repayd with interest again.
For lo the winged God, that wounds hearts,
Causde me be called to account therefore,
And for reuengement of those wrongful smarts,
Which I to others did inflict before,
Addeem'd me to endure this penance sore;
That in this wize, and this unmeet array,
With these two lewd companions, and no more,
Disdain and Scorn, I through the world should stray,
Till I have saved so many, as I erst did slay.
Certes (said then the Prince) the God is just,
That takes vengeance of his peoples spoil.
For were no law in love, but all that lust,
Might them oppress, and painefully turmoile,
His kingdom would continue but a while.
But tell me Lady, wherefore do you bear
This bottle thus before you with such toil,
And eeke this wallet at your back arreare,
That for these Carles to carry much more comely were?
Here in this bottle (said the sorry Maid)
I put the tears of my contrition,
Till to the brim I have it full defrayd:
And in this bag which I behind me don,
I put repentance for things past and gone.
Yet is the bottle leake, and bag so torn,
That all which I put in, falls out anon;
And is behind me trodden down of Scorn,
Who mocketh all my pain, and laughs the more I mourn.
The Infant hearkened wisely to her tale,
And wondered much at Cupids iudg'ment wise,
That could so meekly make proud hearts auale,
And wreake him self on them, that him despise.
Then suffered he Disdain up to arise,
Who was not able up him self to rear,
By means his leg through his late luckelesse prise,
Was cracked in twain, but by his foolish fear
Was helped up, who him supported standing near.
But being up, he looked again aloft,
As if he never had received fall;
And with stern eyebrows stared at him often,
As if he would have daunted him with all:
And standing on his tiptoes, to seem tall,
Down on his golden feet he often gazed,
As if such pride the other could apall;
Who was so far from being ought amazed,
That he his looks despised, and his boast dispraized.
Then turning back unto that captive thrall,
Who all this while stood there beside them bound,
Unwilling to be known, or seen at all,
He from those bands weend him to have vnwound.
But when approaching near, he plainly found,
It was his own true groom, the gentle Squire,
He thereat wext exceedingly astound,
And him did often embrace, and often admire,
Ne could with seeing satisfy his great desire.
Mean while the Saluage man, when he beheld
That huge great fool oppressing the other Knight,
Whom with his weight unwieldy down he held,
He flew upon him, like a greedy kight
Unto some carrion offered to his sight,
And down him plucking, with his nails and teeth
Began him to hale, and tear, and scratch, and bite;
And from him taking his own whip, therewith
So sore him scourges, that the blood down follows.
And sure I ween, had not the Ladies cry
Procured the Prince his cruel hand to stay,
He would with whipping, him have done to dye:
But being checked, he did abstain straight way,
And let him rise. Then thus the Prince began say;
Now Lady since your fortunes thus dispose,
That if ye list have liberty, ye may,
Unto your self I freely leave to chose,
Whether I shall you leave, or from these villains lose.
Ah nay Sir Knight (said she) it may not be,
But that I needs must by all means fulfill
This penance, which enjoined is to me,
Least unto me betide a greater ill;
Yet no less thanks to you for your good will.
So humbly taking leave, she turned aside,
But Arthure with the rest, went onward still
On his first quest, in which did him betide
A great adventure, which did him from them divide.
But first it falls me by course to tell
Of fair Serena, who as erst you heard,
When first the gentle Squire at variaunce fell
With those two Carles, fled fast away, afeard
Of villainy to be to her inferd:
So fresh the image of her former dread,
Yet dwelling in her eye, to her appeard,
That every foot did tremble, which did tread,
And every body two, and two she four did read.
Through hills and dales, through bushes and through breres
Long thus she fled, till that at last she thought
Her self now past the peril of her fears.
Then looking round about, and seeing naught.
Which doubt of danger to her offer might,
She from her palfrey lighted on the plain,
And sitting down, her self a while bethought
Of her long travel and turmoyling pain;
And often did of love, and often of luck complain.
And evermore she blamed Calepine,
The good Sir Calepine, her own true Knight,
As the only author of her woeful tine:
For being of his love to her so light,
As her to leave in such a piteous plight.
Yet never Turtle truer to his make,
Then he was tried unto his Lady bright:
Who all this while endured for her sake,
Great peril of his life, and restless pains did take.
Tho when as all her plaints, she had displayed,
And well disburdened her engrieued breast,
Upon the grass her self adowne she laid;
Where being tyrde with travel, and oppressed
With sorrow, she betook her self to rest.
There whilst in Morpheus bosom safe she lay,
Fearelesse of ought, that mote her peace molest,
False Fortune did her safety betray,
Unto a strange mischaunce, that menaced her decay.
In these wild deserts, where she now abode,
There dwelt a saluage nation, which did live
Of stealth and spoil, and making nightly rode
Into their neighbors borders; ne did give
Them selves to any trade, as for to drive
The painful plough, or cattle for to breed,
Or by aduentrous merchandise to thrive;
But on the labors of poor men to feed,
And serve their own necessities with others need.
Thereto they used one most accursed order,
To eat the flesh of men, whom they mote find,
And strangers to devour, which on their border
Were brought by error, or by wreckfull wind.
A monstrous cruelty against course of kind.
They toward evening wandering every way,
To seek for booty, came by fortune blind,
Whereas this Lady, like a sheep astray,
Now drowned in the depth of sleep all fearelesse lay.
Soon as they spide her, Lord what gladfull glee
They made amongst them selves; but when her face
Like the fair yuory shining they did see,
Each began his fellow solace and embrace,
For joy of such good hap by heavenly grace.
Then began they to deuize what course to take:
Whether to slay her there upon the place,
Or suffer her out of her sleep to wake,
And then her eat attonce; or many meals to make.
The best aduizement was of bad, to let her
Sleep out her fill, without encomberment:
For sleep they said would make her battill better.
Then when she wakt, they all gave one consent,
That since by grace of God she there was sent,
Unto their God they would her sacrifize,
Whose share, her guiltless blood they would present,
But of her dainty flesh they did deuize
To make a common feast, and feed with gurmandize.
So round about her they them selves did place
Upon the grass, and diuersely dispose,
As each thought best to spend the lingering space.
Some with their eyes the daintest morsels chose;
Some praise her paps, some praise her lips and nose;
Some whet their knives, and strip their elboes bare:
The Priest him self a garland does compose
Of finest flowers, and with full busy care
His bloody vessels wash, and holy fire prepare.
The Damzell wakes, then all attonce vpstart,
And round about her flock, like many flies,
Whooping, and hallowing on every part,
As if they would have rent the brazen skies.
Which when she sees with ghastly griefful eyes,
Her heart does quake, and deadly pallid hew
Benumbes her cheeks: Then out aloud she cries,
Where none is nigh to hear, that will her rue,
And rends her golden locks, and snowy breasts embrew.
But all boots not: they hands upon her lay;
And first they spoil her of her iewls dear,
And afterward of all her rich array;
The which amongst them they in pieces tear,
And of the pray each one a part does bear.
Now being naked, to their sordid eyes
The goodly threasures of nature appear:
Which as they view with lustful fantasyes,
Each wishes to him self, and to the rest enuyes.
Her yuorie neck, her alablaster breast,
Her paps, which like white silken pillowes were,
For love in soft delight thereon to rest;
Her tender sides her belly white and clear,
Which like an Altar did it self vprere,
To offer sacrifice divine thereon;
Her goodly thighs, whose glory did appear
Like a triumphall Arch, and thereupon
The spoils of Princes hanged, which were in battle won.
Those dainty parts, the dearlings of delight,
Which mote not be profaned of common eyes,
Those villeins vew'd with loose lascivious sight,
And closely tempted with their crafty spies;
And some of them began among themselves deuize,
Thereof by force to take their beastly pleasure.
But them the Priest rebuking, did aduize*
To dare not to pollute so sacred threasure,
Vowed to the gods: religion held even thieves in measure.
So being stayed, they her from thence directed
Unto a little grove not far aside,
In which an altar shortly they erected,
To slay her on. And now the Euentyde
His broad black wings had through the heavens wide
By this dispred, that was the time ordained
For such a dismal deed, their guilt to hyde:
Of few green turfes an altar soon they feigned,
And decked it all with flowers, which they nigh hand obtained.
Tho when as all things ready were aright,
The Damzell was before the altar set,
Being already dead with fearful fright.
To whom the Priest with naked arms full net
Approaching nigh, and murdrous knife well whet,
Began mutter close a certain secret charm,
With other devilish ceremonies met:
Which done he began aloft t'aduance his arm,
Whereat they shouted all, and made a loud alarm.
Then began the bagpypes and the horns to shrill,
And shrieke aloud, that with the peoples voice
Confused, did the air with terror fill,
And made the wood to tremble at the noyce:
The whiles she wayld, the more they did rejoice.
Now mote ye understand that to this grove
Sir Calepine by chance, more then by choice,
The self same evening fortune hither drove,
As he to seek Serena through the woods did roue.
Long had he sought her, and through many a soil
Had traueld still on foot in heavy arms,
Ne ought was tired with his endless toils,
Ne ought was feared of his certain harms:
And now all weetlesse of the wretched storms,
In which his love was lost, he slept full fast,
Till being waked with these loud alarmes,
He lightly started up like one aghast,
And catching up his arms straight to the noise forth past.
There by th'vncertaine glims of starry night,
And by the twinkling of their sacred fire,
He mote perceive a little dawning sight
Of all, which there was doing in that quire:
Among whom a woman spoyld of all attire
He spyde, lamenting her unlucky strife,
And groaning sore from grieved heart entire;
Eftsoons he saw one with a naked knife
Ready to launch her breast, and let out loved life.
With that he thrusts into the thickest throng,
And even as his right hand adowne descends,
He him preventing, lays on earth along,
And sacrifizeth to the infernal feends.
Then to the rest his wrathful hand he bends,
Of whom he makes such havoc and such hew,
That swarms of damned souls to hell he sends:
The rest that escape his sword and death eschew,
Fly like a flock of doves before a Faulcons view.
From them returning to that Lady back,
Whom by the Altar he does sitting find,
Yet fearing death, and next to death the lack
Of clothes to cover, what they ought by kind,
He first her hands begins to unbind;
And then to question of her present woe;
And afterward to cheer with speeches kind.
But she for naught that he could say or do,
One word durst speak, or answer him awhit thereto.
So inward shame of her uncomely case
She did conceive, through care of womanhood,
That though the night did cover her disgrace,
Yet she in so unwomanly a mood,
Would not bewray the state in which she stood.
So all that night to him unknown she past.
But day, that does discover bad and good,
Ensewing, made her known to him at last:
The end whereof I Will keep until another cast.
Cant. IX.
Calidore hosts with Meliboe
And loves fair Pastorell;
Coridon enuies him, yet he
for ill rewards him well.
NOw turn again my teme thou jolly swayne,
Back to the furrow which I lately left;
I lately left a furrow, one or twain
Vnplough'd, the which my coulter has not cleft:
Yet seemed the soil both fair and fruitful eft,
As I it past, that were too great a shame,
That so rich fruit should be from us bereft;
Besides the great dishonor and defame,
Which should befall to Calidores immortal name.
Great travel has the gentle Calidore
And toil endured, since I left him last
Sewing the Blatant beast, which I forbore
To finish then, for other present have.
Full many paths and perils he has past,
Through hills, through dales, through forests, and through plains
In that same quest which fortune on him cast,
Which he achieved to his own great gains,
Reaping eternal glory of his restless pains.
So sharply he the Monster did pursew,
That day nor night he suffered him to rest,
Ne rested he himself but natures dew,
For dread of danger, not to be redrest,
If he for sloth forslackt so famous quest.
Him first from court he to the cities coursed,
And from the cities to the towns him pressed,
And from the towns into the country forsed,
And from the country back to private farms he scorsed.
From thence into the open fields he fled,
Whereas the Heardes were keeping of their neat,
And shepherds singing to their flocks, that fed,
Lays of sweet love and youths delightful heat:
Him thither eke for all his fearful threat
He followed fast, and chaced him so nie,
That to the folds, where sheep at night do seat,
And to the little cots, where shepherds lie
In winters wrathful time, he forced him to fly.
There on a day as he pursew'd the chase,
He chaunst to spy a sort of shepherd grooms,
Playing on pypes, and caroling apace,
The whiles their beasts there in the budded broomes
Beside them fed, and nipt the tender bloomes:
For other worldly wealth they cared naught.
To whom Sir Calidore yet sweating comes,
And them to tell him courteously besought,
If such a beast they saw, which he had thither brought.
They answered him, that no such beast they saw,
Nor any wicked feend, that mote offend
Their happy flocks, nor danger to them draw:
But if that such there were (as none they kend)
They prayed high God them far from them to send.
Then one of them him seeing so to sweat,
After his rusticke wise, that well he weend,
Offered him drink, to quench his thirsty heat,
And if he hungry were, him offered eke to eat.
The knight was nothing nice, where was no need,
And took their gentle offer: so adowne
They prayed him sit, and gave him for to feed
Such homely what, as serves the simple clown,
That does despise the dainties of the town.
Tho having fed his fill, he there beside
Saw a fair damzell, which did wear a crown
Of sundry flowers, with silken ribbands tide.
Yclad in home-made green that her own hands had did.
Upon a little hillocke she was placed
Higher then all the rest, and round about
Enuiron'd with a girland, goodly graced,
Of lovely lasses, and them all without
The lusty shepherd swaynes sat in a rout,
The which did pype and sing her praises dew,
And often rejoice, and often for wonder shout,
As if some miracle of heavenly hew
Were down to them descended in that earthly view.
And soothly sure she was full fair of face,
And perfectly well shapt in every lim,
Which she did more augment with modest grace,
And comely carriage of her countenance trim,
That all the rest like lesser lamps did dim:
Who her admiring as some heavenly wight,
Did for their sovereign goddess her esteem,
And caroling her name both day and night,
The fairest Pastorella her by name did hight.
Ne was there heard, ne was there shepherds swayne
But her did honor, and eke many a one
Burnt in her love, and with sweet pleasing pain
Full many a night for her did sigh and groan:
But most of all the shepherd Coridon
For her did languish, and his dear life spend;
Yet neither she for him, nor other none
Did care a whit, ne any liking lend:
Though mean her lot, yet higher did her mind ascend.
Her whiles Sir Calidore there vewed well,
And marked her rare demeanure, which him seemed
So far the mean of shepherds to excel,
As that he in his mind her worthy deemed,
To be a Princes Paragone esteemed,
He was unawares surprisd in subtle bands
Of the blind boy, ne thence could be redeemed
By any skill out of his cruel hands,
Caught like the bird, which gazing still on others stands.
So stood he still long gazing thereupon,
Ne any will had thence to move away,
Although his quest were far before him gone;
But after he had fed, yet did he stay,
And sat there still, until the flying day
Was far forth spent, discoursing diversely
Of sundry things, as fell to work delay;
And evermore his speech he did apply
To th'heards, but meant them to the damzels fantazy.
By this the moystie night approaching fast,
Her deawy humor began on the earth to shed,
That warned the shepherds to their homes to have
Their tender flocks, now being fully fed,
For fear of wetting them before their bed;
Then came to them a good old aged sire,
Whose silver locks bedeckt his beard and head,
With shepherds hook in hand, and fit attire,
That wild the damzell rise; the day did now expyre.
He was to weet by common voice esteemed
The father of the fairest Pastorell,
And of her self in very deed so deemed;
Yet was not so, but as old stories tell
Found her by fortune, which to him befell,
In the open fields an Infant left alone,
And taking up brought home, and noursed well
As his own child; for other he had none,
That she in tract of time accounted was his own.
She at his bidding meekely did arise,
And straight unto her little flock did fare:
Then all the rest about her rose likewise,
And each his sundry sheep with several care
Gathered together, and them homeward bare:
Whylest every one with helping hands did strive
Amongst themselves, and did their labors share,
To help fair Pastorella, home to drive
Her fleecie flock; but Coridon most help did give.
But Meliboee (so hight that good old man)
Now seeing Calidore left all alone,
And night arrived hard at hand, began
Him to inuit unto his simple home;
Which though it were a cottage clad with lome,
And all things therein mean, yet better so
To lodge, then in the saluage fields to rome.
The knight full gladly soon agreed thereto,
Being his hearts own wish, and home with him did go.
There he was welcomed of that honest sire,
And of his aged Beldame homely well;
Who him besought himself to disattyre,
And rest himself, till supper time befell.
By which home came the fairest Pastorell,
After her flock she in their fold had tide,
And supper ready dight, they to it fell
With small ado, and nature satisfyde,
The which does little crave contented to abide.
Tho when they had their hunger slaked well,
And the fair maid the table taken away,
The gentle knight, as he that did excel
In courtesy, and well could do and say,
For so great kindness as he found that day,
Began greatly thank his host and his good wife;
And drawing thence his speech another way,
Began highly to commend the happy life,
Which Shepherds lead, without debate or bitter strife.
How much (said he) more happy is the state,
In which ye father here do dwell at ease,
Leading a life so free and fortunate,
From all the tempests of these worldly seas,
Which toss the rest in dangerous disease?
Where wars, and wreckes, and wicked enmity
Do them afflict, which no man can appease,
That certes I your happiness envy,
And wish my lot were plast in such felicity.
Surely my son (then answered he again)
If happy, then it is in this intent,
That having small, yet do I not complain
Of want, ne wish for more it to augment,
But do my self, with that I have, content;
So taught of nature, which does little need
Of foreign helps to life's due nourishment:
The fields my food, my flock my raiment breed;
No better do I wear, no better do I feed.
Therefore I do not any one envy,
Nor am enuyde of any one therefore;
They that have much, fear much to loose thereby,
And store of cares does follow riches store.
The little that I have, grows daily more
Without my care, but only to attend it;
My lambs do every year increase their score,
And my flocks father daily does amend it.
What have I, but to praise The Almighty, that does send it?
To them, that list, the worlds gay shows I leave,
And to great ones such follies do forgive,
Which often through pride do their own peril weaue,
And through ambition down themselves do drive
To sad decay, that might contented live.
Me no such cares nor combrous thoughts offend,
Ne once my minds unmoved quiet grieve,
But all the night in silver sleep I spend,
And all the day, to what I list, I do attend.
Sometimes I hunt the Fox, the vowed foe
Unto my Lambs, and him dislodge away;
Sometime the fawn I practice from the Do,
Or from the Goat her kidde how to convey;
Another while I baytes and nets display,
The birds to catch, or fishes to beguyle:
And when I weary am, I down do lay
My limbs in every shade, to rest from toil,
And drink of every brook, when thirst my throat does boil.
The time was once, in my first prime of years,
When pride of youth forth pricked my desire,
That I disdained amongst mine equal pears
To follow sheep, and shepherds base attire:
For further fortune then I would inquire.
And leaving home, to royal court I sought;
Where I did sell my self for yearly hire,
And in the Princes gardin daily wrought:
There I beheld such vainenesse, as I never thought.
With sight whereof soon cloyd, and long deluded
With idle hopes, which them do entertain,
After I had ten years my self excluded
From native home, and spent my youth in vain,
I began my follies to my self to plain,
And this sweet peace, whose lack did then appear.
Tho back returning to my sheep again,
I from thenceforth have learned to love more dear
This lowly quiet life, which I inherit here.
Whylest thus he talked, the knight with greedy ear
Hong still upon his melting mouth attent;
Whose sensefull words empierst his heart so near,
That he was rapt with double rauishment,
Both of his speech that wrought him great content,
And also of the object of his view,
On which his hungry eye was always bent;
That twixt his pleasing tongue, and her fair hew,
He lost himself, and like one half entraunced grew.
Yet to occasion means, to work his mind,
And to insinuate his hearts desire,
He thus replyde; Now surely sire, I find,
That all this worlds gay shows, which we admire,
Be but vain shadows to this safe retire
Of life, which here in lowliness ye lead,
Fearelesse of foes, or fortunes wrackfull ire,
Which tosseth states, and under foot does tread
The mighty ones, affrayd of every chaunges dread.
That even I which daily do behold
The glory of the great, among whom I won,
And now have proved, what happiness ye hold
In this small plot of your dominion,
Now loath great Lordship and ambition;
And wish th'heauens so much had graced me,
As grant me live in like condition;
Or that my fortunes might transposed be
From pitch of higher place, unto this low degree.
In vain (said then old Meliboe) do men
The heavens of their fortunes fault accuse,
Since they know best, what is the best for them:
For they to each such fortune do diffuse,
As they do know each can most aptly use.
For not that, which men covet most, is best,
Nor that thing worst, which men do most refuse;
But fittest is, that all contented rest
With that they hold: each has his fortune in his breast.
It is the mind, that makes good or ill,
That makes wretch or happy, rich or poor:
For some, that has abundance at his will,
Has not enough, but wants in greatest store;
And other, that has little, asks no more,
But in that little is both rich and wise.
For wisdom is most riches; fools therefore
They are, which fortunes do by vows deuize,
Since each unto himself his life may fortunize.
Since then in each man's self (said Calidore)
It is, to fashion his own lyfes estate,
Give leave awhyle, good father, in this shore
To rest my barcke, which has been beaten late
With storms of fortune and tempestuous fate,
In seas of troubles and of toylesome pain,
That whether quite from them for to retrate
I shall resolve, or back to turn again,
I may here with your self some small repose obtain.
Not that the burden of so bold a guest
Shall chargefull be, or change to you at all;
For your mean food shall be my daily feast,
And this your cabin both my bower and hall.
Besides for recompense hereof, I shall
You well reward, and golden guerdon give,
That may perhaps you better much withal,
And in this quiet make you safer live.
So forth he drew much gold, and toward him it drive.
But the good man, naught tempted with the offer
Of his rich mould, did thrust it far away,
And thus bespake; Sir knight, your bounteous proffer
Be far fro me, to whom ye ill display
That mucky mass, the cause of men's decay,
That mote empaire my peace with dangers dread.
But if ye algates covet to assay
This simple sort of life, that shepherds lead,
Be it your own: our rudeness to your self aread.
So there that night Sir Calidore did dwell,
And long while after, whilst him list remain,
Daily beholding the fair Pastorell,
And feeding on the bayt of his own bane.
During which time he did her entertain
With all kind courtesies, he could invent;
And every day, her company to gain,
When to the field she went, he with her went:
So for to quench his fire, he did it more augment.
But she that never had acquainted been
With such queint usage, fit for Queens and Kings,
Ne ever had such knightly service seen,
But being bred under base shepherds wings,
Had ever learned to love the lowly things,
Did little whit regard his courteous guize,
But cared more for Colins carolings
Then all that he could do, or ever deuize:
His lays, his loves, his looks she did them all despize.
Which Calidore perceiving, thought it best
To change the manner of his lofty look;
And doffing his bright arms, himself addressed
In shepherds weed, and in his hand he took,
In stead of steelehead spear, a shepherds hook,
That who had seen him then, would have bethought
On Phrygian Paris by Plexippus brook,
When he the love of fair Benone sought,
What time the golden apple was unto him brought.
So being clad, unto the fields he went
With the fair Pastorella every day,
And kept her sheep with diligent attent,
Watching to drive the ravenous Wolf away,
The whylest at pleasure she mote sport and play;
And every evening helping them to fold:
And otherwhiles for need, he did assay
In his strong hand their rugged teats to hold,
And out of them to press the milk: love so much could.
Which seeing Coridon, who her likewise
Long time had loved, and hoped her love to gain,
He much was troubled at that strangers guize,
And many gealous thoughts conceived in vain,
That this of all his labor and long pain
Should reap the harvest, ere it ripened were,
That made him scoule, and pout, and often complain
Of Pastorell to all the shepherds there,
That she did love a stranger swayne then him more dear.
And ever when he came in company,
Where Calidore was present, he would loure,
And byte his lip, and even for gealousie
Was ready often his own heart to devour,
Impatient of any paramoure:
Who on the other side did seem so far
From malicing, or grudging his good hour,
That all he could, he graced him with her,
Ne ever showed sign of rancour or of jar.
And often, when Coridon unto her brought
Or little sparrowes, stolen from their nest,
Or wanton squirrels, in the woods far sought,
Or other dainty thing for her addressed,
He would commend his gift, and make the best.
Yet she no whit his presents did regard,
Ne him could find to fancy in her breast:
This newcome shepherd had his market mard.
Old love is little worth when new is more prefard.
One day when as the shepherd swaynes together
Were met, to make their sports and merry glee,
As they are wont in fair sunshynie weather,
The whiles their flocks in shadows shrouded be,
They fell to dance: then did they all agree,
That Colin clout should pipe as one most fit;
And Calidore should lead the ring, as he
That most in Pastorellaes grace did sit.
Thereat frowned Coridon, and his lip closely bit.
But Calidore of courteous inclination
Took Coridon, and set him in his place,
That he should lead the dance, as was his fashion;
For Coridon could dance, and trimly trace.
And when as Pastorella, him to grace,
Her flowery garlond took from her own head,
And plast on his, he did it soon displace,
And did it put on Coridons in stead:
Then Coridon woxe frollicke, that erst seemed dead.
Another time, when as they did dispose
To practice games, and maisteries to try,
They for their Judge did Pastorella chose;
A garland was the meed of victory.
There Coridon forth stepping openly,
Did challenge Calidore to wrestling game:
For he through long and perfect industry,
Therein well practisd was, and in the same
Thought sure t'auenge his grudge, and work his foe great shame.
But Calidore he greatly did mistake;
For he was strong and mightily stiff pight,
That with one fall his neck he almost brake,
And had he not upon him fallen light,
His dearest joint he sure had broken quight.
Then was the oaken crown by Pastorell
Given to Calidore, as his due right;
But he, that did in courtesy excel,
Gave it to Coridon, and said he won it well.
Thus did the gentle knight himself abeare
Amongst that rusticke rout in all his deeds,
That even they, the which his riuals were,
Could not malign him, but commend him needs:
For courtesy amongst the rudest breeds:
Good will and favor. So it surely wrought
With this fair Maid, and in her mind the seeds
Of perfect love did sow, that last forth brought
The fruit of joy and bliss, though long time dearly bought.
Thus Calidore continued there long time,
To win the love of the fair Pastorell;
Which having got, he used without crime
Or blamefull blot, but menaged so well,
That he of all the rest, which there did well,
Was favored, and to her grace commended.
But what strange fortunes unto him befell,
Ere he attained the point by him intended,
Shall more conveniently in other place be ended.
Cant. X.
Calidore sees the Graces dance,
To Colins melody:
The whiles his Pastorell is led,
Into captivity.
WHo now does follow the foul Blatant Beast,
Whilst Calidore does follow that fair Maid,
Unmindful of his vow and high beheast,
Which by the Faery Queen was on him laid,
That he should never leave, nor be delayed
From chacing him, till he had it attchieued?
But now entrapt of love, which him betrayed,
He minds more, how he may be relieved
With grace from her, whose love his heart has sore engrieued.
That from henceforth he means no more to sew
His former quest, so full of toil and pain;
Another quest, another game in view
He has, the guerdon of his love to gain:
With whom he minds for ever to remain,
And set his rest amongst the rusticke sort,
Rather then hunt still after shadows vain
Of courtly favor, fed with light report,
Of every blaste, and sailing always on the port.
Ne certes mote he greatly blamed be,
From so high step to stoop unto so low.
For who had tasted once (as often did he)
The happy peace, which there does ouerflow,
And proved the perfect pleasures, which do grow
Amongst poor hyndes, in hills, in woods, in dales,
Would never more delight in painted show
Of such false bliss, as there is set for stales,
T'entrap unwary fools in their eternal bales.
For what has all that goodly glorious gaze
Like to one sight, which Calidore did view?
The glaunce whereof their dimmed eyes would daze,
That never more they should endure the show
Of that sunshine, that makes them look askew.
Ne ought in all that world of beauties rare,
(Save only Glorianaes heavenly hew
To which what can compare?) can it compare;
The which as comes now, by course I will declare.
One day as he did raunge the fields abroad,
Whilst his fair Pastorella was elsewhere,
He chaunst to come, far from all peoples troad,
Unto a place, whose pleasaunce did appear
To pass all others, on the earth which were:
For all that ever was by natures skill
Deuized to work delight, was gathered there,
And there by her were poured forth at fill,
As if this to adorn, she all the rest did pill.
It was an hill plaste in an open plain,
That round about was bordered with a wood
Of matchless hight, that seemed the earth to disdain,
In which all trees of honor stately stood,
And did all winter as in summer bud,
Spredding pauilions for the birds to bower,
Which in their lower branches sung aloud;
And in their tops the soring hawk did tower,
Sitting like King of fowls in majesty and power.
And at the foot thereof, a gentle flud
His silver waves did softly tumble down,
Vnmard with ragged moss or filthy mud,
Ne mote wild beasts, ne mote the ruder clown
Thereto approach, ne filth mote therein drown:
But Nymphs and Faeries by the bancks did sit,
In the woods shade, which did the waters crown,
Keeping all noisome things away from it,
And to the waters fall tuning their accents fit.
And on the top thereof a spacious plain
Did spread it self, to serve to all delight,
Either to dance, when they to dance would feign,
Or else to course about their bases light;
Ne ought there wanted, which for pleasure might
Desired be, or thence to banish bale:
So pleasauntly the hill with equal hight,
Did seem to ouerlooke the lowly vale;
Therefore it rightly cleeped was mount Acidale.
They say that Venus, when she did dispose
Her self to pleasaunce, used to resort
Unto this place, and therein to repose
And rest her self, as in a gladsome port,
Or with the Graces there to play and sport;
That even her own Cytheron, though in it
She used most to keep her royal court,
And in her sovereign Majesty to sit,
She in regard hereof refusde and thought unfit.
Unto this place when as the Elfin Knight
Approcht, him seemed that the merry sound
Of a shrill pipe he playing heard on hight,
And many feet fast thumping th'hollow ground,
That through the woods their Echo did rebound.
He nigher drew, to weete what mote it be;
There he a troop of Ladies dancing found
Full merrily, and making gladfull glee,
And in the midst a Shepherd piping he did see.
He durst not enter into the open green,
For dread of them unawares to be descryde,
For breaking of their dance, if he were seen;
But in the covert of the wood did bide,
Beholding all, yet of them vnespyde.
There he did see, that pleased much his sight,
That even he him self his eyes enuyde,
An hundred naked maidens lilly white,
All raunged in a ring, and dancing in delight.
All they without were raunged in a ring,
And daunced round; but in the midst of them
Three other Ladies did both dance and sing,
The whilst the rest them round about did hemme,
And like a girlond did in compass stem:
And in the midst of those same three, was placed
Another Damzell, as a precious gemme,
Amidst a ring most richly well enchaced,
That with her goodly presence all the rest much graced.
Look how the Crown, which Ariadne wore
Upon her yuory forehead that same day,
That Theseus her unto his bridale bore,
When the bold Centaures made that bloody fray.
With the fierce Lapithes, which did them dismay;
Being now placed in the firmament,
Through the bright heaven does her beams display,
And is unto the stars an ornament,
Which round about her move in order excellent.
Such was the beauty of this goodly band,
Whose sundry parts were here too long to tell:
But she that in the midst of them did stand,
Seemed all the rest in beauty to excel,
Crowned with a rosy girlond, that right well
Did her beseem. And ever, as the crew
About her daunst, sweet flowers, that far did smell,
And fragrant odours they upon her threw;
But most of all, those three did her with gifts endew.
Those were the Graces, daughters of delight,
Handmaides of Venus, which are wont to haunt
Upon this hill, and dance there day and night:
Those three to men all gifts of grace do grant,
And all, that Venus in her self does vaunt,
Is borrowed of them. But that fair one,
That in the midst was placed parauaunt,
Was she to whom that shepherd pypt alone,
That made him pipe so merrily, as never none.
She was to weete that jolly Shepherds less,
Which piped there unto that merry rout,
That jolly shepherd, which there piped, was
Poor Colin Clout (who knows not Colin clout?)
He pypt apace, whilst they him daunst about.
Pype jolly shepherd, pype thou now apace
Unto thy love, that made thee low to lout;
Thy love is present there with thee in place,
Thy love is there aduaunst to be another Grace.
Much wondered Calidore at this strange sight,
Whose like before his eye had never seen,
And standing long astonished in spright,
And rapt with pleasaunce, wist not what to ween;
Whether it were the train of beauties Queen,
Or Nymphs, or Faeries, or enchaunted show,
With which his eyes mote have deluded been.
Therefore resolving, what it was, to know,
Out of the wood he rose, and toward them did go.
But soon as he appeared to their view,
They vanished all away out of his sight,
And clean were gone, which way he never knew;
All save the shepherd, who for fell despite
Of that displeasure, broke his bag-pipe quight,
And made great moan for that unhappy turn.
But Calidore, though no less sorry wight,
For that mishap, yet seeing him to mourn,
Drew near, that he the truth of all by him mote learn.
And first him greeting, thus unto him spoke,
Hail jolly shepherd, which thy joyous days
Here leadest in this goodly merry make,
Frequented of these gentle Nymphs always,
Which to thee flock, to hear thy lovely lays;
Tell me, what mote these dainty Damzels be,
Which here with thee do make their pleasant plays?
Right happy thou, that may them freely see:
But why when I them saw, fled they away from me?
Not I so happy answered then that swain,
As thou unhappy, which them thence did chase,
Whom by no means thou can recall again,
For being gone, none can them bring in place,
But whom they of them selves list so to grace.
Right sorry I, (said then Sir Calidore,)
That my ill fortune did them hence displace.
But since things passed none may now restore,
Tell me, what were they all, whose lack thee grieves so sore.
Tho began that shepherd thus for to dilate;
Then wot thou shepherd, whatsoever thou be,
That all those Ladies, which thou saw late,
Are Venus Damzels, all with in her fee,
But differing in honor and degree:
They all are Graces, which on her depend,
Besides a thousand more, which ready be
Her to adorn, when so she forth does wend:
But those three in the midst, do chief on her attend.
They are the daughters of sky-ruling Jove,
By him begot of fair Eurynome,
The Oceans daughter, in this pleasant grove,
As he this way coming from feastfull glee,
Of Thetis wedding with AEcidee.
In summers shade him self here rested weary.
The first of them hight mylde Euphrosyne,
Next fair Aglaia, last Thalia merry:
Sweet Goddesses all three which me in mirth do cherry.
These three on men all gracious gifts bestow,
Which deck the body or adorn the mind,
To make them lovely or well favored show,
As comely carriage, entertainment kind,
Sweet semblaunt, friendly offices that bind,
And all the complements of courtesy:
They teach us, how to each degree and kind
We should our selves demean, to low, to hie;
To friends, to foes, which skill men call Ciuility.
Therefore they always smoothly seem to smile,
That we likewise should mylde and gentle be,
And also naked are, that without guile
Or false dissemblaunce all them plain may see,
Simple and true from covert malice free:
And eeke them selves so in their dance they bore,
That two of them still forward seemed to be,
But one still toward showed her self before;
That good should from us go, then come in greater store.
Such were those Goddesses, which ye did see;
But that fourth Maid, which there amidst the^ traced,
Who can aread, what creature mote she be,
Whether a creature, or a goddess graced
With heavenly gifts from heaven first enraced?
But what so sure she was, she worthy was,
To be the fourth with those three other placed:
Yet was she certes but a counrtey less,
Yet she all other country lasses far did pass.
So far as does the daughter of the day,
All other lesser lights in light excel,
So far does she in beautyfull array,
Above all other lasses bear the bell,
Ne less in virtue that beseemes her well,
Does she exceed the rest of all her race,
For which the Graces that here wont to dwell,
Have for more honor brought her to this place,
And graced her so much to be another Grace.
Another Grace she well deserves to be,
In whom so many Graces gathered are,
Excelling much the mean of her degree;
Divine resemblaunce, beauty sovereign rare,
Firm Chastity, that spite ne blemish dare;
All which she with such courtesy does grace,
That all her peers cannot with her compare,
But quite are dimmed, when she is in place.
She made me often pipe and now to pipe apace.
Sun of the world, great glory of the sky,
That all the earth do lighten with thy rays,
Great Gloriana, greatest Majesty,
Pardon thy shepherd, among so many lays,
As he has sung of thee in all his days,
To make one minime of thy poor handmayd,
And underneath thy feet to place her praise,
That when thy glory shall be far displayed
To future age of her this mention may be made.
When thus that shepherd ended had his speech,
Said Calidore; Now sure it yrketh me,
That to thy bliss I made this luckelesse breach,
As now the author of thy bale to be,
Thus to bereave thy loves dear sight from thee:
But gentle Shepherd pardon thou my shame,
Who rashly sought that, which I mote not see.
Thus did the courteous Knight excuse his blame,
And to recomfort him, all comely means did frame.
In such discourses they together spent
Long time, as fit occasion forth them led;
With which the Knight him self did much content,
And with delight his greedy fancy fed,
Both of his words, which he with reason red;
And also of the place, whose pleasures rare
With such regard his senses ravished,
That thence, he had no will away to fare,
But wished, that with that shepherd he mote dwelling share.
But that enuenimd sting, the which of yore,
His poysnous point deep fixed in his heart
Had left, now began afresh to rancle sore,
And to renew the rigor of his smart:
Whch to recure, no skill of Leaches art
Mote him avail, but to return again
To his wounds worker, that with lovely dart
Dinting his breast, had bred his restless pain,
Like as the wounded Whale to shore flies from the maine.
So taking leave of that same gentle swain,
He back returned to his rusticke won,
Where his fair Pastorella did remain:
To whom in sort, as he at first begone,
He daily did apply him self to done,
All dewfull service void of thoughts impare
Ne any pains ne peril did he shonne,
By which he might her to his love allure,
And liking in her yet untamed heart procure.
And evermore the shepherd Coridon,
What ever thing he did her to aggrate,
Did strive to match with strong contention,
And all his pains did closely emulate;
Whether it were to caroll, as they sat
Keeping their sheep, or games to exercize,
Or to present her with their labors late;
Through which if any grace chaunst to arize
To him, the Shepherd straight with jealousy did frize.
One day as they all three together went
To the green wood, to gather strawberies,
There chaunst to them a dangerous accident;
A Tigre forth out of the wood did rise,
That with fell claws full of fierce gourmandize,
And greedy mouth, wide gaping like hell gate,
Did run at Pastorell her to surprise:
Whom she beholding, now all desolate
Began cry to them aloud, to help her all too late.
Which Coridon first hearing, ran in have
To reskue her, but when he saw the feend,
Through cowherd fear he fled away as fast,
Ne durst abide the danger of the end;
His life he steemed dearer then his friend.
But Calidore soon coming to her aid,
When he the beast saw ready now to rend
His loves dear spoil, in which his heart was prayde,
He ran at him enraged in stead of being frayde.
He had no weapon, but his shepherds hook,
To serve the vengeance of his wrathful will,
With which so sternely he the monster struck,
That to the ground astonished he fell;
Whence ere he could recour, he did him quell,
And hewing off his head, it presented
Before the feet of the fair Pastorell;
Who scarcely yet from former fear exempted,
A thousand times him thankt, that had her death prevented.
From that day forth she began him to affect,
And daily more her favor to augment;
But Coridon for cowherdize reject,
Fit to keep sheep, unfit for loves content:
The gentle heart scorns base disparagement.
Yet Calidore did not despise him quight,
But used him friendly for further intent,
That by his fellowship, he color might
Both his estate, and love from skill of any wight.
So well he wood her, and so well he wrought her,
With humble service, and with daily suit,
That at the last unto his will he brought her;
Which he so wisely well did prosecute,
That of his love he reapt the timely fruit,
And ioyed long in close felicity:
Till fortune fraught with malice, blind, and brute,
That enuies lovers long prosperity,
Blew up a bitter storm of foul adversity.
It fortuned one day, when Calidore
Was hunting in the woods (as was his trade)
A lawless people, Brigants hight of yore,
That never used to live by plough nor spade,
But fed on spoil and booty, which they made
Upon their neighbors, which did nigh them border,
The dwelling of these shepherds did invade,
And spoyld their houses, and them selves did murder;
And drove away their flocks, with other much disorder.
Amongst the rest, the which they then did pray,
They spoyld old Melibee of all he had,
And all his people captive led away,
Among which this lucklesse maid away was lad,
Fair Pastorella, sorrowful and sad,
Most sorrowful, most sad, that ever sight,
Now made the spoil of thieves and Brigants bad,
Which was the conquest of the gentlest Knight,
That ever lived, and the only glory of his might.
With them also was taken Coridon,
And carried captive by those thieves away;
Who in the covert of the night, that none
Mote them descry, nor reskue from their pray,
Unto their dwelling did them close convey.
Their dwelling in a little Island was,
Covered with shrubby woods, in which no way
Appeard for people in nor out to pas,
Nor any footing find for ouergrowen gras.
For underneath the ground their way was made,
Through hollow caves, that no man mote discover
For the thick shrubs, which did them always shade
From view of living wight, and covered over:
But darkness dred and daily night did houer
Through all the inner parts, wherein they dwelt.
Ne ligntned was with window, nor with lover,
But with continual candlelight, which dealt
A doubtful sense of things, not so well seen, as felt.
Hither those Brigants brought their present pray,
And kept them with continual watch and ward,
Meaning so soon, as they convenient may,
For slaves to sell them, for no small reward,
To merchants, which them kept in bondage hard,
Or sold again. Now when fair Pastorell
Into this place was brought, and kept with guard
Of griesly thieves, she thought her self in hell,
Where with such damned fiends she should in darkness dwell.
But for to tell the doleful dreriment,
And pitiful complaints, which there she made,
Where day and night she naught did but lament
Her wretched life, shut up in deadly shade,
And waste her goodly beauty, which did fade
Like to a flower, that feels no heat of sun,
Which may her feeble leaves with comfort glade.
But what befell her in that theeuish won,
Will in an other Canto better be begone.
Cant. XI.
The thieves fall out for Pastorell,
VVhilest Melibee is slain:
Her Calidore from them redeemes,
And brings back again.
THe joys of love, if they should ever last,
Without affliction or disquietnesse,
That worldly chances do amongst them cast,
Would be on earth too great a blessedness,
Liker to heaven, then mortal wretchedness.
Therefore the winged God, to let men weet,
That here on earth is no sure happiness,
A thousand sowres has tempred with one sweet,
To make it seem more dear and dainty, as is meet.
Like as is now befalne to this fair Maid,
Fair Pastorell, of whom is now my song,
Who being now in dreadful darkness laid,
Amongst those thieves, which her in bondage strong
Detaynd, yet Fortune not with all this wrong
Contented, greater mischief on her threw,
And sorrows heapt on her in greater throng;
That who so hears her heaviness, would rue
And pity her sad plight, so changed from pleasant hew.
Whylest thus she in these hellish dens remained,
Wrapped in wretched cares and hearts unrest,
It so befell (as Fortune had ordained)
That he, which was their Captain professed,
And had the chief command of all the rest,
One day as he did all his prisoners view,
With lustful eyes, beheld that lovely guest,
Fair Pastorella, whose sad mournful hew
Like the fair Morning clad in misty fog did show.
At sight whereof his barbarous heart was fired,
And inly burnt with flames most raging whot,
That her alone he for his part desired
Of all the other pray, which they had got,
And her in mind did to him self allot.
From that day forth he kyndnesse to her showed,
And sought her love, by all the means he mote;
With looks, with words, with gifts he often her wowed;
And mixed threats among, and much unto her vowed.
But all that ever he could do or say,
Her constant mind could not a whit remove,
Nor draw unto the lure of his lewd lay,
To grant him favor, or afford him love.
Yet ceast he not to sew and all ways prove,
By which he mote accomplish his request,
Saying and doing all that mote behoue;
Ne day nor night he suffered her to rest,
But her all night did watch, and all the day molest.
At last when him she so importune saw,
Fearing least he at length the raines would lend
Unto his lust, and make his will his law,
Since in his power she was to foe or friend,
She thought it best, for shadow to pretend
Some show of favor, by him gracing small,
That she thereby mote either freely wend,
Or at more ease continue there his thrall:
A little well is lent, that gains more withal.
So from thenceforth, when love he to her made,
With better terms she did him entertain,
Which gave him hope, and did him half persuade,
That he in time her ioyaunce should obtain.
But when she saw, through that small favors gain,
That further, then she willing was, he pressed,
She found no means to bar him, but to feign
A sudden sickness, which her sore oppressed,
And made unfit to serve his lawless minds behest.
By means whereof she would not him permit
Once to approach to her in priuity,
But only among the rest by her to sit,
Mourning the rigor of her malady,
And seeking all things meet for remedy.
But she resolved no remedy to find,
Nor better cheer to show in misery,
Till Fortune would her captive bonds unbind,
Her sickness was not of the body but the mind.
During which space that she thus sick did lie,
It chaunst a sort of merchants, which were wount
To skim those coasts, for bondmen there to buy,
And by such traffic after gains to hunt,
Arrived in this Isle though bare and blunt,
T'inquire for slaves; where being ready met
By some of these same thieves at the instant brunt,
Were brought unto their Captain, who was set
By his fair patients side with sorrowful regret.
To whom they showed, how those merchants were
Arrived in place, their bondslaues for to buy,
And therefore prayed, that those same captives there
Mote to them for their most commodity
Be sold, and among them shared equally.
This their request the Captain much appalled;
Yet could he not their just demand deny,
And willed straight the slaves should forth be called,
And sold for most advantage not to be forstalled.
Then forth the good old Meliboe was brought,
And Coridon, with many other more,
Whom they before in diverse spoils had caught:
All which he to the merchants sale did show.
Till some, which did the sundry prisoners know,
Began to inquire for that fair shepherdess,
Which with the rest they took not long ago,
And began her form and feature to express,
The more t'augment her price, through praise of comeliness.
To whom the Captain in full angry wize
Made answer, that the Maid of whom they spoke,
Was his own purchase and his only prize,
With which none had to do, ne ought partake,
But he himself, which did that conquest make;
Little for him to have one silly less:
Besides through sickness now so wan and weak,
That nothing meet in merchandise to pass.
So showed them her, to prove how pale and weak she was.
The sight of whom, though now decayed and mard,
And eke but hardly seen by candlelight,
Yet like a Diamond of rich regard,
In doubtful shadow of the darkesome night,
With starrie beams about her shining bright,
These merchants fixed eyes did so amaze,
That what through wonder, and what through delight,
A while on her they greedily did gaze,
And did her greatly like, and did her greatly praize.
At last when all the rest them offered were,
And prises to them placed at their pleasure,
They all refused in regard of her,
Ne ought would buy, how ever prisd with measure,
Withouten her, whose worth above all threasure
They did esteem, and offered store of gold.
But then the Captain fraught with more displeasure,
Bad them be still, his love should not be sold:
The rest take if they would, he her to him would hold.
Therewith some other of the chiefest thieves
Boldly him bad such injury forbear;
For that same maid, how ever it him greeues,
Should with the rest be sold before him theare,
To make the prises of the rest more dear.
That with great rage he stoutly does denay;
And fiercely drawing forth his blade, does swear,
That who so hardy hand on her does lay,
It dearly shall aby, and death for handsell pay.
Thus as they words amongst them multiply,
They fall to strokes, the fruit of too much talk,
And the mad steel about does fiercely fly,
Not sparing wight, ne leaving any balke,
But making way for death at large to walk:
Who in the horror of the griesly night,
In thousand dreadful shapes does among them stalk,
And makes huge havoc, whiles the candlelight
Out quenched, leaves no skill nor difference of wight.
Like as a sort of hungry dogs ymet
About some carcass by the common way,
Do fall together, stryuing each to get
The greatest portion of the greedy pray;
All on confused heaps themselves assay,
And snatch, and byte, and rend, and tug, and tear;
That who them sees, would wonder at their fray,
And who sees not, would be affrayd to hear.
Such was the conflict of those cruel Brigants there.
But first of all, their captives they do kill,
Least they should join against the weaker side,
Or rise against the remnant at their will;
Old Meliboe is slain, and him beside
His aged wife, with many others wide,
But Coridon escaping craftily,
Creepes forth of doors, whilst darkness him does hide,
And flies away as fast as he can hye,
Ne stays leave to take, before his friends do dye.
But Pastorella, woeful wretched Elfe,
Was by the Captain all this while defended,
Who minding more her safety then himself,
His target always over her pretended;
By means whereof, that mote not be amended,
He at the length was slain, and laid on ground,
Yet holding fast twixt both his arms extended
Fair Pastorell, who with the self same wound
Launcht through the arm, fell down with him in drerie swound.
There lay she covered with confused preasse
Of carcases, which dying on her fell.
Tho when as he was dead, the fray began cease,
And each to other calling, did compel
To stay their cruel hands from slaughter fell,
Since they that were the cause of all, were gone.
Thereto they all attonce agreed well,
And lighting candles new, began search anon,
How many of their friends were slain, how many sone.
Their Captain there they cruelly found killed,
And in his arms the dreary dying maid,
Like a sweet Angel twixt two clouds vphild:
Her lovely light was dimmed and decayed,
With cloud of death upon her eyes displayed;
Yet did the cloud make even that dimmed light
Seem much more lovely in that darkness laid,
And twixt the twinkling of her eyelids bright,
To spark out little beams, like stars in foggie night.
But when they moved the carcases aside,
They found that life did yet in her remain:
Then all their helps they busily applyde,
To call the soul back to her home again;
And wrought so well with labor and long pain,
That they to life recovered her at last.
Who sighing sore, as if her heart in twain
Had riuen been, and all her heart strings brast,
With drearie drouping eyne looked up like one aghast.
There she beheld, that sore her grieved to see,
Her father and her friends about her lying,
Her self sole left, a second spoil to be
Of those, that having saved her from dying,
Renewed her death by timely death denying:
What now is left her, but to wayle and weep,
Wringing her hands, and ruefully loud crying?
Ne cared she her wound in tears to steep,
Albe with all their might those Brigants her did keep.
But when they saw her now reliu'd again,
They left her so, in charge of one the best
Of many worst, who with unkind disdain
And cruel rigor her did much molest;
Scarce yielding her due food, or timely rest,
And scarsely suffering her infestred wound,
That sore her payn'd, by any to be dressed.
So leave we her in wretched thraldom bound,
And turn we back to Calidore, where we him found.
Who when he back returned from the wood,
And saw his shepherds cottage spoiled quight,
And his love reft away, he wexed wood,
And half enraged at that ruefull sight,
That even his heart for very fell despite,
And his own flesh he ready was to tear,
He chauft, he grieved, he fretted, and he sight,
And fared like a furious wyld Bear,
Whose whelps are stolen away, she being otherwhere.
Ne wight he found, to whom he might complain,
Ne wight he found, of whom he might inquire;
That more increast the anguish of his pain.
He sought the woods; but no man could see there,
He sought the plains; but could no tidings hear.
The woods did naught but echoes vain rebound;
The playnes all waste and empty did appear:
Where wont the shepherds often their pypes resound,
And feed an hundred flocks, there now not one he found.
At last as there he romed up and down,
He chaunst one coming toward him to spy,
That seemed to be some sorry simple clown,
With ragged weeds, and locks vpstaring hye,
As if he did from some late danger fly,
And yet his fear did follow him behynd:
Who as he unto him approached nigh,
He mote perceive by signs, which he did find,
That Coridon it was, the silly shepherds hynd.
Tho to him running fast, he did not stay
To greet him first, but asked where were the rest;
Where Pastorell? who full of fresh dismay,
And gushing forth in tears, was so oppressed,
That he no word could speak, but smit his breast,
And up to heaven his eyes fast streming threw.
Whereat the knight amazed, yet did not rest,
But asked again, what meant that rufull hew:
Where was his Pastorell? where all the other crew?
Ah well away (said he then sighing sore)
That ever I did live, this day to see,
This dismal day, and was not dead before,
Before I saw fair Pastorella dye.
Die? out alas then Calidore did cry:
How could the death dare ever her to quell?
But read thou shepherd, read what destiny,
Or other dyrefull hap from heaven or hell
Has wrought this wicked deed, do fear away, and tell.
Tho when the shepherd breathed had a while,
He thus began: where shall I then commence
This woeful tale? or how those Brigants vile,
With cruel rage and dreadful violence
Spoyld all our cots, and carried us from hence?
Or how fair Pastorell should have been sold
To merchants, but was saved with strong defense?
Or how those thieves, whilst one sought her to hold,
Fell all at ods, and fought through fury fierce and bold.
In that same conflict (woe is me) befell
This fatal chance, this doleful accident,
Whose heavy tidings now I have to tell.
First all the captives, which they here had hent,
Were by them slain by general consent;
Old Meliboe and his good wife withal
These eyes saw die, and dearly did lament:
But when the lot to Pastorell did fall,
Their Captain long withstood, and did her death forstall,
But what could he against all them do alone:
It could not boot; needs mote she die at last:
I only escaped through great confusione
Of cries and clamors, which amongst them past,
In dreadful darkness dreadfully aghast;
That better were with them to have been dead,
Then here to see all desolate and wast,
Despoyled of those joys and jolly head,
Which with those gentle shepherds here I wont to lead.
When Calidore these ruefull news had raught,
His heart quite deaded was with anguish great,
And all his wits with doole were nigh distraught,
That he his face, his head, his breast did beat,
And death it self unto himself did threat;
Often cursing th'heauens, that so cruel were
To her, whose name he often did repeat;
And wishing often, that he were present there,
When she was slain, or had been to her succor nere.
But after grief awhile had had his course,
And spent it self in mourning, he at last
Began to mitigate his swelling sourse,
And in his mind with better reason cast,
How he might save her life, if life did last;
Or if that dead, how he her death might wreake,
Since otherwise he could not mend thing past;
Or if it to revenge he were too weak,
Then for to die with her, and his lives thread to break.
Tho Coridon he prayed, since he well knew
The ready way unto that theeuish won,
To wend with him, and be his conduct true
Unto the place, to see what should be done.
But he, whose heart through fear was late fordonne,
Would not for ought be drawn to former dread,
But by all means the danger known did shonne:
Yet Calidore so well him wrought with meed,
And fair bespoke with words, that he at last agreed.
So forth they go together (God before)
Both clad in shepherds weeds agreeably,
And both with shepherds hooks: But Calidore
Had underneath, him armed privily.
Tho to the place when they approached nigh,
They chaunst, upon an hill not far away,
Some flocks of sheep and shepherds to espy;
To whom they both agreed to take their way,
In hope there news to learn, how they mote best assay.
There did they find, that which they did not fear,
The self same flocks, the which those thieves had reft
From Meliboe and from themseles whyleare,
And certain of the thieves there by them left,
The which for want of herds themselves then kept.
Right well knew Coridon his own late sheep,
And seeing them, for tender pity wept:
But when he saw the thieves, which did them keep
His heart began fail, albe he saw them all asleep.
But Calidore recomforting his grief,
Though not his fear: for naught may fear dissuade;
Him hardly forward drew, whereas the thief
Lay sleeping soundly in the bushes shade,
Whom Coridon him counseld to invade
Now all unawares, and take the spoil away;
But he, that in his mind had closely made
A further purpose, would not so them slay,
But gently waking them, gave them the time of day.
Tho sitting down by them upon the green,
Of sundry things he purpose began to feign;
That he by them might certain tidings ween
Of Pastorell, were she alive or slain.
Among which the thieves them questioned again,
What mister men, and eke from whence they were.
To whom they answered, as did appertain,
That they were poor heardgroomes, the which whylere
Had from their masters fled, and now sought hyre elsewhere.
Whereof right glad they seemed, and offer made
To hyre them well, if they their flocks would keep:
For they themselves were evil grooms, they said,
Unwont with herds to watch, or pasture sheep,
But to forray the land, or scour the deep.
Thereto they soon agreed, and earnest took,
To keep their flocks for little hyre and chepe:
For they for better hyre did shortly look,
So there all day they bode, till light the sky forsook.
Tho when as toward darksome night it drew,
Unto their hellish dens those thieves them brought,
Where shortly they in great acquaintance grew,
And all the secrets of their entrayles sought.
There did they find, contrary to their thought,
That Pastorell yet lived, but all the rest
Were dead, right so as Coridon had taught:
Whereof they both full glad and blyth did rest,
But chiefly Calidore, whom grief had most possessed.
At length when they occasion fittest found,
In dead of night, when all the thieves did rest
After a late forray, and slept full sound,
Sir Calidore him armed, as he thought best,
Having of late by diligent inquest,
Provided him a sword of meanest sort:
With which he straight went to the Captains nest.
But Coridon durst not with him consort,
Ne durst abide behind, for dread of worse effort.
When to the Cave they came, they found it fast:
But Calidore with huge resistlesse might,
The doors assailed, and the locks vpbrast.
With noise whereof the thief awaking light,
Unto the entrance ran: where the bold knight
Encountering him with small resistance slew;
The whiles fair Pastorell through great affright
Was almost dead, misdoubting least of new
Some uproar were like that, which lately she did view.
But when as Calidore was comen in,
And began aloud for Pastorell to call,
Knowing his voice although not heard long sin,
She sudden was revived therewithal,
And wondrous joy felt in her spirits thrall:
Like him that being long in tempest tossed,
Looking each hour into deaths mouth to fall,
At length espyes at hand the happy cost,
On which he safety hopes, that erst feared to be lost.
Her gentle heart, that now long season past
Had never ioyance felt, nor cheerful thought,
Began some smacke of comfort new to taste,
Like lyfull heat to nummed senses brought,
And life to feel, that long for death had sought;
Ne less in heart rejoiced Calidore,
When he her found, but like to one distraught
And robbed of reason, toward her him bore,
A thousand times embrast, and kissed a thousand more.
But now by this, with noise of late uproar,
The hue and cry was raised all about;
And all the Brigants flocking in great store,
Unto the cave began preasse, naught having dout
Of that was done, and entered in a rout.
But Calidore in th'entry close did stand,
And entertayning them with courage stout,
Still slew the foremost, that came first to hand,
So long till all the entry was with bodies mand.
Tho when no more could nigh to him approach,
He breathed his sword, and rested him till day:
Which when he spyde upon the earth t'encroch,
Through the dead carcases he made his way,
Among which he found a sword of better say,
With which he forth went into the open light:
Where all the rest for him did ready stay,
And fierce assayling him, with all their might
Began all upon him lay: there began a dreadful fight.
How many flies in whottest summers day
Do seize upon some beast, whose flesh is bare,
That all the place with swarms do ouerlay,
And with their little stings right felly fare;
So many thieves about him swarming are,
All which do him assail on every side,
And sore oppress, ne any him does spare:
But he does with his raging brond divide
Their thickest troops, and round about him scattreth wide.
Like as a Lion among an heard of dear,
Disperseth them to catch his choysest pray;
So did he fly amongst them here and there,
And all that nere him came, did hew and slay,
Till he had strowd with bodies all the way;
That none his danger daring to abide,
Fled from his wrath, and did themselves convey
Into their caves, their heads from death to hide,
Ne any left, that victory to him enuide.
Then back returning to his dearest dear,
He her began to recomfort, all he might,
With gladfull speeches, and with lovely cheer,
And forth her bringing to the joyous light,
Whereof she long had lackt the wishfull sight,
Deuiz'd all goodly means, from her to drive
The sad remembrance of her wretched plight.
So her uneath at last he did revive,
That long had lain dead, and made again alive.
This done, into those theeuish dens he went,
And thence did all the spoils and threasures take,
Which they from many long had robbed and rent,
But fortune now the victors meed did make;
Of which the best he did his love betake;
And also all those flocks, which they before
Had reft from Meliboe and from his make,
He did them all to Coridon restore.
So drove them all away, and his love with him bore.
Cant. XII.
Fair Pastorella by great hap
her parents understands,
Calidore does the Blatant beast
subdew, and bynd in bands.
LIke as a ship, that through the Ocean wide
Directs her course unto one certain cost,
Is met of many a counter wind and tide,
With which her winged speed is let and crossed,
And she her self in stormy surges tossed;
Yet making many a board, and many a bay,
Still wins way, ne has her compass lost:
Right so it fares with me in this long way,
Whose course is often stayed, yet never is astray.
For all that hitherto has long delayed
This gentle knight, from sewing his first quest,
Though out of course, yet has not been mis-sayd,
To show the courtesy by him professed,
Even unto the lowest and the least.
But now I come into my course again,
To his atchieuement of the Blatant beast;
Who all this while at will did range and rain,
Whilst none was him to stop, nor none him to restrain.
Sir Calidore when thus he now had raught
Fair Pastorella from those Brigants power,
Unto the Castle of Belgard her brought,
Whereof was Lord the good Sir Bellamoure;
Who whylome was in his youths freshest flower
A lusty knight, as ever wielded spear,
And had endured many a dreadful stoure
In bloody battle for a Lady dear,
The fairest Lady then of all that living were.
Her name was Claribell, whose father hight
The Lord of Many Islands, far renound
For his great riches and his greater might.
He through the wealth, wherein he did abound,
This daughter thought in wedlock to have bound
Unto the Prince of Picteland bordering nere,
But she whose sides before with secret wound
Of love to Bellamoure empierced were,
By all means shund to match with any foreign fere.
And Bellamour again so well her pleased,
With daily service and attendance dew,
That of her love he was entyrely seized,
And closely did her wed, but known to few.
Which when her father understood, he grew
In so great rage, that them in dongeon deep
Without compassion cruelly he threw;
Yet did so straightly them a sunder keep,
That neither could to company of the other creep.
Nathlesse Sir Bellamour, whether through grace
Or secret gifts so with his keepers wrought,
That to his love sometimes he came in place,
Whereof her womb vnwist to wight was fraught,
And in dew time a maiden child forth brought.
Which she straight way for dread least, if her sire
Should know thereof, to slay he would have sought,
Delivered to her handmayd, that for hyre
She should it cause be fostred under strange attire.
The trusty damzell bearing it abroad
Into the empty fields, where living wight
Mote not bewray the secret of her lode,
She forth began lay unto the open light
The little babe, to take thereof a sight.
Whom whylest she did with watrie eyne behold,
Upon the little breast like crystal bright,
She mote perceive a little purple mold,
That like a rose her silken leaves did fair unfold.
Well she it marked, and pitied the more,
Yet could not remedy her wretched case,
But closing it again like as before,
Bedeaw'd with tears there left it in the place:
Yet left not quite, but drew a little space
Behind the bushes, where she her did hyde,
To weet what mortal hand, or heavens grace
Would for the wretched infants help provide,
For which it loudly called, and pitifully cryde.
At length a Shepherd, which there by did keep
His fleecie flock upon the playnes around,
Led with the infants cry, that loud did weep,
Came to the place, where when he wrapped found
Th'abandond spoil, he softly it unbound;
And seeing there, that did him pity sore,
He took it up, and in his mantle wound;
So home unto his honest wife it bore,
Who as her own it nursed, and named evermore.
Thus long continued Claribell a thrall,
And Bellamour in bands, till that her sire
Departed life, and left unto them all.
Then all the storms of fortunes former ire
Were turned, and they to freedom did retire.
Thenceforth they joyed in happiness together,
And lived long in peace and love entyre,
Without disquiet or dislike of either,
Till time that Calidore brought Pastorella thither.
Both whom they goodly well did entertain;
For Bellamour knew Calidore right well,
And loved for his prowess, since they twain
Long since had fought in field. Als Claribell
No less did tender the fair Pastorell,
Seeing her weak and wan, through durance long.
There they a while together thus did dwell
In much delight, and many joys among,
Until the damzell began to wex more sound and strong.
Tho began Sir Calidore him to aduize
Of his first quest, which he had long forlore,
Ashamed to think, how he that enterprise,
The which the Faery Queen had long before
Bequeathed to him, forslacked had so sore;
That much he feared, least reproachful blame
With foul dishonor him mote blot therefore;
Besides the loss of so much loos and fame,
As through the world thereby should glorify his name.
Therefore resolving to return in have
Unto so great atchieuement, he bethought
To leave his love, now peril being past,
With Claribell, whylest he that monster sought
Troughout the world, and to destruction brought.
So taking leave of his fair Pastorell,
Whom to recomfort, all the means he wrought,
With thanks to Bellamour and Claribell,
He went forth on his quest, and did, that him befell.
But first, ere I do his adventures tell,
In this exploite, me needs to declare,
What did betide to the fair Pastorell,
During his absence left in heavy care,
Through daily mourning, and nightly misfare:
Yet did that ancient matrone all she might,
To cherish her with all things choice and rare;
And her own handmayd, that Melissa hight,
Appointed to attend her dewly day and night.
Who in a morning, when this Maiden fair
Was dighting her, having her snowy breast
As yet not laced, nor her golden hair
Into their comely tresses dewly dressed,
Chaunst to espy upon her yuory chest
The rosy mark, which she remembered well
That little Infant had, which forth she kest,
The daughter of her Lady Claribell,
The which she bore, the whiles i^ prison she did dwell.
Which well auizing, straight she began to cast
In her conceiptfull mind, that this fair Maid
Was that same infant, which so long since past
She in the open fields had loosely laid
To fortunes spoil, unable it to aid.
So full of joy, straight forth she ran in have
Unto her mistress, being half dismayed,
To tell her, how the heavens had her graste,
To save her child, which in misfortunes mouth was plaste.
The sober mother seeing such her mood,
Yet knowing not, what meant that sudden through,
Asked her, how mote her words be understood,
And what the matter was, that moved her so.
My liefe (said she) ye know, that long ygo,
Whilst ye in durance dwelt, ye to me gave
A little maid, the which ye chylded tho;
The same again if now ye list to have,
The same is yonder Lady, whom high God did save.
Much was the Lady troubled at that speech,
And began to question straight how she it knew.
Most certain marks, (said she) do me it teach,
For on her breast I with these eyes did view
The little purple rose, which thereon grew,
Whereof her name ye then to her did give.
Besides her countenance, and her likely hew,
Matched with equal years, do surely prieue
That yond same is your daughter sure, which yet does live
The matrone stayed no longer to enquire,
But forth in have ran to the stranger Maid;
Whom catching greedily for great desire,
Rent up her breast, and bosom open laid,
In which that rose she plainly saw displayed.
Then her embracing twixt her arms twain,
She long so held, and softly weeping said;
And live thou my daughter now again?
And art thou yet alive, whom dead I long did feign.
Tho further asking her of sundry things,
And times comparing with their accidents,
She found at last by very certain signs,
And speaking marks of passed monuments,
That this young Maid, whom chance to her presents
Is her own daughter, her own infant dear.
Tho wondering long at those so strange events,
A thousand times she her embraced nere,
With many a joyful kiss, and many a melting tear.
Who ever is the mother of one child,
Which having thought long dead, she fyndes alive,
Let her by proof of that, which she has fylde
In her own breast, this mothers joy descriue:
For other none such passion can contriue
In perfect form, as this good Lady felt,
When she so fair a daughter saw survive,
As Pastorella was, that nigh she swelt
For passing joy, which did all into pity melt.
Thence running forth unto her loved Lord,
She unto him recounted, all that fell:
Who joining joy with her in one accord,
Acknowledged for his own fair Pastorell.
There leave we them in joy, and let us tell
Of Calidore, who seeking all this while
That monstrous Beast by final force to quell,
Through every place, with restless pain and toil
Him followed, by the tract of his outrageous spoil.
Through all estates he found that he had past,
In which he many massacres had left,
And to the Clergy now was come at last;
In which such spoil, such havoc, and such theft
He wrought, that thence all goodness he bereft,
That endless were to tell. The Elfin Knight,
Who now no place besides unsought had left,
At length into a Monastere did light,
Where he him found despoyling all with maine and might.
Into their cloisters now he broken had,
Through which the Monckes he chaced here and there,
And them pursued into their dortours sad,
And searched all their cells and secrets near;
In which what filth and ordure did appear,
Were yrkesome to report; yet that foul Beast
Naught sparing them, the more did toss and tear,
And ransacke all their dens from most to least,
Regarding naught religion, nor their holy heast.
From thence into the sacred Church he broke,
And robbed the Chancell, and the deskes down threw,
And Altars fouled, and blasphemy spoke,
And th'Images for all their goodly hew,
Did cast to ground, whilst none was them to rue;
So all confounded and disordered there.
But seeing Calidore, away he flew,
Knowing his fatal hand by former fear;
But he him fast pursuing, soon approached near.
Him in a narrow place he ouertooke,
And fierce assailing forced him turn again:
Sternely he turned again, when he him struck
With his sharp steel, and ran at him amain
With open mouth, that seemed to contain
A full good pecke within the utmost brim,
All set with iron teeth in raunges twain,
That terrifide his foes, and armed him,
Appearing like the mouth of Orcus griesly grim.
And therein were a thousand tongs empight,
Of sundry kinds, and sundry quality,
Some were of dogs, that barked day and night,
And some of cats, that wrawling still did cry.
And some of Bears, that groynd continually,
And some of Tygres, that did seem to gren,
And snar at all, that ever passed by:
But most of them were tongues of mortal men,
Which spoke reprochfully, not caring where nor when.
And them amongst were mingled here and there,
The tongues of Serpents with three forked stings,
That spat out poison and gore bloody gere
At all, that came within his rauenings,
And spoke licentious words, and hateful things
Of good and bad alike, of low and hie;
Ne Kesars spared he a whit, nor Kings,
But either blotted them with infamy,
Or bit them with his banefull teeth of injury.
But Calidore thereof no whit afraid,
Rencountred him with so impetuous might,
That th'outrage of his violence he stayed,
And bet abacke, threatening in vain to bite,
And spitting forth the poison of his spite,
That fomed all about his bloody jaws.
Tho rearing up his former feet on hight,
He rampt upon him with his ravenous paws,
As if he would have rent him with his cruel claws.
But he right well aware, his rage to ward,
Did cast his shield atweene, and therewithal
Putting his puissaunce forth, pursued so hard,
That backward he enforced him to fall,
And being down, ere he new help could call,
His shield he on him threw, and fast down held,
Like as a bullock, that in bloody stall
Of butchers balefull hand to ground is feld,
Is forcibly kept down, till he be thoroughly queld.
Full cruelly the Beast did rage and rore,
To be down held, and maystred so with might,
That he began fret and foam out bloody gore,
Striving in vain to rere him self upright.
For still the more he strove, the more the Knight
Did him suppress, and forcibly subdew;
That made him almost mad for fell despite.
He grind, he bit, he scratcht, he venim threw,
And fared like a feend, right horrible in hew.
Or like the hell-borne Hydra, which they feign
That great Alcides whilome overthrew,
After that he had labourd long in vain,
To crop his thousand heads, the which still new
Forth budded, and in greater number grew.
Such was the fury of this hellish Beast,
Whilst Calidore him under him down threw;
Who nathemore his heavy load releast,
But aye the more he raged, the more his power increast.
Tho when the Beast saw, he mote naught avail,
By force, he began his hundred tongues apply,
And sharply at him to revile and rail,
With bitter terms of shameful infamy;
Often interlacing many a forged lie,
Whose like he never once did speak, nor hear,
Nor ever thought thing so unworthily:
Yet did he naught for all that him forbear,
But strained him so straightly, that he chokt him near.
At last when as he found his force to shrincke,
And rage to quail, he took a muzzell strong
Of surest iron, made with many a lincke;
Therewith he mured up his mouth along,
And therein shut up his blasphemous tongue,
For never more defaming gentle Knight,
Or unto lovely Lady doing wrong:
And thereunto a great long chain he tight,
With which he drew him forth, eue^ in his own despite.
Like as whylome that strong Tirynthian swain,
Brought forth with him the dreadful dog of hell,
Against his will fast bound in iron chain,
And roaring horribly, did him compel
To see the hateful sun, that he might tell
To griesly Pluto, what on earth was done,
And to the other damned ghosts, which dwell
For aye in darkness, which day light does shonne.
So led this Knight his captyue with like conquest won.
Yet greatly did the Beast repine at those
Strange bands, whose like till then he never bore,
Ne ever any durst till then impose,
And chauffed inly, seeing now no more
Him liberty was left aloud to rore:
Yet durst he not draw back; nor once withstand
The proved power of noble Calidore,
But trembled underneath his mighty hand,
And like a fearful dog him followed through the land.
Him through all Faery land he followed so,
As if he learned had obedience long,
That all the people where so he did go,
Out of their towns did round about him throng,
To see him lead that Beast in bondage strong,
And seeing it, much wondered at the sight;
And all such persons, as he erst did wrong,
Rejoiced much to see his captive plight,
And much admyr'd the Beast, but more admyr'd the Knight,
Thus was this Monster by the maystring might
Of doughty Calidore, suppressed and tamed,
That never more he mote endammadge wight
With his vile tongue, which many had defamed,
And many causeless caused to be blamed:
So did he eeke long after this remain,
Until that, whether wicked fate so framed,
Or fault of men, he broke his iron chain,
And got into the world at liberty again.
Thenceforth more mischief and more scath he wrought
To mortal men, then he had done before;
Ne ever could by any more be brought
Into like bands, ne maystred any more:
Albe that long time after Calidore,
The good Sir Pelleas him took in hand,
And after him Sir Lamoracke of yore,
And all his brethren borne in Britain land;
Yet none of them could ever bring him into band.
So now he raungeth through the world again,
And rages sore in each degree and state;
Ne any is, that may him now restrain,
He grown is so great and strong of late,
Barking and biting all that him do bate,
Albe they worthy blame, or clear of crime:
Ne spares he most learned wits to rate,
Ne spares he the gentle Poets rhyme,
But rends without regard of person or of time.
Ne may this homely verse, of many meanest,
Hope to escape his venomous despite,
More then my former writs, all were they clearest
From blamefull blot, and free from all that wite,
With which some wicked tongues did it backebite,
And bring into a mighty Peers displeasure,
That never so deserved to endite.
Therefore do you my rimes keep better measure,
And seek to please, that now is counted wisemens threasure.
FINIS.

