decorative border IH^S

PROSOPOPOIA. OR, MOTHER HUBBERDS TALE.

By Edm. Sp.

Dedicated to the right Honorable, the Lady Compton and Mountegle.

dragon rampant

LONDON, Printed by H. L. and are sold by G. Lathum.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, the Lady Compton and Mountegle.
MOST fair and virtuous Lady; having sought opportunity by some good means
to make known to your Ladyship, the humble affection and faithful duty,
which I have always professed, and am bound to bear to that House, from
whence ye spring; I have at length found occasion to remember the same, by
making a simple present to you of these my idle labors; which having long
since composed in the raw conceit of my youth, I lately among other papers
lighted upon, and was by others, which liked the same, moved to set them forth.
Simple is the device, and the composition mean, yet carries some delight,
even the rather, because of the simplicity and meannesse thus personated. The
same I beseech your Ladyship take in good part, as a pledge of that profession
which I have made to you; and keep with you, until with some other more
worthy labor, I do redeem it out of your hands, and discharge my utmost
duty. Till then, wishing your Ladyship all increase of honor and happiness,
I humbly take leave.

Your La. ever humbly; Ed. Sp.

PROSOPOPOIA: OR Mother Hubberds Tale.
IT was the month, in which the righteous Maid,
That for disdain of sinful worlds vpbraide,
Fled back to heaven, whence she was first conceived,
Into her silver bower the Sun received;
And the hot Syrian dog on him awayting,
After the chafed Lions cruel bayting,
Corrupted had the air with his noisome breath,
And poured on the earth plague, pestilence, and death.
Amongst the rest, a wicked malady
Reigned emongst men, that many did to die,
Deprived of sense and ordinary reason;
That it to Leaches seemed strange and geason.
My fortune was among many other more,
To be partaker of their common woe;
And my weak body set on fire with grief,
Was robbed of rest, and natural relief.
In this ill plight, there came to visit me
Some friends, who sorry my sad case to see,
Began to comfort me in cheerful wise,
And means of gladsome solace to devise.
But seeing kindly sleep refuse to do
His office, and my feeble eyes forgo,
They sought my troubled sense how to deceive
With talk, that might unquiet fancies reaue;
And sitting all on seats about me round,
With pleasant tales (fit for that idle stound)
They cast in course to waste the weary hours:
Some told of Ladies, and their Paramours;
Some of brave Knights, and their renowned Squires;
Some of the Faeries, and their strange attires;
And some of Giants, hard to be believed,
That the delight thereof me much relieved.
Amongst the rest, a good old woman was,
Hight Mother Hubberd, who did far surpass
The rest in honest mirth, that seemed her well:
She when her turn was come her tale to tell,
Told of a strange adventure, that betided
Betwixt the Fox and the Ape by him misguided;
The which for that my sense it greatly pleased,
All were my spirit heavy and diseased,
I Will write in terms, as she the same did say,
So well as I her words remember may.
No Muses aid me needs heere-to to call;
Base is the style, and matter mean withal.
Whylome (said she) before the world was civil,
The Fox and the Ape disliking of their evil
And hard estate, determined to seek
Their fortunes far abroad, lyeke with lyeke:
For both were crafty and unhappy witted;
Two fellows might no where be better fitted.
The Fox, that first this cause of grief did find,
Began first thus plain his case with words unkind.
Neighbor Ape, and my Gossip eke beside
(Both two sure bands in friendship to be ti'de)
To whom may I more trustily complain
The evil plight, that does me sore constrain,
And hope thereof to find due remedy?
Hear then my pain and inward agony.
Thus many years I now have spent and worn,
In mean regard, and basest fortunes scorn,
Doing my Country service as I might,
No less I dare say then the proudest weight;
And still I hoped to be up advanced,
For my good parts; but still it has mischaunced.
Now therefore that no longer hope I see,
But froward fortune still to follow me,
And losels lifted high, where I did look,
I mean to turn the next leaf of the book:
Yet ere that any way I do betake,
I mean my Gossip privy first to make.
Ah! my dear Gossip (answered then the Ape)
Deeply do your sad words my wits awhape,
Both for because your grief does great appear,
And eke because my self am touched near:
For I likewise have wasted much good time,
Still waiting to preferment up to clime,
Whilst others always have before me stepped,
And from my beard the fat away have swept;
That now unto despair I gin to grow,
And mean for better wind about to throw.
Therefore to me, my trusty friend, aread
Thy counsel: Two is better then one head.
Certes (said he) I mean me to disguize
In some strange habit, after uncouth wize,
Or like a Pilgrim, or a Lymiter,
Or like a Gipsen, or a Iuggeler,
And so to wander to the worlds end,
To seek my fortune, where I may it mend:
For worse then that I have I cannot meet.
Wide is the world I wot, and every street
Is full of fortunes, and adventures strange,
Continually subject unto change.
Say my fair brother now, if this device
Do like you, or may you to like entice.
Surely (said the Ape) it likes me wondrous well;
And would ye not poor fellowship expel,
My self would offer you to accompany
In this adventures chauncefull ieopardie.
For to wexe old at home in idleness,
Is disaduentrous, and quite fortunelesse:
Abroad where change is, good may gotten be.
The Fox was glad, and quickly did agree:
So both resolved the morrow next ensuing,
So soon as day appeared to peoples viewing,
On their intended journey to proceed;
And over night, what-so thereto did need,
Each did prepare in readiness to be.
The morrow next, so soon as one might see
Light out of heavens windows forth to look,
Both their habiliments unto them took,
And put themselves (a Gods name) on their way:
When As the Ape beginning well to wey
This hard adventure, thus began to advise;
Now read Sir Reynold, as ye be right wise,
What course ye ween is best for us to take,
That for our selves we may a living make.
Whether shall we profess some trade or skill?
Or shall we vary our device at will,
Even as new occasion appears?
Or shall we tie our selves for certain years,
To any service, or to any place?
For it behoues ere that into the race
We enter, to resolve first hereupon.
Now surely brother (said the Fox anon)
Ye have this matter motioned in season:
For every thing that is begun with reason
Will come by ready means unto his end:
But things miscounselled must needs miswend.
Thus therefore I advise upon the case,
That not to any certain trade or place,
Nor any man we should our selves apply;
For, why should he that is at liberty
Make himself bond? Since then we are free horn,
Let us all servile base subjection scorn;
And as we be sons of the world so wide,
Let us our fathers heritage divide,
And challenge to our selves our portions dew
Of all the patrimony, which a few
Now hold in hugger mugger in their hand,
And all the rest do rob of good and land.
For now a few have all, and all have naught,
Yet all be brethren ylike dearly bought:
There is no right in this partition,
Ne was it so by institution
Ordained first, ne by the law of Nature,
But that she gave like blessing to each creature
As well of worldly liuelode as of life,
That there might be no difference nor strife,
Nor ought called mine or thine: thrice happy then
Was the condition of mortal men.
That was the golden age of Saturn old,
But this might better be the world of gold:
For without gold now nothing will be got.
Therefore (if please you) this shall be our plot,
We will not be of any occupation.
Let such vile vassalls borne to base vocation
Drudge in the world, and for their living droyle
Which have no wit to live withouten toil.
But we will walk about the world at pleasure
Like two free men, and make our ease a treasure.
Free men some beggars call; but they be free,
And they which call them so more beggars be:
For they do swinke and sweat to feed the other,
Who lives like Lords of that which they do gather,
And yet do never thank them for the same,
But as their due by nature do it claim.
Such will we fashion both our selves to be,
Lords of the world, and so will wander free
Where so us lists, vncontroul'd of any:
Hard is our hap, if we (emongst so many)
Light not on some that may our state amend;
Seldom but some good comes ere the end.
Well seemed the Ape to like this ordinance:
Yet well considering of the circumstance,
As pausing in great doubt a while he staid,
And afterward with grave advisement said;
I cannot my liefe brother like but well
The purpose of the complot which ye tell:
For well I wot (compared to all the rest
Of each degree) that Beggars life is best:
And they that think themselves the best of all,
Oft-times to begging are content to fall.
But this I wot withal, that we shall run
Into great danger, like to be undone,
Wildly to wander thus in the worlds eye,
Without Pasport or good warrantie,
For fear least we like rogues should be reputed,
And for care-marked beasts abroad be bruted:
Therefore I read, that we our counsels call,
How to prevent this mischief ere it fall,
And how we may with most security,
Beg amongst those that beggars do defy.
Right well, dear Gossip, ye advised have,
(Said then the Fox) but I this doubt will save;
For ere we farther pass, I will deuize
A Pasport for us both in fittest wize,
And by the name of Soldier us protect;
That now is thought a civil begging sect.
Be you the Soldier, for you likest are
For manly semblance, and small skill in war:
I will but wait on you, and as occasion
Falls out, my self fit for the same will fashion.
The Pasport ended, both they forward went,
The Ape clad Souldier-like, fit for the intent,
In a blew iacket with a cross of red,
And many slits, as if that he had shed
Much blood through many wounds therein received,
Which had the use of his right arm bereaved;
Upon his head an old Scotch cap he wore,
With a plume feather all to pieces tore:
His breeches were made after the new cut,
Al Portugese, loose like an empty gut;
And his hose broken high above the heeling,
And his shoes beaten out with traueling.
But neither sword nor dagger he did bear,
Seems that no foes reuengement he did fear;
In stead of them a handsome bat he held,
On which he leaned, as one far in eld.
Shame light on him, that through so false illusion,
Does turn the name of Soldiers to abusion,
And that which is the noblest mystery,
Brings to reproach and common infamy.
Long they thus travailed, yet never met
Adventures, which might them a working set:
Yet many ways they sought, and many tried;
Yet for their purposes none fit espied.
At last, they chaunc't to meet upon the way,
A simple husbandman in garments gray.
Yet though his vesture were but mean and bace,
A good yeoman he was of honest place.
And more for thrift did care then for gay clothing:
Gay without good, is good hearts greatest loathing.
The Fox him spying, bad the Ape him dight
To play his part, for lo he was in sight
That (if he he erred not) should them entertain,
And yield them timely profit for their pain.
Eftsoons the Ape himself began to vpreare,
And on his shoulders high his bat to bear,
As if good service he were fit to do;
But little thrift for him he did it to:
And stoutly forward he his steps did strain,
That like a handsome swain it him became.
When As they night approached, that good man
Seeing them wandering loosely, first began
TO enquire of custom, what and whence they were?
To whom the Ape, I am a souldiere,
That late in wars have spent my dearest blood,
And in long service lost both limbs and good,
And now constrained that trade to ouer-giue,
I driven am to seek some means to live:
Which might it you in pity please to afford,
I would be ready both in deed and word,
To do you faithful service all my days.
This iron world (that same he weeping says)
Brings down the stoutest hearts to lowest state:
For misery does brauest minds abate,
And makes them seek for that they wont to scorn,
Of fortune and of hope at once for lorne.
The honest man, that heard him thus complain,
Was grieved, as he had felt part of his pain;
And well disposed, him some relief to show,
Asked if in husbandry he ought did know,
To plough, to plant, to reap, to rake, to sow,
To hedge, to ditch, to thresh, to thatch, to mow;
Or to what labor else he was prepared?
For husbands life is labourous and hard.
When As the Ape him heard so much to talk
Of labor, that did from his liking balke,
He would have slipped the collar handsomely
And to him said; Good Sir, full glad am I,
To take what pains may any living wight:
But my late maimed limbs lack wonted might
To do their kindly services, as needs:
Scarce this right hand the mouth with diet feeds,
So that it may no painful work endure,
Ne to strong labor can it self enure.
But if that any other place you have,
Which asks small pains, but thriftinesse to save,
Or care to ouer-looke, or trust to gather,
Ye may me trust as your own ghostly father.
With that the husbandman began him avize,
That it for him was fittest exercise
Cattle to keep, or ground to ouer-see;
And asked him if he could willing be
To keep his sheep, or to attend his swine,
Or watch his mares, or take his charge of kine?
Gladly (said he) what ever such like pain
Ye put on me, I will the same sustain:
But gladliest I of your fleecie sheep
(Might it you please) would take on me the keep.
For ere that unto arms I me betook,
Unto my Fathers sheep I used to look,
That yet the skill thereof I have not lost:
There-to right well this Curdogg by my cost
(Meaning the Fox) will serve, my sheep to gather,
And drive to follow after their Belwether.
The Husbandman was meanly well content,
Trial to make of his endeuourment,
And home him leading, lent to him the charge
Of all his flock, with liberty full large,
Giving account of the annual increase.
Both of their Lambs, and of their woolly fleece.
Thus is this Ape become a shepherd swain,
And the false Fox, his dog (God give them pain)
For, ere the year have half his course outrun,
And do return from whence it first begun,
They shall him make an ill account of thrift.
Now, when as Time flying with wings swift,
Expired had the term, that these two iavels
Should render up a reckning of their travels
Unto their master, which it of them sought,
Exceedingly they troubled were in thought,
Ne wist what answer unto him to frame,
Ne how to escape great punishment, or shame,
For their false treason and vile theeuery.
For, not a lamb of all their flocks supply
Had they to show: but ever as they bred,
They slew them, and upon their fleshes fed:
For that disguised dog loved blood to spill,
And drew the wicked shepherd to his will.
So twixt them both they not a lambkin left,
And when lambs fayl'd, the old sheep lives they rest;
That how to acquit themselves unto their Lord,
They were in doubt, and flatly set abord.
The Fox then counseled the Ape, for to require
Respite till morrow, to answer his desire:
For times delay new hope of help still breeds.
The goodman granted, doubting naught their deeds,
And bad next day that all should ready be.
But they more subtle meaning had then he:
For the next morrowes meed they closely meant,
For fear of after claps for to prevent.
And that same evening, when all shrouded were
In careless sleep, they without care or fear,
Cruelly fell upon their flock in fold,
And of them slew at pleasure what they would:
Of which, when as they feasted had their fill,
For a full complement of all their ill,
They stole away, and took their hasty flight,
Carried in clouds of all-concealing night.
So was the husbandman left to his loss,
And they unto their fortunes change to toss.
After which sort they wandered long while,
Abusing many through their cloked guile;
That at the last they began to be descried
Of every one, and all their sleights espied.
So as their begging now them failed quite;
For none would give, but all men would them wit:
Yet would they take no pains to get their living,
But seek some other way to gain by giving,
Much like to begging, but much better named;
For many beg, which are thereof ashamed.
And now the Fox had gotten him a gown,
And the Aape a cassocke side-long hanging down;
For they their occupation meant to change,
And now in other state abroad to range:
For, since their soldiers Pas no better spedd,
They forged another, as for Clerks, booke-redd.
Who passing forth, as their adventures fell,
Through many haps, which needs not here to tell;
At length, chanced with a formal Priest to meet,
Whom they in civil manner first did greet,
And after asked an alms for Gods dear love.
The man straightway his choler up did move,
And with reproachful terms began them revile,
For following that trade so base and vile;
And asked what License, or what Pas they had.
Ah (said the Ape, as sighing wondrous sad)
It Is an hard case, when men of good deserving
Must either driven be perforce to steruing,
Or asked for their Pas by every squib,
That list at will them to revile or snib:
And yet (God wot) small odds I often see
Twixt them that ask, and them that asked be.
Nathelesse, because you shall not us misdeeme,
But that we are as honest as we seem,
Ye shall our Pasport at your pleasure see,
And then ye will (I hope) well moved be.
Which when the Priest beheld, he viewed it near,
As if therein some Text he studying were;
But little else (God wot) could thereof skill:
For, tead he could not Evidence, nor Will,
Ne tell a written word, ne write a letter,
Ne make one tittle worse, ne make one better:
Of such deep learning little had he need,
Ne yet of Latin, ne of Greek, that breed
Doubts among Divines, and difference of Texts,
From whence arise diversity of Sects,
And hateful heresies of God abhorred:
But this good Sir did follow the plain Word,
Ne meddled with their controversies vain,
All his care was, his service well to saine,
And to read Homelies on holidayes,
When that was done, he might attend his plays;
An easy life, and fit high God to please.
He, having ouer-lookt their Pas at ease,
Began at the length them to rebuke again,
That no good trade of life did entertain,
But lost their time in wandering loose abroad,
Seeing the world, in which they bootlesse boad,
Had ways enough for all therein to live;
Such grace did God unto his creatures give.
Said then the Fox; Who has the world not tried,
From the right way full eath may wander wide.
We are but Nouices, new come abroad,
We have not yet the tract of any troad,
Nor on us taken any state of life,
But ready are of any to make priefe.
Therefore, might please you, which the world have proved,
Us to advise, which forth but lately moved,
Of some good course, that we might undertake:
Ye shall for ever us your bondmen make.
The Priest began wexe half proud to be so praide,
And thereby willing to afford them aid;
It seems (said he) right well that ye be Clerks,
Both by your witty words, and by your works.
Is not that name enough to make a living
To him that has a whit of Natures giving?
How many honest men see ye arize
Daily thereby, and grow to goodly prize?
To Deanes, to Archdeacons, to Commissaries,
To Lords, to Principalls, to Prebendaries;
All jolly Prelates, worthy rule to bear,
Who ever them envy: yet spite bites near.
Why should ye doubt then, but that ye likewise
Might unto some of those in time arise?
In the mean time to live in good estate,
Loving that love, and hating those that hate;
Being some honest Curate, or some Vicker,
Content with little in condition sicker.
Ah! but (says the Ape) the charge is wondrous great,
To feed men's souls, and has an heavy threat.
To feed men's souls (quoth he) is not in man:
For, they must feed themselves, do what we can.
We are but charged to lay the meat before:
Eat they that list, we need to do no more.
But God it is that feeds them with his grace,
The bread of life poured down from heavenly place.
Therefore said he, that with the budding rod
Did rule the Jews, All shall be taught of God.
That same has Jesus Christ now to him raught,
By whom the flocks is rightly fed and taught:
He is the Shepherd, and the Priest is he;
We but his Shepherd swains ordained to be.
Therefore heere-with do not your self dismay;
Ne is the pains so great, but bear ye may;
For not so great as it was wont of yore,
It Is now adays, ne half so straight and sore.
They whylome used duly every day
Their service and their holy things to say,
At noone and even, besides their Anthemes sweet,
Their penny Masses, and their Complynes meet,
Their Diriges, their Trentals, and their shrifts,
Their memories, their singings, and their gifts.
Now all these needless works, are laid away;
Now once a week upon the Sabbath day,
It is enough to do our small devotion,
And then to follow any merry motion.
Ne are we tide to fast, but when we list,
Ne to wear garments base of woollen twist,
But with the finest silks us to array,
That before God we may appear more gay,
Resembling Aarons glory in his place:
For far unfit it is, that persons bace
Should with vile clothes approach Gods majesty,
Whom no uncleanness may approchen nie:
Or that all men which any master serve,
Good garments for their service should deserve;
But he that serves the Lord of hoasts most high,
And that in highest place, to approach him nigh,
And all the peoples prayers to present
Before his throne, as on embassage sent
Both to and fro, should not deserve to wear
A garment better, than of wool or hair.
Beside, we may have lying by our sides
Our lovely Lasses, or bright shining Brides:
We be not tide to wilful chastity,
But have the Gospel of free liberty.
By that he ended had his ghostly sermon,
The Fox was well induced to be a Parson;
And of the Priest eftsoons began to enquire,
How to a Benefice he might aspire.
Marie there (said the Priest) is art indeed.
Much good deep learning one thereout may reed,
For, that the groundwork is, and end of all,
How to obtain a Beneficial.
First therefore, when ye have in handsome wise
Your selves attired, as you can devise,
Then to some Noble man your self apply,
Or other great one in the worlds eye,
That has a zealous disposition
To God, and so to his religion:
There must thou fashion eke a godly zeal,
Such as no capers may contrayre reveal:
For, each thing fained ought more wary be.
There must thou walk in sober grauitee,
And seem as Saint-like as Saint Radegund:
Fast much, pray often, look lowely on the ground,
And unto every one do courtesy meek:
These looks (naught saying) do a Benefice seek,
And be thou sure one not to lack ere long.
But if thee list unto the Court to throng,
And there to hunt after the hoped pray,
Then must thou thee dispose another way:
For there thou needs must learn, to laugh, to lie,
To face, to forge, to scoff, to company,
To crouche, to please, to be a beetle stock
Of thy great Masters will, to scorn, or mock:
So may thou chance mock out a benefice,
Unless thou can one conjure by device,
Or cast a figure for a Bishopric:
And if one could, it were but a schoole-trick.
These be the ways, by which without reward
Livings in Court be gotten, though full hard.
For nothing there is done without a fee:
The Courtier needs must recompensed be
With a Benevolence, or have in gage
The Primilias of your Parsonage:
Scarce can a Bishopric for pas them by,
But that it must be gelt in priuitie.
Do not thou therefore seek a living there,
But of more private persons seek elsewhere,
Where-as thou may compound a better penny,
Ne let thy learning questioned be of any.
For some good Gentleman that has the right
Unto his Church for to present a wight,
Will cope with thee in reasonable wise;
That if the living yearly do arise
To forty pound, that then his youngest son
Shall twenty have, and twenty thou have won:
Thou have it won, for it is of frank gift,
And he will care for all the rest to shift;
Both, that the Bishop may admit of thee,
And that therein thou may maintain I be.
This is the way for one that is vnlearn'd
Living to get, and not to be discerned.
But they that are great Clerks, have nearer ways,
For learning sake to living them to raise:
Yet many eke of them (God wot) are driven,
TO accept a Benefice in pieces riuen.
How sai'st thou (friend) have I not well discourst
Upon this Common place (though plain, not wourst)?
Better a short tale, then a bad long shriuing.
Needs any more to learn to get a living?
Now sure and by my hallidome (quoth he)
Yea great master are in your degree:
Great thanks, I yield you for your discipline,
And do not doubt, but duly to incline
My wits thereto, as ye shall shortly hear.
The Priest him wished good speed, and well to fare.
So parted they, as eithers way them led.
But the Ape and Fox ere long so well them sped,
Through the Priests wholesome counsel lately tought,
And through their own fair handling wisely wrought,
That they a Benefice twixt them obtained;
And crafty Reynold was a Priest ordained;
And the Ape his Parish Clarke procured to be.
Then made they revel route and goodly glee.
But ere long time had passed, they so ill
Did order their affairs, that the evil will
Of all their Parishners they had constrained;
Who to the Ordinary of them complained,
How foully they their offices abused,
And them of crimes and heresies accused;
That Pursiuants he often for them sent:
But they neglecting his commandment
So long persisted obstinate and bold,
Till at the length he published to hold
A Visitation, and them cyted thither:
Then was high time their wits about to gather;
What did they then, but made a composition
With their next neighbor Priest for light condition,
To whom their living they resigned quight
For a few pence, and ran away by night.
So passing through the Country in disguize,
They fled far off, where none might them surprise,
And after that long straied here and there,
Through every field and forest far and near;
Yet never found occasion for their turn,
But almost steru'd, did much lament and mourn.
At last, they chaunc't to meet upon the way
The Mule, all decked in goodly rich array,
With bells and bosses, that full lowdly rung,
And costly trappings, that to ground down hung.
Lowly they him saluted in meek wise;
But he through pride and fatnes began despise
Their meannesse; scarce vouchsafe them to requite.
Whereat the Fox deep groaning in his sprite,
Said, Ah! sir Mule, now blessed be the day,
That I see you so goodly and so gay
In your attyres, and eke your silken hyde
Filled with round flesh, that every bone does hide.
Seems that in fruitful pastures you do live,
Or Fortune does you secret favor give.
Foolish Fox (said the Mule) thy wretched need
Praises the thing that does thy sorrow breed.
For well I ween, thou can not but envy
My wealth, compared to thine own misery,
That art so lean and meagre waxen late,
That scarce thy legs uphold thy feeble gate.
Ay me *said then the Fox) whom evil hap
Unworthy in such wretchedness does wrap,
And make the scorn of other beasts to be:
But read (fair Sir, of grace) from whence come ye?
Or what of tidings you abroad do hear?
News may perhaps some good vnweeting bear.
From royal Court I lately came (said he)
Where all the bravery that eye may see,
And all the happiness that heart desire,
Is to be found; he nothing can admire,
That has not seen that heavens portracture:
But tidings there is none I you assure,
Save that which common is, and known to all,
That Courtiers as the tide do rise and fall.
But, tell us (said the Ape) we do you pray,
Who now in Court does bear the greatest sway.
That if such fortune do to us befall,
We may seek favor of the best of all.
Marie (said he) the highest now in grace,
Be the wild beasts, that swiftest are in chase;
For in their speedy course and nimble flight
The Lion now does take the most delight:
But chiefly, joys on foot them to behold,
Enchaste with chain and circulet of gold:
So wild a beast so tame ytaught to be,
And buxonie to his bands is joy to see.
So well his golden Circlet him beseems:
But his late chain his Liege unmeet esteems;
For so brave beasts he loves best to see
In the wild forest raunging fresh and free.
Therefore if fortune thee in Court to live,
In case thou ever there wilt hope to thrive,
To some of these thou must thy self apply:
Else, as a thistle-downe in the air does fly,
So, vainly shall thou to and fro be tossed,
And lose thy labor and thy fruitless cost.
And yet full few that follow them I see,
For virtues bare regard advanced be,
But either for some gainefull benefit,
Or that they may for their own turns be sit.
Nath'lesse, perhaps, ye things may handle so,
That ye may better thrive then thousands mo.
But (said the Ape) how shall we first come in,
That after we may favor seek to win?
How else (said he) but with a good bold face,
And with big words, and with a stately pace,
That men may think of you in general,
That to be in you which is not at all:
For, not by that which is, the world now deemeth
(As it was wont) but by that same it seems.
Ne do I doubt but that ye well can fashion
Your selves there-to, according to occasion:
So fare you well, good Courtiers may ye be;
So proudly neighing, from them parted he.
Then began this crafty couple to deuize,
How for the Court themselves they might aguize:
For thither they themselves meant to address,
In hope to find their happier success;
So well they shifted, that the Ape anon
Himself had clothed like a Gentleman,
And the sly Fox, as like to be his groom,
That to the Court in seemly sort they come.
Where the fond Ape himself vprearing hy
Upon his tiptoes, stalketh stately by,
As if he were some great Magnifice,
And boldly does amongst the boldest go.
And his man Reynold with fine counterfesaunce
Supports his credit and his countenance.
Then began the Courtiers gaze on every side,
And stare on him, with big looks basen wide,
Wondering what mister wight he was, and whence:
For he was clad in strange accoustrements,
Fashioned with huient devises never seen
In Court before, yet there all fashions been:
Yet he them in new fanglenesse did pass:
But his behavior altogether was
Alla Turchesca, much the more admyr'd,
And his looks lofty, as if he aspyr'd
To dignity, and sdeign'd the low degree;
That all which did such strangeness in him see,
By secret means began of his state enquire,
And privily his servant thereto hire:
Who, thoroughly armed against such couerture,
Reported unto all, that he was sure
A noble Gentleman of his regard,
Which, through the world had with long travel fared,
And seen the manners of all beasts on ground;
Now here arrived, to see if like he found.
Thus did the Ape at first him credit gain,
Which afterward he wisely did maintain
With gallant show, and daily more augment
Through his fine feats and Courtly complement;
For he could play, and dance, and vaute, and spring,
And all that else pertaines to reuelling,
Only through kindly aptnes of his joints.
Besides, he could do many other points,
The which in Court him served to good stead:
For, he among Ladies could their fortunes read
Out of their hands, and merry leasings tell,
And iuggle finely, that became him well:
But he so light was at legier-demaine,
That what he touched, came not to light again;
Yet would he laugh it out, and proudly look,
And tell them, that they greatly him mistook.
So would he scoff them out with mockery,
For he therein had great felicity;
And with sharp quips joyed others to deface,
Thinking that their disgracing did him grace:
So whilst that other like vain wits he pleased,
And made to laugh, his heart was greatly eased.
But the right gentle mind would bite his lip,
To hear the lauell so good men to nip:
For though the vulgar yield an open ear,
And common Courtiers love to gybe and fleare
At every thing, which they hear spoken ill,
And the best speeches with ill meaning spill;
Yet the brave Courtier, in whose beauteous thought
Regard of honor harbors more than ought,
Does loath such base condition, to backbite
Anies good name for envy or despite:
He stands on terms of honorable mind,
Ne will be carried with the common wind
Of Courts inconstant mutabilitie,
Ne after every tattling fable fly;
But hears, and sees the follies of the rest,
And thereof gathers for himself the best:
He will not creep, nor crouch with fained face,
But walks upright with comely steadfast pace,
And unto all does yield due curtefie;
But not with kissed hand below the knee,
As that fame Apish crew is wont to do:
For he disdaines himself to embase there-to.
He hates foul leasings, and vile flattery,
Two fithy blots in noble Gentry;
And lothefull idleness he does detest,
The canker-worme of every gentle breast:
The which to banish with fair exercise
Of knightly feats, he daily does devise:
Now menaging the mouths of stubborn steedes:
Now practicing the proof of warlike deeds,
Now his bright arms assaying, now his spear,
Now the nigh-aymed ring away to bear;
At other times he casts to sew the chase
Of swift wild beasts, or run on foot a race,
Ten large his breath (large breath in arms most needful)
Or else by wrestling to wex strong and heedfull,
Or his stiff arms to stretch with Eughen bow,
And manly legs, still passing to and fro,
Without a gowned beast him fast beside;
A vain ensample of the Perfian pride,
Who after he had won the Assyrian foe,
Did ever after scorn on foot to go.
Thus when this Courtly Gentleman with toil
Himsefe has wearied, he does recoyle
Unto his rest, and there with sweet delight
Of Musicks skill reuiues his toyled spright;
Or else with Loves, and Ladies gentle sports,
The joy of youth, himself he recomforts:
Or lastly, when the body list to pause,
His mind unto the Muses he with-drawes;
Sweet Lady Muses, Ladies of delight,
Delights of life, and ornaments of light:
With whom he close confers with wise discourse,
Of Natures works, of heavens continual course,
Of foreign lands, of people different,
Of kingdoms change, of diverse government,
Of dreadful battles, of renowned Knights;
With which he kindles his ambitious sprights
To like desire and praise of noble fame,
The only vp-shot where-to he does aim:
For all his mind on honor fixed is,
To which he leuels all his purposes,
And in his Princes service spends his days,
Not so much for to gain, or for to raise
Himself to high degree; as for his grace,
And in his liking to win worthy place,
Through due deserts and comely carriage,
In what-so please employ his personage,
That may be matter meet to gain him praise;
For he is fit to use in all assayes,
Whether for Arms and warlike amenaunce,
Or else for wise and civil governance.
For he is practiced well in policy,
And there-to does his courting most apply:
To learn the enterdeale of Princes strange,
To mark the intent of Counsels, and the change
Of States, and eke of private men some-while,
Supplanted by fine falsehood and fair guile;
Of all the which he gathers what is fit*
TO enrich the storehouse of his powerful wit,
Which through wise speeches, and grave conference
He daily eekes, and brings to excellence.
Such is the rightful Courtier in his kind:
But unto such the Ape lent not his mind;
Such were for him no fit companions,
Such would descry his lewd conditions:
But the young lusty gallants he did chose
To follow, meet to whom he might disclose
His witless pleasance, and ill-pleasing vain.
A thousand ways he them could entertain,
With all the thriftlesse games that may be found,
With mumming and with masking all around,
With dice, with cards, with balliards far unfit,
With shuttle cocks, mis-seming manly wit,
With courtizans, and costly riotize,
Whereof still somewhat to his share did rize:
Ne, them to pleasure, would he sometimes scorn
A Pandars coat (so basely was he borne):
There-to he could fine loving verses frame,
And play the Poet often. But ah! for shame,
Let not sweet Poets praise, whose only pride
Is virtue to advaunce, and vice deride,
Be with the work of losels wit defamed,
Ne let such verses Poetry be named:
Yet he the name on him would rashly take,
Maugre the sacred Muses, and it make
A servant to the vile affection
Of such, as he depended most upon,
And with the sugry sweet thereof allure
Chaste Ladies ears to fantasies impure,
To such delights the noble wits he led
Which him relieved and their vain humors fed
With fruitless follies, and unsound delights.
But if perhaps, into their noble sprights
Desire of honor, or brave thought of arms
Did ever creep, then with his wicked charms
And strong conceits he would it drive away,
Ne suffer it to house there half a day.
And when so love of letters did inspire
Their gentle wits, and kindly wise desire
That chiefly does each noble mind adorn,
Then he would scoff at learning, and eke scorn
The Sectaries thereof, as people bace,
And simple men, which never came in place
Of worlds affairs, but in dark corners mewd,
Muttred of matters, as their books them showed,
Ne other knowledge ever did attain,
But with their gowns their gravity maintain.
From them he would his impudent lewd speech
Against Gods holy Ministers often reach,
And mock Divines and their profession:
What else then did he by progression,
But mock high God himself, whom they profess?
But what cared he for God or godlinsse?
All his care was himself how to advance,
And to uphold his courtly countenance
By all the cunning means he could devise;
Were it by honest ways, or otherwise,
He made small choice: yet sure his honesty
Got him small gains, but shameless flattery,
And filthy brocage, and unseemly shifts,
And borow base, and some good Ladies gifts:
But the best help, which chiefly him sustained,
Was his man Reynolds purchase which he gained.
For he was schooled by kind in all the skill
Of close conueyance, and each practice ill
Of coosinage and cleanly knauerie,
Which often maintained his masters bravery.
Besides, he used another slippery slight,
In taking on himself in common sight,
False personages, fit for every sted,
With which he thousands cleanly coosined:
Now like a Merchant, Merchants to deceive,
With whom his credit he did often leave
In gage, for his gay Masters hopeless dett,
Now like a Lawyer, when he land would let,
Or sell fee-simples in his Masters name,
Which he had never, nor ought like the same:
Then would he be a Broker, and draw in
Both wares and money, by exchange to win:
Then would he seem a Farmer, that would sell,
Bargains of woods, which he did lately fell,
Or corn, or cattle, or such other ware,
There-by to coosin men not well aware;
Of all the which there came a secret fee
To the Ape, that he his countenance might be.
Besides all this, he used often to beguile
Poor suitors, that in Court did haunt some while:
For he would learn their business secretly,
And then inform his Master hastily,
That he by means might cast them to prevent,
And beg the suit the which the other meant.
Or otherwise, false Reynold would abuse
The simple Suter, and wish him to choose
His Master, being one of great regard
In Court, to compass any suit not hard,
In case his pains were recompenc't with reason:
So would he work the silly man by treason
To buy his Masters frivolous good will,
That had not power to do him good or ill.
So pitiful a thing is Suitors state.
Most miserable man, whom wicked fate
Has brought to Court, to sue for had-ywist,
That few have found, and many one has mist;
Full little know thou that have not tried,
What hell it is, in suing long to bide:
To loose good days that might be better spent;
To waste long nights in pensive discontent:
To speed to day, to be put back to morrow;
To feed on hope, to pine with fear and sorrow;
To have thy Princes grace, yet want her Peers;
To have thy asking, yet wait many years;
To fret thy soul with crosses and with cares;
To eat thy heart through comfortless despaires;
To fawn, to crouch, to wait, to ride, to run;
To spend, to give, to want, to be undone,
Unhappy wight, borne to disastrous end,
That does his life in so long tendance spend.
Who ever leaves sweet home, where mean estate
In safe assurance, without strife or hate,
Finds all things needful for contentment meek;
And will to Court for shadows vain to seek,
Or hope to gain, himself a daw will try:
That curse God send unto mine enemy.
For none but such as this bold Ape vnbiest,
Can ever thrive in that unlucky quest;
Or such as has a Reynold to his man,
That by his shifts his Master furnish can.
But yet this Fox could not so closely hide
His crafty feats, but that they were descride
At length, by such as sat in justice seat,
Who for the same him foully did entreat;
And having worthily him punished.
Out of the Court for ever banished,
And now the Ape wanting his huckster man,
That wont provide his necessaries began
To grow into great lack, ne could up hold
His countenance in those his garments old;
Ne new ones could he easily provide,
Though all men him uncased began deride,
Like as a Puppit placed in a play,
Whose part once past, all men bid take away:
So that he driven was to great distress,
And shortly brought to hopeless wretchedness.
Then closely as he might, he cast to leave
The Court, not asking any Pas or leave;
But ran away in his rentrags by night,
Ne ever stayed in place, ne spoke to wight,
Till that the Fox his copesmate he had found,
To whom complaining his unhappy stound,
At last again with him in travel joined,
And with him fared some better chance to find.
So in the world long time they wandered,
And mickle want and hardness suffered;
That them repented much so foolishly
To come so far to seek for misery,
And leave the sweetness of contented home,
Though eating hips, and drinking watery foam.
Thus as they them complained to and fro,
Whilst through the forest rechlesse they did go,
Lo where they spide, how in a gloomy glade,
The Lion sleeping lay in secret shade,
His Crown and Scepter lying him beside,
And having doft for heat his dreadful hide:
Which when they saw, the Ape was sore afraid,
And would have fled with terror all dismaide.
But him the Fox with hardy words did stay,
And bad him put all cowardice away:
For now was time (if ever they would hope)
To aim their counsels to the fairest scope,
And them for ever highly to advance,
In case the good which their own happy chance
Them freely offered, they would wisely take.
Scarce could the Ape yet speak, so did he quake,
Yet as he could, he asked how good might grow,
Where naught but dread and death do seem in show.
Now (said he) whiles the Lion sleeps sound,
May we his Crown and Mace take from the ground,
And eke his skin, the terror of the wood,
Wherewith we may our selves (if we think good)
Make Kings of beasts, and Lords of forests all,
Subject unto that power imperial.
Ah! but (said the Ape) who is so bold a wretch,
That dare his hardy hand to those out-stretch;
When as he knows his meed, if he be spide,
To be a thousand deaths, and shame beside?
Fond Ape (said then the Fox) into whose breast
Never crept thought of honor, nor brave gest,
Who will not venture life a King to be,
And rather rule and reign in sovereign see,
Than dwell in dust inglorious and bace,
Where none shall name the number of his place?
One joyous hour in blisfull happiness,
I choose before a life of wretchedness.
Be therefore counseled herein by me,
And shake off this vile-harted cowardree.
If he awake, yet is not death the next,
For we may coulor it with some pretext
Of this, or that, that may excuse the crime:
Else we may fly; thou to a tree may clime,
And I creep under ground; both from his reach:
Therefore be ruled to do as I do teach.
The Ape, that erst did naught but chill and quake,
Now began some courage unto him to take,
And was content to attempt that enterprise,
Tickled with glory and rash couetise;
But first began question whether should assay
Those royal ornaments to steal away.
Mary that shall your self (quoth he thereto)
For ye be fine and nimble it to do;
Of all the beasts which in the forests be,
Is not a fitter for this turn than ye:
Therefore mine own dear brother take good heart,
And ever think a kingdom is your part.
Loath was the Ape (though praised) to adventure,
Yet faintly began into his work to enter,
Afraid of cuery leaf that stirred him by,
And every stick that underneath did ly;
Upon his tiptoes nicely he up went,
For making noise, and still his ear he lent
To every sound, that under heaven blew,
Now went, now stepped, now crept, now backward drew,
That it good sport had been him to have eyde:
Yet at the last (so well he him applyde,)
Through his fine handling, and his cleanly play,
He all those royal signs had stolen away,
And with the Foxes help them borne aside,
Into a secret corner vnespide.
Whither when as they came, they fell at words,
Whether of them should be the Lord of Lords:
For the Ape was stryfefull, and ambicious;
And the Fox guilefull, and most covetous,
That neither pleased was, to have the rain
Twixt them divided into even twain,
But either (algates) would be Lords alone:
For Love and Lordship bide no paragone.
I am most worthy (said the Ape) since I
For it did put my life in ieopardy:
There-to I am in person and in stature
Most like a man, the Lord of every creature,
So that it seems I was made to reign,
And borne to be a kingly Sovereign.
Nay (said the Fox) Sir Ape you are astray:
For though to steal the Diadem away
Were the work of your nimble hand, yet I
Did first devise the plot by policy;
So that it wholly springs from my wit:
For which also I claim my self more fit
Than you, to rule: for government of state
Will without wisdom soon be ruinate.
And where you claim your self for outward shape
Most like a man, Man is not like an Ape
In his chief parts, that is, in wit and spirit;
But I therein most like to him do merit
For my sly wyles and subtle craftiness,
The title of the kingdom to possess.
Nath'lesse (my brother) since we passed are
Unto this point, we will appease our jar,
And I with reason meet will rest content,
That ye shall have both crown and government,
Upon condition, that ye ruled be
In all affairs, and counseled by me;
And that ye let none other ever draw
Your mind from me, but keep this as a law:
And hereupon an oath unto me plight.
The Ape was glad to end the strife so light,
And there-to swore: for who would not often swear,
And often vnsweare, a Diadem to bear?
Then freely up those royal spoils he took,
Yet at the Lions skin he inly quooke;
But it dissembled, and upon his head
The Crown, and on his back the skin he did,
And the false Fox him helped to array.
Then when he was all dight, he took his way
Into the forest, that he might be seen
Of the wild beasts in his new glory sheene.
There the two first, whom he encountered, were
The Sheep and the Ass, who stricken both with fear
At sight of him, began fast away to fly,
But unto them the Fox aloud did cry,
And in the Kings name bad them both to stay,
Upon the pain that thereof follow may.
Hardly nath' less were they restrained so,
Till that the Fox forth toward them did go,
And there dissuaded them from needless fear,
For that the King did favor to them bear;
And therefore dreadlesse bad them come to Corte:
For no wild beasts should do them any torte
There or abroad, ne would his majesty
Use them but well; with gracious clemency,
As whom he knew to him both fast and true;
So he persuaded them with homage due
Themselves to humble to the Ape prostrate,
Who gently to them bowing in his gate,
Received them with cheerful entertain,
Thence, forth proceeding with his princely train,
He shortly met the Tygre, and the Bore,
Which with the simple Camel raged sore
In bitter words, seeking to take occasion,
Upon his fleshy corpse to make invasion:
But soon as they this mock-King did espy,
Their troublous strife they stinted by and by,
Thinking indeed that it the Lion was.
He then to prove whether his power would pass
As current, sent the Fox to them straight way,
Commanding them their cause of strife bewray;
And if that wrong on either side there were,
That he should warn the wronger to appear
The morrow next at Court, it to defend;
In the mean time upon the King to attend.
The subtle Fox so well his message said,
That the proud beasts him readily obayd:
Whereby the Ape in wondrous stomach woxe,
Strongly encouraged by the crafty Fox;
That King indeed himself he shortly thought,
And all the beasts him feared as they ought:
And followed unto his Palace hie,
Where taking Conge, each one by and by
Departed to his home in dreadful awe,
Full of the feared sight which late they saw.
The Ape thus seized of the Regal throne,
Eftsoons by counsel of the Fox alone,
Began to provide for all things in assurance,
That so his rule might longer have endurance.
First, to his Gate he pointed a strong guard,
That none might enter but with issue hard:
Then for the safeguard of his personage,
He did appoint a warlike equipage
Of foreign beasts, not in the forest bred,
But part by land, and part by water fed;
For tyranny is with strange aid supported.
Then unto him all monstrous beasts resorted
Bred of two kinds, as Griffons, Minotaures,
Crocodiles, Dragons, Beauers, and Centaures:
With those himself he strengthened mightily,
That fear he need no force of enemy.
Then began he rule and tyrannize at will,
Like as the Fox did guide his graceless skill,
And all wild beasts made vassals of his pleasures,
And with their spoils enlarged his private treasures.
No care of justice, nor no rule of reason,
No temperance, nor no regard of season
Did thenceforth ever enter in his mind,
But cruelty, the sign of currish kind,
And sdeignfull pride, and wilful arrogance;
Such follows those whom fortune does advance.
But the false Fox most kindly played his part:
For, whatsoever mother wit, or art
Could work, he put in proof: no practice sly,
No counterpoint of cunning policy,
No reach, no breach, that might him profit bring,
But he the same did to his purpose wring.
Naught suffered he the Ape to give or grant,
But through his hand must pass the Fiant.
All offices, all Leases by him lept,
And of them all what-so he likte, he kept.
Justice he sold injustice for to buy,
And for to purchase for his progeny.
Ill might it prosper, that ill gotten was:
But so he got it, little did he pass.
He fed his cubs with fat of all the soil,
And with the sweet of others sweating toil,
He crammed them with crumbs of Benefices,
And filled their mouths with meeds of malefices,
He clothed them with all colors save white,
And loaded them with Lordships and with might,
So much as they were able well to bear,
That with the weight their backs nigh broken were;
He chaffred Chayres in which Churchmen were set,
And breach of laws to privy ferme did let.
No statute so established might be,
Nor ordinance so needful, but that he
Would violate, though not with violence,
Yet under color of the confidence
The which the Ape reposed in him alone,
And reckned him the kingdoms cornerstone.
And ever when he ought would bring to pass,
His long experience the platform was:
And when he ought not pleasing would put by,
The clock was care of thrift, and husbandry,
For to increase the common treasures store;
But his own treasure he increased more,
And lifted up his lofty towers thereby,
That they began to threat the neighbor sky;
The whiles the Princes Palaces fell fast
To ruin: (for what thing can ever last?)
And whilst the other Peers for poverty
Were forced their ancient houses to let lie,
And their old Castles to the ground to fall,
Which their forefathers (famous over all)
Had founded for the Kingdoms ornament,
And for their memories long monument.
But he no count made of Nobility,
Nor the wild beasts whom arms did glorify,
The Realms chief strength and girlond of the Crown;
All these through fained crimes he thrust a down,
Or made them dwell in darkness of disgrace:
For none, but whom he list might come in place.
Of men of arms he had but small regard,
But kept them low, and straightened very hard:
For men of learning little he esteemed;
His wisdom he above their learning deemed.
As for the rascal Commons least he cared;
For not so common was his bounty shared;
Let God (said he) if please, care for the many,
I for my self must care before else any:
So did he good to none, to many ill,
So did he all the kingdom rob and pill,
Yet none durst speak, nor none durst of him plain;
So great he was in grace, and rich through gain.
Ne would he any let to have access
Unto the Prince, but by his own address:
For all that else did come, were sure to fail,
Yet would he further none but for avail.
For, on a time the Sheep, to whom of yore
The Fox had promised of friendship store,
What time the Ape the kingdom first did gain,
Came to the Court, her case there to complain,
How that the Wolf her mortal enemy,
Had sithence slain her Lamb most cruelly;
And therefore craved to come unto the King,
To let him know the order of the thing.
Soft gooddy Sheep (then said the Fox) not so:
Unto the King so rash ye may not go,
He is with greater matter busied,
Then a Lamb, or the Lambs own mothers head,
Ne certes may I take it well in part,
That ye my cousin Wolf so foully thwart,
And seek with slander his good name to blot:
For there was cause, else do it he would not.
Therefore surcease good Dame, and hence depart,
So went the Sheep away with heavy heart.
So many more, so every one was used,
That to give largely to the box refused.
Now when high love, in whose almighty hand
The care of Kings, and power of Empires stand,
Sitting one day within his turret hie,
From whence he viewes with his black-lidded eye,
What-so the heaven in his wide vawte contains,
And all that in the deepest earth remains,
And troubled kingdom of wild beasts beheld,
Whom not their kindly Sovereign did weld,
But an usurping Ape with guile suborned,
Had all subuerst, he sdeignfully it scorned,
In his great heart, and hardly did refrain,
But that with thunderbolts he had him slain,
And driven down to hell, his dewest meed:
But him avizing, he that dreadful deed
Forbore, and rather chose with scornful shame
Him to avenge, and blot his brutish name
Unto the world, that never after any
Should of his race be void of infamy:
And his false counselor, the cause of all,
To damn to death, or dole perpetual,
From whence he never should be quit, not stall'd.
Forthwith he Mercury unto him called,
And bad him fly with neuer-resting speed
Unto the forest, where wild beasts do breed,
And there enquiring privily, to learn,
What did of late chance to the Lion stearne,
That he ruled not the Empire, as he ought;
And whence were all those plaints unto him brought
Of wrongs and spoils, by saluage beasts committed;
Which done he bad the Lion be remitted
Into his seat, and those same treachours vile
Be punished for their presumptuous guile.
The son of Maia soon as he received
The word, straight with his azure wings he cleau'd
The liquid clouds, and lucid firmament;
Ne staid, till that he came with sleep descent
Unto the place, where his prescript did show.
There stouping like an arrowe from a bow,
He soft arrived on the graffie Plain,
And fairly passed forth with easy pain,
Till that unto the Palace nigh he came.
Then gau he to himself new shape to frame,
And that fair face, and that Ambrosiall hew
Which wonts to deck the Gods immortal crew,
And beautify the shinie firmament,
He doft, unfit for that rude rabblement.
So standing by the gates in strange disguize,
He began enquire of some in secret wize,
Both of the King and of his government,
And of the Fox, and his false blandishment:
And evermore he heard each one complain
Of foul abuses both in realm and reign.
Which yet to prove more true, he meant to see,
And an eye-witnes of each thing to be.
Tho, on his head his dreadful hat he dight,
Which makes him invisible in sight,
And mocketh the eyes of all the lookers on,
Making them think it but a vision.
Through power of that, he runs through enemies swerds;
Through power of that, he passes through the herds
Of ravenous wild beasts, and does beguile
Their greedy mouths of the expected spoil;
Through power of that, his cunning theeueries
He wonts to work, that none the same espies;
And through the power of that, he puts on,
What shape he list in apparition.
That on his head he wore: and in his hand
He took Caduceus his snakie wand,
With which the damned ghosts he governs,
And furies rules, and Tartare tempereth.
With that he causes sleep to seize the eyes,
And fear the hearts of all his enemies;
And when he list, an universal night
Throughout the world he makes on every wight*
As when his Sire with Alcumena lay.
Thus dight, into the Court he took his way,
Both through the guard, which never him descride,
And through the watchmen, who him never spide:
Thence, forth he past into each secret part,
Where-as he saw (that sorely grieved his heart)
Each place abounding with foul injuries,
And filled with treasure rackt with robberies:
Each place defilde with blood of guiltless beasts,
Which had been slain to serve the Apes beheasts;
Gluttony, malice, pride, and couetize,
And lawlesnes reigning with riotize;
Besides the infinite extortions,
Done through the Foxes great oppressions,
That the complaints thereof could not be told.
Which when he did with lothfull eyes behold,
He would no more endure, but came his way,
And cast to seek the Lion where he may,
That he might work the auengement for this shame,
On those two caytiues, which had bred him blame.
And seeking all the forest busily,
At last he found, where sleeping he did ly:
The wicked weed, which there the Fox did lay,
From underneath his head he took away,
And then him waking, forced up to rize.
The Lion looking up, began him avize,
As one late in a trance, what had of long
Become of him: for fantasy is strong.
Arise (said Mercury) thou sluggish beast,
That here lie senseless, like the corpse deceast,
The whilst thy kingdom from thy head is rent,
And thy throne royal with dishonor blent:
Arise, and do thy self redeem from shame,
And be aueng'd on those that breed thy blame.
There-at enraged, soon he began vp-start,
Grinding his teeth, and grating his great heart,
And rouzing up himself, for his rough hide
He began to reach; but no where it espide.
Therewith he began full terribly to rore,
And chauft at that indignity right sore.
But when his Crown and Scepter both he wanted
Lord how he fumed, and sweld, and raged, and panted;
And threatened death, and thousand deadly dolours
To them that had purloyn'd his Princely honors!
With that in haste, disroabed as he was,
He toward his own Palace forth did pass;
And all the way he roared as he went,
That all the forest with astonishment
Thereof did tremble, and the beasts therein
Fled fast away from that so dreadful din.
At last, he came unto his mansion,
Where all the gates he found fast locked anon,
And many warders round about them stood.
With that he roared aloud, as he were wood,
That all the Palace quaked at the stound,
As if it quite were riuen from the ground,
And all within were dead and hartlesse left;
And the Ape himself, as one whose wits were reft,
Fled here and there, and every corner sought,
To hide himself from his own feared thought.
But the false Fox, when he the Lion heard,
Fled closely forth, straightway of death afeard,
And to the Lion came full lowly creeping,
With fained face, and watery eyne half weeping,
TO excuse his former treason and abusion,
And turning all unto the Apes confusion:
Nath'lesse, the royal Beast for bore believing,
But bad him stay at ease till further preeuing.
Then when he saw no entrance to him granted,
Roaring yet louder that all hearts it daunted,
Upon those gates with force he fiercely flew,
And rending them in pieces, felly slew
Those warders strange, and all that else he met,
But the Ape still flying, he no where might get:
From room to room, from beam to beam he fled
All breathless, and for fear now almost ded:
Yet him at last the Lion spide and caught,
And forth with shame unto his judgment brought.
Then all the beasts he caused assembled be,
To hear their doom, and sad ensample see.
The Fox, first Author of that treachery,
He did uncase, and then abroad let fly.
But the Apes long tail (which then he had) he quight
Cut off, and both ears pared of their hight;
Since which, all Apes but half their ears have left,
And of their tails are utterly bereft.
So Mother Hubberd her discourse did end:
Which pardon me, if I a miss have pend;
For, weak was my remembrance it to hold,
And bad her tongue that it so bluntly told.
FINIS.

