Four Hymns, MADE BY EDM. SPENSER.

ANCHORA SPEI

printer's or publisher's device

LONDON, Printed for William Ponsonby. 1596.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE AND MOST Virtuous Ladies, the Lady Margaret Countess
of Cumberland, and the Lady Marie Countess of Warwick.
Having in the greener times of my youth, composed these former two Hymns in
the praise of Love and beauty, and finding that the same too much pleased
those of like age and disposition, which being too vehemently carried with that
kind of affection, do rather suck out poison to their strong passion, then
honey to their honest delight, I was moved by the one of you two most excellent
Ladies, to call in the same. But being unable so to do, by reason that many
copies thereof were formerly scattered abroad, I resolved at least to amend,
and by way of retractation to reform them, making in stead of those two Hymns
of earthly or natural love and beauty, two others of heavenly and celestial.
The which I do dedicate jointly unto you two honorable sisters, as to the most
excellent and rare ornaments of all true love and beauty, both in the one and
the other kind, humbly beseeching you to vouchsafe the patronage of them, and
to accept this my humble service, in lieu of the great graces and honorable
favors which ye daily show unto me, until such time as I may by better means
yield you some more notable testimony of my thankful mind and dutiful
devotion. And even so I pray for your happiness. Greenwich this first of
September. 1596.

Your Honors most bounden ever in all humble service. Ed. Sp.

AN HYMN IN HONOR OF LOVE.
Love, that long since have to thy mighty power,
Perforce subdude my poor captiued heart,
And raging now therein with restless stowre,
Do tyrannize in every weaker part;
Feign would I seek to ease my bitter smart,
By any service I might do to thee,
Or ought that else might to thee pleasing be.
And now t'asswage the force of this new flame,
And make thee more propitious in my need,
I mean to sing the praises of thy name,
And thy victorious conquests to areed;
By which thou made many hearts to bleed
Of mighty Victors, with wide wounds embrewed,
And by thy cruel darts to thee subdewed.
Only I fear my wits enfeebled late,
Through the sharp sorrows, which thou have me bred,
Should faint, and words should fail me, to relate
The wondrous triumphs of thy great godhed.
But if thou would vouchsafe to ouerspred
Me with the shadow of thy gentle wing,
I should enabled be thy acts to sing.
Come then, o come, thou mighty God of love,
Out of thy silver bowres and secret bliss,
Where thou do sit in Venus lap above,
Bathing thy wings in her ambrosiall kiss,
That sweeter far then any Nectar is;
Come softly, and my feeble breast inspire
With gentle fury, kindled of thy fire.
And ye sweet Muses, which have often proved
The piercing points of his auengefull darts;
And ye fair Nimphs, which oftentimes have loved
The cruel worker of your kindly smarts,
Prepare your selves, and open wide your hearts,
For to receive the triumph of your glory,
That made you merry often, when ye were sorry.
And ye fair blossoms of youths wanton breed,
Which in the conquests of your beauty bost,
Wherewith your lovers feeble eyes you feed,
But sterue their hearts, that needs nourture most,
Prepare your selves, to march amongst his host,
And all the way this sacred hymn do sing,
Made in the honor of your Sovereign king.
GReat god of might, that reignest in the mind,
And all the body to thy hest do frame,
Victor of gods, subduer of mankind,
That do the Lions and fell Tigers tame,
Making their cruel rage thy scornful game,
And in their roaring taking great delight;
Who can express the glory of thy might?
Or who alive can perfectly declare,
The wondrous cradle of thine infancy?
When thy great mother Venus first thee bare,
Begot of Plenty and of Penury,
Though elder then thine own nativity;
And yet a child, renewing still thy years;
And yet the eldest of the heavenly Pears.
For ere this worlds still moving mighty mass,
Out of great Chaos ugly prison crept,
In which his goodly face long hidden was
From heavens view, and in deep darkness kept,
Love, that had now long time securely slept
In Venus lap, unarmed then and naked,
Began rear his head, by Clotho being waked.
And taking to him wings of his own heat,
Kindled at first from heavens life-giuing fire,
He began to move out of his idle seat,
VVeakely at first, but after with desire
Lifted aloft, he began to mount up hyre,
And like fresh Eagle, make his hardy flight
Through all that great wide wast, yet wanting light.
Yet wanting light to guide his wandering way,
His own fair mother, for all creatures sake,
Did lend him light from her own goodly ray:
Then through the world his way he began to take,
The world that was not till he did it make;
Whose sundry parts he from them selves did sever,
The which before had lain confused ever.
The earth, the air, the water, and the fire,
Then began to raunge them selves in huge array,
And with contrary forces to conspyre
Each against other, by all means they may,
Threatening their own confusion and decay:
Air hated earth, and water hatefyre,
Till Love relented their rebellious ire.
He then them took, and tempering goodly well
Their contrary dislikes with loved means,
Did place them all in order, and compel
To keep them selves within their sundry raines,
Together linkt with Adamantine chains;
Yet so, as that in every living wight
They mix themselves, and show their kindly might.
So ever since they firmly have remained,
And duly well observed his beheast;
Through which now all these things that are contained
Within this goodly cope, both most and least
Their being have, and daily are increast,
Through secret sparks of his infused fire,
Which in the barraine cold he does inspyre.
Thereby they all do live, and moved are
To multiply the likeness of their kind,
Whilst they seek only, without further care,
To quench the flame, which they in burning find:
But man, that breathes a more immortal mind,
Not for lusts sake, but for eternity,
Seeks to enlarge his lasting progeny.
For having yet in his deducted spright,
Some sparks remaining of that heavenly fire,
He is enlumind with that goodly light,
Unto like goodly semblant to aspyre:
Therefore in choice of love, he does desire
That seems on earth most heavenly, to embrace,
That same is Beauty, borne of heavenly race.
For sure of all, that in this mortal frame
Contained is, naught more divine does seem,
Or that resembles more the immortal flame
Of heavenly light, then Beauties glorious beam.
What wonder then, if with such rage extreme
Frail men, whose eyes seek heavenly things to see,
At sight thereof so much enrauisht be?
Which well perceiving that imperious boy,
Does therewith tip his sharp empoisned darts;
Which glancing through the eyes with cou^tena^ce coy,
Rest not, till they have pierst the trembling hearts,
And kindled flame in all their inner parts,
Which suckes the blood, and drinks up the life
Of careful wretches with consuming grief.
Thenceforth they plain, and make full piteous moan
Unto the author of their balefull bane;
The days they waste, the nights they grieve and groan,
Their lives they loath, and heavens light disdain;
No light but that, whose lamp does yet remain
Fresh burning in the image of their eye,
They deigne to see, and seeing it still dye.
The whylst thou tyrant Love do laugh and scorn
At their complaints, making their pain thy play;
Whylest they lie languishing like thrals forlorn,
The whiles thou do triumph in their decay,
And otherwhyles, their dying to delay,
Thou do emmarble the proud heart of her,
Whose love before their life they do prefer.
So have thou often done (ay me the more)
To me thy vassal, whose yet bleeding heart,
With thousand wounds thou mangled have so sore
That whole remains scarce any little part,
Yet to augment the anguish of my smart,
Thou have enfrosen her disdainefull breast,
That no one drop of pity there does rest.
Why then do I this honor unto thee,
Thus to ennoble thy victorious name,
Since thou do show no favor unto me,
Ne once move ruth in that rebellious Dame,
Somewhat to slack the rigor of my flame?
Certes small glory do thou win hereby,
To let her live thus free, and me to die.
But if thou be indeed, as men thee call,
The worlds great Parent, the most kind preserver
Of living wights, the sovereign Lord of all,
How falls it then, that with thy furious fervor,
Thou do afflict as well the not deseruer,
As him that does thy lovely heasts despize,
And on thy subjects most do tyrannize?
Yet herein eke thy glory seems more,
By so hard handling those which best thee serve,
That ere thou do them unto grace restore,
Thou may well try if they will ever swerue,
And may them make it better to deserve,
And bauing got it, may it more esteem,
For things hard gotten, men more dearly deem.
So hard those heavenly beauties be enfyred,
As things divine, least passions do impresse,
The more of steadfast mynds to be admyred,
The more they stayed be on steadfastness:
But baseborne mynds such lamps regard the less,
Which at first blowing take not hasty fire,
Such fancies feel no love, but loose desire.
For love is Lord of truth and loialtie,
Lifting himself out of the lowly dust,
On golden plumes up to the purest sky,
Above the reach of loathly sinful lust,
Whose base affect through cowardly distrust
Of his weak wings, dare not to heaven fly,
But like a moldwarpe in the earth dothly.
His dunghill thoughts, which do themselves enure
To dirtie dross, no higher dare aspyre,
Ne can his feeble earthly eyes endure
The flaming light of that celestial fire,
Which kindles love in generous desire,
And makes him mount above the native might
Of heavy earth, up to the heavens hight.
Such is the power of that sweet passion,
That it all sordid baseness does expel,
And the refyned mind does newly fashion
Unto a fairer form, which now does dwell
In his high thought, that would it self excel;
Which he beholding still with constant sight,
Admires the mirror of so heavenly light.
Whose image printing in his deepest wit,
He thereon feeds his hungry fantasy,
Still full, yet never satisfyde with it,
Like Tantale, that in store does steruedly:
So does he pine in most satiety,
For naught may quench his infinite desire,
Once kindled through that first conceived fire.
Thereon his mind affixed wholly is,
Ne thinks on ought, but how it to attain;
His care, his joy, his hope is all on this,
That seems in it all blisses to contain,
In sight whereof, all other bliss seems vain.
Thrice happy man, might he the same possess;
He faines himself, and does his fortune bless.
And though he do not win his wish to end,
Yet thus far happy he him self does ween,
That heavens such happy grace did to him lend,
As thing on earth so heavenly, to have seen,
His hearts enshrined saint, his heavens queen,
Fairer then fairest, in his fayning eye,
Whose sole aspect he counts felicitye.
Then forth he casts in his unquiet thought,
What he may do, her favor to obtain;
What brave exploit, what peril hardly wrought,
What puissant conquest, what aduenturons pain,
May please her best, and grace unto him gain:
He dreads no danger, nor misfortune fears,
His faith, his fortune, in his breast he bears.
Thou art his god, thou art his mighty guide,
Thou being blind, letst him not see his fears,
But cariest him to that which he has eyde,
Through seas, through flames, through thousand swords and spears:
Ne ought so strong that may his force withstand,
With which thou armest his resistlesse hand.
Witness Leander, in the Euxine waves,
And stout AEneas in the Troiane fire,
Achilles preassing through the Phrygian glaiues,
And Orpheus daring to provoke the ire
Of damned fiends, to get his love retire:
For both through heaven and hell thou make way,
To win them worship which to thee obey.
And if by all these perils and these pains,
He may but purchase lyking in her eye,
What heavens of joy, then to himself he faynes,
Eftsoons he wypes quite out of memory,
What ever ill before he did aby,
Had it been death, yet would he die again,
To live thus happy as her grace to gain.
Yet when he has found favor to his will,
He nathemore can so contented rest,
But forces further on, and strives still
T'approch more near, till in her inmost breast,
He may embosomd be, and loved best;
And yet not best, but to be loved alone,
For love can not endure a Paragone.
The fear whereof, o how does it torment
His troubled mind with more then hellish pain!
And to his fayning fausie represent
Sights never seen, and thousand shadows vain,
To break his sleep, and waste his idle brain;
Thou that have never loved can not believe,
Least part of th'euils which poor lovers grieve.
The gnawing envy, the hart-fretting fear,
The vain surmizes, the distrustful shows,
The false reports that flying tales do bear,
The doubts, the dangers, the delays, the woes,
The feigned friends, the unassured foes,
With thousands more then any tongue can tell,
Do make a lovers life a wretches hell.
Yet is there one more cursed then they all,
That cancker worm, that monster Gelosie,
Which eats the heart, and feeds upon the gall,
Turning all loves delight to misery,
Through fear of loosing his felicity.
Ah Gods, that ever ye that monster placed
In gentle love, that all his joys defaced.
By these, o Love, thou do thy entrance make,
Unto thy heaven, and do the more endeere,
Thy pleasures unto those which them partake,
As after storms when clouds begin to clear,
The Sun more bright and glorious does appear;
So thou thy folk, through pains of Purgatory,
Do bear unto thy bliss, and heavens glory.
There thou them placest in a Paradize
Of all delight, and joyous happy rest,
Where they do feed on Nectar heavenly wize,
With Hercules and Hebe, and the rest
Of Venus dearlings, through her bounty blessed,
And lie like Gods in yuorie beds arayd,
With rose and lillies over them displayed.
There with thy daughter Pleasure they do play
Their hurtlesse sports, without rebuke or blame,
And in her snowy bosom boldly lay
Their quiet heads, deuoyd of guilty shame,
After full ioyance of their gentle game,
Then her they crown their Goddess and their Queen,
And deck with flowers thy altars well beseene.
Ay me, dear Lord, that ever I might hope,
For all the pains and woes that I endure,
To come at length unto the wished scope
Of my desire, or might my self assure,
That happy port for ever to recure.
Then would I think these pains no pains at all,
And all my woes to be but penance small.
Then would I sing of thine immortal praise
An heavenly Hymn, such as the Angels sing,
And thy triumphant name then would I raise
Boue all the gods, thee only honoring,
My guide, my God, my victor, and my king;
Till then, dread Lord, vouchsafe to take of me
This simple song, thus framed in praise of thee.
FINIS.
AN HYMN. IN HONOR OF BEAVTIE.
AH whither, Love, will thou now carry me?
What wontlesse fury do thou now inspire
Into my feeble breast, too full of thee?
Whylest seeking to aslake thy raging fire,
Thou in me kindlest much more great desire,
And up aloft above my strength do raise
The wondrous matter of my fire to praise.
That as I erst in praise of thine own name,
So now in honor of thy Mother dear,
An honorable Hymn I eke should frame,
And with the brightness of her beauty clear,
The ravished hearts of gazefull men might rear,
To admiration of that heavenly light,
From whence proceeds such foul enchaunting might.
Thereto do thou great Goddess, queen of Beauty,
Mother of love, and of all worlds delight,
Without whose sovereign grace and kindly dewty,
Nothing on earth seems fair to fleshly sight,
Do thou vouchsafe with thy loue-kindling light,
Tilluminate my dim and dulled eyne,
And beautify this sacred hymn of thine.
That both to thee, to whom I mean it most,
And eke to her, whose fair immortal beam,
Has darted fire into my feeble ghost,
That now it wasted is with woes extreme,
It may so please that she at length will stream
Some deaw of grace, into my withered heart,
After long sorrow and consuming smart.
WHat time this worlds great workmaister did cast
To make al things, such as we now behold
It seems that he before his eyes had plast
A goodly Pattern to whose perfect mould,
He fashiond them as comely as he could,
That now so fair and seemly they appear,
As naught may be amended any wheare.
That wondrous Pattern wheresoere it be,
Whether in earth laid up in secret store,
Or else in heaven, that no man may it see
With sinful eyes, for fear it to deflore,
Is perfect Beauty which all men adore,
Whose face and feature does so much excel
All mortal sense, that none the same may tell.
Thereof as every earthly thing partakes,
Or more or less by influence divine,
So it more fair accordingly it makes,
And the gross matter of this earthly mine,
Which clotheth it, thereafter does refyne,
Doing away the dross which dims the light
Of that fair beam, which therein is empight.
For through infusion of celestial power,
The duller earth it quickneth with delight,
And life-full spirits privily does power
Through all the parts, that to the lookers sight
They seem to please. That is thy sovereign might,
O Cyprian Queen, which flowing from the beam
Of thy bright star, thou into them do stream.
That is the thing which gives pleasant grace
To all things fair, that kindles lively fire,
Light of thy lamp, which shyning in the face,
Thence to the soul darts amorous desire,
And robs the hearts of those which it admyre,
Therewith thou pointest thy Sons poysned arrow,
That wounds the life, and wastes the inmost marrow.
How vainly then do idle wits invent,
That beauty is naught else, but mixture made
Of colors fair, and goodly temp'rament
Of pure complexions, that shall quickly fade
And pass away, like to a summers shade,
Or that it is but comely composition
Of parts well measurd, with meet disposition.
Has white and red in it such wondrous power,
That it can pierce through the eyes unto the heart,
And therein stir such rage and restless stowre,
As naught but death can stint his dolours smart?
Or can proportion of the outward part,
Move such affection in the inward mind,
That it can rob both sense and reason blind?
Why do not then the blossoms of the field,
Which are arayd with much more orient hew,
And to the sense most dainty odours yield,
Work like impression in the lookers view?
Or why do not fair pictures like power show,
In which oftimes, we Nature see of Art
Excelled, in perfect limming every part.
But ah, believe me, there is more then so
That works such wonders in the minds of men.
I that have often proved, too well it know;
And who so list the like assayes to ken,
Shall find by trial, and confess it then,
That Beauty is not, as fond men misdeeme,
An outward show of things, that only seem.
For that same goodly hew of white and red,
With which the cheeks are sprinkled, shall decay,
And those sweet rosy leaves so fairly spread
Upon the lips, shall fade and fall away
To that they were, even to corrupted clay.
That golden wyre, those sparckling stars so bright
Shall turn to dust, and loose their goodly light.
But that fair lamp, from whose celestial ray
That light proceeds, which kindles lovers fire,
Shall never be extinguished nor decay,
But when the vital spirits do expyre,
Unto her native planet shall retire,
For it is heavenly borne and can not die,
Being a parcel of the purest sky.
For when the soul, the which derived was
At first, out of that great immortal Spright,
By whom all live to love, whilome did pas
Down from the top of purest heavens hight,
To be embodied here, it then took light
And lively spirits from that fairest star,
Which lights the world forth from his fiery carre.
Which power retayning still or more or less,
When she in fleshly seed is est enraced,
Through every part she does the same impresse,
According as the heavens have her graced,
And frames her house, in which she will be placed,
Fit for her self, adorning it with spoil
Of th'heauenly riches, which she robderewhyle.
Thereof it comes, that these fair souls, which have
The most resemblance of that heavenly light,
Frame to themselves most beautiful and brave
Their fleshly bower, most fit for their delight,
And the gross matter by a sovereign might
Tempers so trim, that it may well be seen,
A palace fit for such a virgin Queen.
So every spirit, as it is most pure,
And has in it the more of heavenly light,
So it the fairer body does procure
To habit in, and it more fairly dight
With cheerful grace and amiable sight.
For of the soul the body form does take:
For soul is form, and does the body make.
Therefore where ever that thou do behold
A comely corpse, with beauty fair endewed,
Know this for certain, that the same does hold
A beauteous soul, with fair conditions thewed,
Fit to receive the seed of virtue strewed.
For all that fair is, is by nature good;
That is a sign to know the gentle blood.
Yet often it falls, that many a gentle mind
Dwells in deformed tabernacle drowned,
Either by chance, against the course of kind,
Or through unaptness in the substance fownd,
Which it assumed of some stubborn grownd,
That will not yield unto her forms direction,
But is performed with some foul imperfection.
And often it falls (ay me the more to rue)
That goodly beauty, albe heavenly borne,
Is foul abusd, and that celestial hew,
Which does the world with her delight adorn,
Made but the bait of sin, and sinners scorn;
Whilst every one does seek and sew to have it,
But every one does seek, but to deprave it.
Yet nathemore is that fair beauties blame,
But theirs that do abuse it unto ill:
Nothing so good, but that through guilty shame
May be corrupt, and wrested unto will.
Nathelesse the soul is fair and beauteous still,
How ever fleshes fault it filthy make:
For things immortal no corruption take.
But ye fair Dames, the worlds dear ornaments,
And lively images of heavens light,
Let not your beams with such disparagements
Be dimd, and your bright glory darkened quight,
But mindful still of your first countries sight,
Do still preserve your first informed grace,
Whose shadow yet shynes in your beauteous face.
Loath that foul blot, that hellish fierbrand,
Disloiall lust, fair beauties foulest blame,
That base affections, which your ears would bland,
Commend to you by loves abused name;
But is indeed the bondslaue of defame,
Which will the garland of your glory mar,
And quench the light of your bright shyning star.
But gentle Love, that loiall is and true,
Will more illumine your resplendent ray,
And add more brightness to your goodly hew,
From light of his pure fire, which by like way
Kindled of yours, your likeness does display,
Like as two mirrours by opposd reflection,
Do both express the faces first impression.
Therefore to make your beauty more appear,
It you behoues to love, and forth to lay
That heavenly riches, which in you ye bear,
That men the more admyre their fountain may,
For else what booteth that celestial ray,
If it in darkness be enshrined ever,
That it of loving eyes be vewed never?
But in your choice of Loves, this well aduize,
That likest to your selves ye them select,
The which your forms first sourse may sympathize,
And with like beauties parts be inly decked:
For if you loosely love without respect,
It is no love, but a discordant war,
Whose unlike parts amongst themselves do jar.
For Love is a celestial harmony,
Of likely hearts composd of stars concent,
Which join together in sweet sympathy,
To work each others joy and true content,
Which they have harbourd since their first desce^t
Out of their heavenly bowres, where they did see
And know each other here beloved to be.
Then wrong it were that any other twain
Should in loves gentle band combyned be,
But those whom heaven did at first ordain,
And made out of one mould the more t'agree:
For all that like the beauty which they see,
Straight do not love: for love is not so light,
As straight to burn at first beholders sight.
But they which love indeed, look otherwise,
With pure regard and spotless true intent,
Drawing out of the object of their eyes,
A more refyned form, which they present
Unto their mind, void of all blemishment;
Which it reducing to her first perfection,
Beholds free from fleshes frail infection.
And then conforming it unto the light,
Which in it self it has remaining still
Of that first Sun, yet sparckling in his sight,
Thereof he fashions in his higher skill,
An heavenly beauty to his fancies will,
And it embracing in his mind entyre,
The mirror of his own thought does admyre.
Which seeing now so inly fair to be,
As outward it appears to the eye,
And with his spirits proportion to agree,
He thereon fixes all his fantasy,
And fully sets his felicity,
Counting it fairer, then it is indeed,
And yet indeed her fairness does exceed.
For lovers eyes more sharply sighted be
Then other men's, and in dear loves delight
See more then any other eyes can see,
Through mutual receipt of beams bright,
Which carry privy message to the spright,
And to their eyes that inmost fair display,
As plain as light discouers dawning day.
Therein they see through amorous eye-glaunces,
Armies of loves still flying too and fro,
Which dart at them their little fiery lances,
Whom having wounded, back again they go,
Carrying compassion to their lovely foe;
Who seeing her fair eyes so sharp effect,
Cures all their sorrows with one sweet aspect.
In which how many wonders do they reed
To their conceit, that others never see,
Now of her smiles, with which their souls they feed,
Like Gods with Nectar in their bankets free,
Now of her looks, which like to Cordials be;
But when her words embassade forth she sends,
Lord how sweet music that unto them lends.
Sometimes upon her forhead they behold
A thousand Graces masking in delight,
Sometimes within her eyelids they unfold
Ten thousand sweet belgards, which to their sight
Do seem like twinkling stars in frostie night:
But on her lips like rosy buds in May,
So many millions of chaste pleasures play.
All those, o Cytherea, and thousands more
Thy handmaides be, which do on thee attend
To deck thy beauty with their dainties store,
That may it more to mortal eyes commend,
And make it more admyr'd of foe and friend;
That in men's hearts thou may thy throne enstall,
And spread thy lovely kingdom over all.
Then Iotryumph, o great beauties Queen,
Advance the banner of thy conquest hie,
That all this world, the which thy vassals been,
May draw to thee, and with dew fealty,
Adore the power of thy great Majesty,
Singing this Hymn in honor of thy name,
Compyld by me, which thy poor liegeman am.
In lieu whereof grant, o great Sovereign,
That she whose conquering beauty does captive
My trembling heart in her eternal chain,
One drop of grace at length will to me give,
That I her bounden thrall by her may live,
And this same life, which first fro me she reaued,
May owe to her, of whom I it received.
And you fair Venus dearling, my dear dread,
Fresh flower of grace, great Goddess of my life,
When your fair eyes these fearful lines shall read,
Deigne to let fall one drop of dew relief,
That may recure my hearts long pyning grief,
And show what wo^drous power your beauty has,
That can restore a damned wight from death.
FINIS.
AN HYMN OF HEAVENLY LOVE.
Love, lift me up upon thy golden wings,
From this base world unto thy heavens hight,
Where I may see those admirable things,
Which there thou workest by thy sovereign might,
Far above feeble reach of earthly sight,
That I thereof an heavenly Hymn may sing
Unto the god of Love, high heavens king.
Many lewd lays (ah woe is me the more)
In praise of that mad fit, which fools call love,
I have in th'heat of youth made heretofore,
That in light wits did loose affection move.
But all those follies now I do reprove,
And turned have the tenor of my string,
The heavenly praises of true love to sing.
And ye that wont with greedy vain desire
To read my fault, and wondering at my flame,
To warm your selves at my wide sparckling fire,
Since now that heat is quenched, quench my blame,
And in her ashes shroud my dying shame:
For who my passed follies now pursewes,
Begins his own, and my old fault renewes.
BEfore this worlds great frame, in which al things
Are now containd, found any being place,
Ere flitting Time could wag his eyas wings
About that mighty bound, which does embrace
The rolling Spheres, and parts their hours by space,
That high eternal power, which now does move
In all these things, moved in it self by love.
It loved it self, because it self was fair;
(For fair is loved;) and of it self begot
Like to it self his eldest son and heir,
Eternal, pure, and void of sinful blot,
The firstling of his joy, in whom no jot
Of loves dislike, or pride was to be found,
Whom he therefore with equal honor crowned.
With him he raignd, before all time prescribed,
In endless glory and immortal might,
Together with that third from them derived,
Most wise, most holy, most almighty Spright,
Whose kingdoms throne no thought of earthly wight
Can co^prehe^d, much less my tre^bling verse
With equal words can hope it to rehearse.
Yet o most blessed Spirit, pure lamp of light,
Eternal spring of grace and wisdom true,
Vouchsafe to shed into my barren spright,
Some little drop of thy celestial dew,
That may my rymes with sweet infuse embrew,
And give me words equal unto my thought,
To tell the marueiles by thy mercy wrought.
Yet being pregnant still with powrefull grace,
And full of fruitful love, that loves to get
Things like himself, and to enlarge his race,
His second brood though not in power so great,
Yet full of beauty, next he did beget
An infinite increase of Angels bright,
All glistring glorious in their Makers light.
To them the heavens illimitable hight,
Not this round heaven, which we from hence behold,
Adornd with thousand lamps of burning light,
And with ten thousand gemmes of shyning gold,
He gave as their inheritance to hold,
That they might serve him in eternal blis,
And be partakers of those joys of his.
There they in their trinall triplicities
About him wait, and on his will depend,
Either with nimble wings to cut the skies,
When he them on his messages does send,
Or on his own dread presence to attend,
Where they behold the glory of his light,
And caroll Hymns of love both day and night.
Both day and night is unto them all one,
For he his beams does still to them extend,
That darkness there appears never none,
Ne has their day, ne has their bliss an end,
But there their termelesse time in pleasure spend,
Ne ever should their happiness decay,
Had not they dared their Lord to disobay.
But pride impatient of long resting peace,
Did puff them up with greedy bold ambition,
That they began cast their state how to increase,
Above the fortune of their first condition,
And sit in Gods own seat without commission:
The brightest Angel, even the Child of light
Drew millions more against their God to fight.
The Almighty seeing their so bold assay,
Kindled the flame of his consuming ire,
And with his only breath them blew away
From heavens hight, to which they did aspyre,
To deepest hell, and lake of damned fire;
Where they in darkness and dread horror dwell,
Hating the happy light from which they fell.
So that next offspring of the Makers love,
Next to himself in glorious degree,
Degendering to hate fell from above
Through pride; (for pride and love may ill agree)
And now of sin to all ensample be:
How then can sinful flesh it self assure,
Since purest Angels fell to be impure?
But that eternal fount of love and grace,
Still flowing forth his goodness unto all,
Now seeing left a waste and empty place
In his wide Palace, through those Angels fall,
Cast to supply the same, and to enstall
A new unknown Colony therein,
Whose root from earths base groundworke should begin.
Therefore of clay, base, vile, and next to naught,
Yet formed by wondrous skill, and by his might:
According to an heavenly pattern wrought,
Which he had fashiond in his wise foresight,
He man did make, and breathd a living spright
Into his face most beautiful and fair,
Endewd with wifedomes riches, heavenly, rare.
Such he him made, that he resemble might
Himself, as mortal thing immortal could;
Him to be Lord of every living wight,
He made by love out of his own like mould,
In whom he might his mighty self behold:
For love does love the thing beloved to see,
That like it self in lovely shape may be.
But man forgetful of his makers grace,
No less then Angels, whom he did ensew,
Fell from the hope of promised heavenly place,
Into the mouth of death to sinners dew,
And all his offspring into thraldom threw:
Where they for ever should in bonds remain,
Of never dead, yet ever dying pain.
Till that great Lord of Love, which him at first
Made of mere love, and after liked well,
Seeing him lie like creature long accursed,
In that deep horror of despeyred hell,
Him wretch in doole would let no longer dwell,
But cast out of that bondage to redeem,
And pay the price, all were his debt extreme.
Out of the bosom of eternal bliss,
In which he reigned with his glorious sire,
He down descended, like a most demisse
And abject thrall, in fleshes frail attire,
That he for him might pay sins deadly hyre,
And him restore unto that happy state,
In which he stood before his hapless fate.
In flesh at first the guilt committed was,
Therefore in flesh it must be satisfyde:
Nor spirit, nor Angel, though they man surpas,
Could make amends to God for man's misguyde,
But only man himself, who self did slide.
So taking flesh of sacred virgins womb,
For man's dear sake he did a man become.
And that most blessed body, which was borne
Without all blemish or reproachful blame,
He freely gave to be both rent and torn
Of cruel hands, who with despightfull shame
Reuyling him, that them most vile became,
At length him nailed on a gallow tree,
And slew the just, by most unjust decree.
O huge and most unspeakable impression
Of loves deep wound, that pierst the piteous heart
Of that dear Lord with so entyre affection,
And sharply launching every inner part,
Dolours of death into his soul did dart;
Doing him die, that never it deserved,
To free his foes, that from his heast had swerued.
What heart can feel least touch of so sore launch,
Or thought can think the depth of so dear wound?
Whose bleeding sourse their streams yet never staunch,
But still do flow, and freshly still redound,
To heal the sores of sinful souls unsound,
And cleanse the guilt of that infected crime,
Which was enrooted in all fleshly slyme.
O blessed well of love, o flower of grace,
O glorious Morning star, o lamp of light,
Most lively image of thy fathers face,
Eternal King of glory, Lord of might,
Meek lamb of God before all worlds behight,
How can we thee requite for all this good?
Or what can prize that thy most precious blood?
Yet naught thou ask'st in lieu of all this love,
But love of us for guerdon of thy pain.
Ay me; what can us less then that behone?
Had he required life of us again,
Had it been wrong to ask his own with gain?
He gave us life, he it restored lost;
Then life were least, that us so little cost.
But he our life has left unto us free,
Free that was thrall, and blessed that was band;
Ne ought demands, but that we loving be,
As he himself has loved us before hand,
And bound thereto with an eternal band,
Him first to love, that us so dearly bought,
And next, our brethren to his image wrought.
Him first to love, great right and reason is,
Who first to us our life and being gave;
And after when we fared had amiss,
Us wretches from the second death did save;
And last the food of life, which now we have,
Even himself in his dear sacrament,
To feed our hungry souls unto us lent.
Then next to love our brethren, that were made
Of that self mould, and that self makers hand,
That we, and to the same again shall fade,
Where they shall have like heritage of land,
How ever here on higher steps we stand;
Which also were with self same price redeemed
That we, how ever of us light esteemed.
And were they not, yet since that loving Lord
Commanded us to love them for his sake,
Even for his sake, and for his sacred word,
Which in his last bequest he to us spoke,
We should them love, and with their needs partake;
Knowing that whatsoere to them we give,
We give to him, by whom we all do live.
Such mercy he by his most holy reed
Unto us taught, and to approve it true,
Ensampled it by his most righteous deed,
Showing us mercy miserable crew,
That we the like should to the wretches show,
And love our brethren; thereby to approve,
How much himself that loved us, we love.
Then rouse thy self, o earth, out of thy soil,
In which thou wallowest like to filthy swyne,
And do thy mind in durty pleasures moyle,
Unmindful of that dearest Lord of thine;
Lift up to him thy heavy clouded eyne,
That thou his sovereign bounty may behold.
And read through love his mercies manifold.
Begin from first, where he encradled was
In simple cratch, wrapped in a wad of hay,
Between the toylefull Ox and humble Ass,
And in what rags, and in how base array,
The glory of our heavenly riches lay,
When him the silly Shepherds came to see,
Whom greatest Princes sought on lowest knee.
From thence read on the story of his life,
His humble carriage, his vnfaulty ways,
His cancred foes, his fights, his toil, his strife,
His pains, his poverty, his sharp assayes,
Through which he past his miserable days,
Offending none, and doing good to all,
Yet being malist both of great and small.
And look at last how of most wretched wights,
He taken was, betrayed, and false accused,
How with most scornful taunts, and fell despights bruised;
He was reuyld, disgrast, and foul abused,
How scourgd, how crowned, how buffeted, how and side.
And lastly how twixt robbers crucifyde,
With bitter wounds through hands, through feet
Then let thy flinty heart that feels no pain,
Empierced be with pitiful remorse,
And let thy bowels bleed in every vain,
At sight of his most sacred heavenly corse,
So torn and mangled with malicious forse,
And let thy soul, whose sins his sorrows wrought,
Melt into tears, and groan in grieved thought.
With sense whereof whilst so thy softened spirit
Is inly touched, and humbled with meek zeal,
Through meditation of his endless merit,
Lift up thy mind to the author of thy weal,
And to his sovereign mercy do appeal;
Learn him to love, that loved thee so dear,
And in thy breast his blessed image bear.
With all thy heart, with all thy soul and mind,
Thou must him love, and his beheasts embrace,
All other loves, with which the world does blind
Weak fancies, and stir up affections base,
Thou must renounce, and utterly displace,
And give thy self unto him full and free,
That full and freely gave himself to thee.
Then shall thou feel thy spirit so possessed,
And ravished with devouring great desire
Of his dear self, that shall thy feeble breast
Inflame with love, and set thee all on fire
With burning zeal, through every part entire,
That in no earthly thing thou shall delight,
But in his sweet and amiable sight.
Thenceforth all worlds desire will in thee dye,
And all earthes glory on which men do gaze,
Seem dirt and dross in thy pure sighted eye,
Compared to that celestial beauties blaze,
Whose glorious beams all fleshly sense does daze
With admiration of their passing light,
Blinding the eyes and lumining the spright.
Then shall thy ravished soul inspired be
With heavenly thoughts, far above humane skill,
And thy bright radiant eyes shall plainly see
Th'Idee of his pure glory present still,
Before thy face, that all thy spirits shall fill
With sweet enragement of celestial love,
Kindled through sight of those fair things above.
FINIS.
AN HYMN OF HEAVENLY BEAVTIE.
RApt with the rage of mine own ravished thought,
Through co^templation of those goodly sights,
And glorious images in heaven wrought,
Whose wo^drous beauty breathing sweet delights,
Do kindle love in high conceipted sprights:
I feign to tell the things that I behold,
But feel my wits to fail, and tongue to fold.
Vouchsafe then, o thou most almighty Spright,
From whom all gifts of wit and knowledge flow,
To shed into my breast some sparkling light
Of thine eternal Truth, that I may show
Some little beams to mortal eyes below,
Of that immortal beauty, there with thee,
Which in my weak distraughted mind I see.
That with the glory of so goodly sight,
The hearts of men, which fondly here admyre
Fair seeming shows, and feed on vain delight,
Transported with celestial desire
Of those fair forms, may lift themselves up hye^,
And learn to love with zealous humble dewty
The Eternal fountain of that heavenly beauty.
Beginning then below, with th'easie view
Of this base world, subiectro fleshly eye,
From thence to mount aloft by order dew,
To contemplation of the immortal sky,
Of the soar faulcon so I learn to fly,
That flags awhile her fluttering wings beneath,
Till she her self for stronger flight can breath.
Then look who list, thy gazefull eyes to feed
With sight of that is fair, look on the frame
Of this wide universe, and therein reed
The endless kinds of creatures, which by name
Thou can not count, much less their natures aim:
All which are made with wondrous wise respect,
And all with admirable beauty decked.
First The Earth, on adamantine pillars founded,
Amid the Sea engirt with brazen bands;
Then The Air still flitting, but yet firmly bounded
On every side, with pyles of flaming brands,
Never consumed nor quenched with mortal hands;
And last, that mighty shining crystal wall,
Wherewith he has encompassed this All.
By view whereof, it plainly may appear,
That still as every thing does upward tend,
And further is from earth, so still more clear
And fair it grows, till to his perfect end
Of purest beauty, it at last ascend:
Air more then water, fire much more then air,
And heaven then fire appears more pure and fair.
Look thou no further, but affixe thine eye,
On that bright shynie round still moving Mass,
The house of blessed Gods, which men call Sky,
All sowd with glistring stars more thick the^ grass,
Whereof each other does in brightness pass;
But those two most, which ruling night and day,
As King and Queen, the heavens Empire sway.
And tell me then, what have thou ever seen,
That to their beauty may compared be,
Or can the sight that is most sharp and keen,
Endure their Captains flaming head to see?
How much less those, much higher in degree,
And so much fairer, and much more then these,
As these are fairer then the land and seas?
For far above these heavens which here we see,
Be others far exceeding these in light,
Not bounded, not corrupt, as these same be,
But infinite in largeness and in hight,
Vnmouing, vncorrupt, and spotless bright,
That need no Sun t'illuminate their spheres,
But their own native light far passing theirs.
And as these heavens still by degrees arize,
Until they come to their first Mouers bound,
That in his mighty compass does comprize,
And carry all the rest with him around,
So those likewise do by degrees redound,
And rise more fair, till they at last ariue
To the most fair, whereto they all do strive.
Fair is the heaven, where happy souls have place,
In full enioyment of felicity,
Whence they do still behold, the glorious face
Of the divine eternal Majesty;
More fair is that, where those Idees on hie
Enraunged be, which Plato so admyred,
And pure Intelligences from God inspyred.
Yet fairer is that heaven, in w hich do rain
The sovereign Powers and mighty Potentates,
Which in their high protections do contain
All mortal Princes, and imperial States;
And fayrer yet, whereas the royal Seats
And heavenly Dominations are set,
From whom all earthly governance is fet.
Yet far more fair be those bright Cherubins,
Which all with golden wings are ouerdight,
And those eternal burning Seraphins,
Which from their faces dart out fiery light;
Yet fairer then they both, and much more bright
Be The Angels and Archangels, which attend
On Gods own person, without rest or end.
These thus in fair each other far excelling,
As to the Highest they approach more near,
Yet is that Highest far beyond all telling,
Fairer then all the rest which there appear,
Though all their beauties joined together were:
How then can mortal tongue hope to express,
The image of such endless perfectness?
Cease then my tongue, and lend unto my mind
Leave to bethink how great that beauty is,
Whose utmost parts so beautiful I find,
How much more those essential parts of his,
His truth, his love, his wisdom, and his blis,
His grace, his doom, his mercy and his might,
By which he lends us of himself a sight.
Those unto all he daily does display,
And show himself in the image of his grace,
As in a looking glass, through which he may
Be seen, of all his creatures vile and base,
That are unable else to see his face,
His glorious face which glistereth else so bright,
That The Angels selves can not endure his sight.
But we frail wights, whose sight cannot sustain
The Suns bright beams, when he on us does shine,
But that their points rebutted back again
Are duld, how can we see with feeble eyne,
The glory of that Majesty divine,
In sight of whom both Sun and Moon are dark,
Compared to his least resplendent spark?
The means therefore which unto us is lent,
Him to behold, is on his works to look,
Which he has made in beauty excellent,
And in the same, as in a brazen book,
To read enregistred in every nooke
His goodness, which his beauty does declare,
For all that's good, is beautiful and fair.
Thenee gathering plumes of perfect speculation,
To impe the wings of thy high flying mind,
Mount up aloft through heavenly contemplation,
From this dark world, whose damps the soul do blind,
And like the native brood of Eagles kind,
On that bright Sun of glory fix thine eyes,
Cleared from gross mists of frail infirmities.
Humbled with fear and awful reverence,
Before the footestoole of his Majesty,
Throw thy self down with trembling innocence,
Ne dare look up with corruptible eye,
On the dred face of that great Deity,
For fear, lest if he chance to look on thee,
Thou turn to naught, and quite confounded be.
But lowly fall before his mercy seat,
Close covered with the Lambs integrity,
From the iustwrath of his auengefull threate,
That sits upon the righteous throne on hy:
His throne is built upon Eternity,
More firm and durable then steel or brass,
Or the hard diamond, which them both does pass.
His scepter is the rod of Righteousness,
With which he bruseth all his foes to dust,
And the great Dragon strongly does repress,
Under the rigor of his judgment just;
His seat is Truth, to which the faithful trust;
From whence proceed her beams so pure and bright,
That all about him sheddeth glorious light.
Light far exceeding that bright blazing spark,
Which darted is from Titans flaming head,
That with his beams enlumineth the dark
The dark and dampish air, whereby al things are red:
Whose nature yet so much is marvelled
Of mortal wits, that it does much amaze
The greatest wisards, which thereon do gaze.
But that immortal light which there does shine,
Is many thousand times more clear,
More excellent, more glorious, more divine,
Through which to God all mortal actions here,
And even the thoughts of men, do plain appear:
For from the eternal Truth it does proceed,
Through heavenly virtue, which her beams do breed.
With the great glory of that wondrous light,
His throne is all encompassed around,
And hid in his own brightness from the sight
Of all that look thereon with eyes unsound:
And underneath his feet are to be found,
Thunder, and lightning, and tempestuous fire,
The instruments of his auenging ire.
There in his bosom Sapience does sit,
The sovereign dearling of the Deity,
Clad like a Queen in royal robes, most fit
For so great power and peerless majesty.
And all with gemmes and jewels gorgeously
Adornd, that brighter then the stars appear,
And make her native brightness seem more clear.
And on her head a crown of purest gold
Is set, in sign of highest sovereignty,
And in her hand a scepter she does hold,
With which she rules the house of God on hy,
And menageth the euer-mouing sky,
And in the same these lower creatures all,
Subjected to her power imperial.
Both he auen and earth obey unto her will,
And all the creatures which they both contain:
For of her fullness which the world does fill,
They all partake, and do in state remain,
As their great Maker did at first ordain,
Through observation of her high beheast,
By which they first were made, and still increast.
The fairness of her face no tongue can tell,
For she the daughters of all wemens race,
And Angels eke, in beauty does excel,
Sparkled on her from Gods own glorious face,
And more increast by her own goodly grace,
That it does far exceed all humane thought,
Ne can on earth compared be to ought.
Ne could that Painter (had he lived yet)
Which pictured Venus with so curious quill,
That all posterity admyred it,
Have purtrayd this, for all his maistring skill;
Ne she her self, had she remained still,
And were as fair, as fabling wits do feign,
Could once come near this beauty sovereign.
But had those wits the wonders of their days,
Or that sweet Teian Poet which did spend
His plenteous vain in setting forth her praise,
Seen but a glims of this, which I pretend,
How wondrously would he her face commend,
Above that Idol of his fayning thought,
That all the world should with his rimes be fraught?
How then dare I, the nouice of his Art,
Presume to picture so divine a wight,
Or hope to express her least perfections part,
Whose beauty filles the heavens with her light,
And darkes the earth with shadow of her sight?
Ah gentle Muse thou art too weak and faint,
The pourtraict of so heavenly hew to paint.
Let Angels which her goodly face behold
And see at will, her sovereign praises sing,
And those most facred mysteries unfold,
Of that fair love of mighty heavens king.
Enough is me t'admyre so heavenly thing,
And being thus with her huge love possessed,
In the only wonder of her self to rest.
But who so may, thrice happy man him hold,
Of all on earth, whom God so much does grace,
And lets his own Beloved to behold:
For in the view of her celestial face,
All joy, all bliss, all happiness have place,
Ne ought on earth can want unto the wight,
Who of her self can win the wishfull sight.
For she out of her secret threasury,
Plenty of riches forth on him will power,
Even heavenly riches, which there hidden ly
Within the closet of her chastest bower,
The Eternal portion of her precious dowre,
Which mighty God has given to her free,
And to all those which thereof worthy be.
None thereof worthy be, but those whom she
Vouchsafes to her presence to receive,
And lets them her lovely face to see,
Whereof such wondrous pleasures they conceive,
And sweet contentment, that it does bereave
Their soul of sense, through infinite delight,
And them transport from flesh into the spright.
In which they see such admirable things,
As carries them into an ecstasy,
And hear such heavenly notes, and carolings
Of Gods high praise, that filles the brazen sky,
And feel such joy and pleasure inwardly,
That makes them all worldly cares forget,
And only think on that before them set.
Ne from thenceforth does any fleshly sense,
Or idle thought of earthly things remain,
But all that erst seemd sweet, seems now offense,
And all that pleased erst, now seems to pain,
Their joy, their comfort, their desire, their gain,
Is fixed all on that which now they see,
All other sights but feigned shadows be.
And that fair lamp, which uses to inflame
The hearts of men with self consuming fire,
Thenceforth seems foul, and full of sinful blame;
And all that pomp, to which proud minds aspyre
By name of honor, and so much desire,
Seems to them baseness, and all riches dross,
And all mirth sadness, and all lucre loss.
So full their eyes are of that glorious sight,
And senses fraught with such satietie,
That in naught else on earth they can delight,
But in th'aspect of that felicity,
Which they have written in their inward ey;
On which they feed, and in their fastened mind
All happy joy and full contentment find.
Ah then my hungry soul, which long have fed
On idle fancies of thy foolish thought,
And with false beauties flattring bait misled,
Have after vain deceiptfull shadows sought,
Which all are fled, and now have left thee naught,
But late repentance through thy follies prief;
Ah cease to gaze no matter of thy grief.
And look at last up to that sovereign light,
From whose pure beams alperfect beauty springs,
That kindles love in every godly spright,
Even the love of God, which loathing brings
Of this vile world, and these gay seeming things;
With whose sweet pleasures being so possessed,
Thy straying thoughts henceforth for ever rest.
Daphnaida.

AN ELEGY UPON THE DEATH OF THE NOBLE AND VIRTUOUS DOVGLAS Howard, daughter
and heir of Henry Lord Howard, Viscount Byndon, and wife of Arthur Gorges
Esquier.

Dedicated to the Right honorable the Lady Helena, Marquess of Northampton.

By Ed. Sp.

ANCHORA SPEI

printer's or publisher's device

AT LONDON Printed for William Ponsonby, 1596.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE AND Virtuous Lady Helena Marquess of North-hampton.
I Have the rather presumed humbly to offer unto your Honor the dedication of
this little Poem, for that the noble and virtuous Gentlewoma^ of whom it is
written, was by match near alied, and in affection greatly devoted unto your
Ladyship. The occasion why I wrote the same, was as well the great good fame
which I heard of her deceassed, as the particular good will which I bear unto
her husband Master Arthur Gorges, a lover of learning and virtue, whose house,
as your Ladyship by marriage has honored, so do I find the name of them by
many notable records, to be of great antiquity in this Realm; and such as
have ever borne themselves with honoarable reputation to the world, and
unspotted loyalty to their Prince and Country: besides so lineally are they
descended from the Howards, as that the Lady Anne Howard, eldest daughter to
John Duke of Norfolk, was wife to Sir Edmund, mother to Sir Edward, and
grandmother to Sir William and Sir Thomas Gorges Knights. And therefore I do
assure my self, that no due honor done to the white Lion, but will be most
grateful to your Ladyship, whose husband and children do so nearly
participate with the blood of that noble family. So in all duty I recommende
this Pamphlet, and the good acceptance thereof, to your honorable favor and
protection. London this first of January. 1591.

Your Honors humbly ever. Ed. Sp.

DAPHNAIDA.
WHat ever man he be, whose heavy mind
With grief of mournful great mishap oppressed,
Fit matter for his cares increase would find:
Let read the rufull plaint herein expressed,
Of one (I ween) the wofulst man alive;
Even sad Alcyon, whose empierced breast,
Sharp sorrow did in thousand pieces riue.
But who so else in pleasure finds sense,
Or in this wretched life does take delight,
Let him be banished far away from hence:
Ne let the sacred Sisters here be hight,
Though they of sorrow heavily can sing;
For even their heavy song would breed delight:
But here no tunes, save sobs and groans shall ring.
In stead of them, and their sweet harmony,
Let those three fatal Sisters, whose sad bands
Do weaue the direful threeds of destiny,
And in their wrath break off the vital bands,
Approach hereto: and let the dreadful Queen
Of darkness deep come from the Stygian strands,
And grisly Ghosts to hear this doleful teene.
In gloomie evening, when the weary Sun,
After his days long labor drew to rest,
And sweatie steedes now having over run
The compast sky, began water in the west,
I walked abroad to breath the freshing air
In open fields, whose flowring pride oppressed
With early frosts, had lost their beauty fair.
There came unto my mind a troublous thought,
Which daily does my weaker wit possess,
Ne lets it rest, until it forth have brought
Her long borne Infant, fruit of heaviness,
Which she conceived has through meditation
Of this worlds vainness, and life's wretchedness,
That yet my soul it deeply does empassion.
So as I muzed on the misery
In which men live, and I of many most,
Most miserable man; I did epsy
Where toward me a sorry wight did cost,
Clad all in black, that mourning did bewray:
And Iaakob staff in hand devoutly crossed,
Like to some Pilgrim, come from far away.
His careless locks, vncombed and unshorn,
Hong long adowne, and beard all over grown,
That well he seemd to be some wight forlorn;
Down to the earth his heavy eyes were thrown
As loathing light: and ever as he went,
He sighed soft, and inly deep did groan,
As if his heart in pieces would have rent.
Approaching nigh, his face I vewed nere,
And by the semblant of his countenance,
Me seemd I had his person seen else where,
Most like Alcyon seeming at a glaunce;
Alcyon he, the iollie Shepherd swain,
That wont full merrily to pipe and dance,
And fill with pleasance every wood and plain.
Yet half in doubt, because of his disguize,
I softly said, Alcyon? There withal
He looked a side as in disdainefull wise,
Yet stayed not: till I again did call.
Then turning back, he said with hollow sound,
Who is it, that does name me, woeful thrall,
The wretchedst man that treads this day on ground?
One, whom like woefulness impressed deep,
Has made fit mate thy wretched case to hear,
And given like cause with thee to wail and weep:
Grief finds some ease by him that like does bear,
Then stay Alcyon, gentle shepherd stay
(Quoth I) till thou have to my trusty care
Committed, what thee does so ill apay.
Cease foolish man (said he half wrothfully)
To seek to hear that which cannot be told:
For the huge anguish, which does multiply
My dying pains, no tongue can well unfold:
Ne do I care, that any should bemone
My hard mishap or any weep that would,
But seek alone to weep, and dye alone.
Then be it so (quoth I) that thou art bent
To die alone, unpitied, vnplained,
Yet ere thou die, it were convenient
To tell the cause, which thee thereto constrained:
Least that the world thee dead accuse of guilt,
And say, when thou of none shall be maintained,
That thou for secret crime thy blood have spilt.
Who life dooes loath, and longs to be unbound
From the strong shackles of frail flesh (quoth he)
Naught cares at all, what they that live on ground
Deem the occasion of his death to be:
Rather desires to be forgotten quight,
Than question made of his calamity,
For hearts deep sorrow hates both life and light.
Yet since so much thou seemst to rue my grief,
And car'st for one that for himself cares naught,
(Sign of thy love, though naught for my relief:
For my relief exceeds living thought)
I will to thee this heavy case relate,
Then harken well till it to end be brought,
For never did thou hear more hapless fate.
Whilome Ivsde (as thou right well do know)
My little flock on western downs to keep.
Not far from whence Sabrinaes stream does flow,
And flowrie bancks with silver liquor steep.
Naught card I then for worldly change or chance,
For all my joy was on my gentle sheep,
And to my pype to caroll and to dance.
It there befell, as I the fields did range
Fearelesse and free, a fair young Lioness,
White as the native Rose before the change,
Which Venus blood did in her leaves impresse.
I spied playing on the grassie plain
Her youthful sports and kindly wantonness,
That did all other Beasts in beawtie stain.
Much was I moved at so goodly sight;
Whose like before, mine eye had seldom seen,
And began to cast, how I her compass might,
And bring to hand, that yet had never been:
So well I wrought with mildnes and with pain,
That I her caught disporting on the green,
And brought away fast bound with silver chain.
And afterward I handled her so sayre,
That though by kind she stout and saluage were,
For being borne an ancient Lions hair,
And of the race, that all wild beasts do fear;
Yet I her framed and wanso to my bent,
That she became so meek and mild of cheer,
As the least lamb in all my flock that went.
For she in field, where ever I did wend,
Would wend with me, and wait by me all day:
And all the night that I in watch did spend,
If cause required, or else in sleep, if nay,
She would all night by me or watch or sleep;
And evermore when I did sleep or play,
She of my flock would take full wary keep.
Safe then and safest were my fillie she epe,
Ne feared the Wolf, ne feared the wildest beast:
All were I drowned in carelessequiet deep:
My loucly Lionosse without beheast
So careful was for them and for my good,
Thta when I waked, neither most nor least
I found miscarried or in plain or wood.
Often did the Shepheatils, which my hap did hear,
And often their lasses which my lack enuyde,
Daily resort to my from far and near,
To see my Lioness, whose prailes wide
Where spread abroad, and when her worthiness
Much greater than the rude report they try'de,
They her did praise, and my good fortune bless.
Long thus Lioyed in my happiness,
And well did hope my joy would have no end:
But oh fond man, that in worlds fickleness
Reposedst hope, or weenedst her thy friend,
That glories most in mortal miseries,
And daily does her changefull counfels bend
To make new matter fit for Tragedies.
For whilst I was thus without dread or dout,
A cruel Satyr with his murdrous dart,
Greedy of mischief, ranging all about,
Gave her the fatal wound of deadly smart:
And reft from me my sweet companion,
And reft fro me my love, my life, my heart:
My Lioness (an woe is me) is gone.
Out of the world thus was she reft away,
Out of the world, unworthy such a spoil;
And borne to heaven, for he auen a fitter pray:
Much fitter than the Lion, which with toil
Alcides slew, and fixed in firmament;
Her now I seek throughout this earthly soil,
And seeking miss, and missing do lament.
Therewith he began afresh to wail and weep,
That I for pity of his heavy plight,
Could not abstain mine eyes with tears to steep:
But when I saw the anguish of his spright
Some deal alaid, I him bespake again.
Certes Alcyon, painful is thy plight,
That it in me breeds almost equal pain.
Yet does not my dull wit well understand
The riddle of thy loved Lioness;
For rare it seems in reason to be skand,
That man, who does the whole worlds rule possess
Should to a beast his noble heart embase,
And be the vassal of his vassalesse:
Therefore more plain aread this doubtful case.
Then sighing sore, Daphne thou knew (quoth he)
She now is dead; ne more endured to say:
But fell to ground for great extremity,
That I beholding it, with deep dismay
Was much appald, and lightly him vprearing,
Revoked life, that would have fled away,
All were my self through grief in deadly drearing.
Then began I him to comfort all my best,
And with mild counsel strove to mitigate
The stormy passion of his troubled breast,
But he thereby was more empassionate:
As stubborn steed, that is with curb restrained,
Becomes more fierce and fervent in his gate,
And breaking forth at last, thus dearnely plained.
1 What man henceforth that breaths vital air,
Will honor heaven, or heavenly powers adore?
Which so unjustly do their judgments share;
Among earthly wights, as to afflict so sore
The innocent, as those which do transgress,
And do not spare the best or fairest, more
Than worst or fowlest, but do both oppress.
If this be right, why did they then create
The world so fair, since fairness is neglected?
Or why be they themselves immaculate,
If purest things be not by them respected?
She fair, she pure, most fair, most pure she was,
Yet was by them as thing impure rejected:
Yet she in pureness, heaven it self did pas.
In pureness and in all celestial grace,
That men admire in goodly womankind;
She did excel and seemed of Angels race,
Living on earth like Angel new diuinde,
Adorned with wisdom and with chastity:
And all the dowries of a noble mind,
Which did her beauty much more beautify.
No age has bred (since fair Astraea left
The sinful world) more virtue in a wight,
And when she parted hence, with her she reft
Great hope; and robbed her race of bounty quight:
Well may the shepherd lasses now lament,
For doubble loss by her has on them light;
To loose both her and bounties omament.
Ne let Elisa royal Shepherdess
The praises of my parted love envy,
For she has praises in all plenteousnesse,
Powered upon her, like showers of Castaly
By her own Shepherd, Colin her own Shepherd,
That her with heavenly hymns does deifie,
Of rusticke muse full hardly to be betterd.
She is the Rose, the glory of the day,
And mine the Primrose in the lowly shade,
Mine, ah not mine; amiss I mine did say:
Not mine but his, which mine a while her made:
Mine to be his, with him to live for ay:
O that so fair a flower so soon should fade,
And through untimely tempest fall away.
She fell away in her first ages spring,
Whilst yet her leaf was green, and fresh her rind,
And whilst her branch fair blossoms forth did bring,
She fell away against all course of kind:
For age to dye is right, but youth is wrong;
She fell away like fruit blown down with wind:
Weep Shepherd weep to make my vndersong.
2 What heart so stony hard, but that would weep,
And pour forth fountains of incessant tears?
What Timon, but would let compassion creep
Into his breast, and pierce his frosen ears?
In stead of tears, whose brackish bitter well
I wasted have, my heart blood dropping wears,
To think to ground how that fair blossom fell.
Yet fell she not, as one enforst to dye,
Ne did with dread and grudging discontent,
But as one toyld with travel down does lie,
So lay she down, as if to fleepe she went,
And closde her eyes with careless quiemesse;
The whiles soft death away her spirit hent,
And soul assoyld from sinful fleshlinesse.
Yet ere that life her lodging did forsake,
She all resolved and ready to remone,
Calling to me (ay me) this wise bespake;
Alcyon, ah my first and latest lone,
Ah why does my Alcyon weep and mourn,
And grieve my ghost, that ill more him behoue,
As if to me had chaunst some evil turn?
I, since the messenger is come for me,
That summons souls unto the bridale feast
Of his great Lord, must needs depart from thee,
And straight obey his soneraine beheast:
Why should Alcyon then so sore lament,
That I from misery shall be releast,
And freed from wretched long imprisonment?
Our days are full of dolor and disease,
Our life afflicted with incessant pain,
That naught on earth may lessen or appease.
Why then should I desire here to remain?
Or why should he that loves me, sorry be
For my deliverance, or at all complain
My good to hear, and toward joys to see?
I go, and long desired have to go,
I go with gladness to my wished rest,
Whereas no worlds sad care, nor wasting woe
May come their happy quiet to molest,
But Saints and Angels in celestial thrones
Eternally him praise, that has them blessed;
There shall I be amongst those blessed ones.
Yet ere I go, a pledge I leave with thee
Of the late love, the which betwixt us past,
My young Ambrosia, in lieu of me
Love her: so shall our love for ever last.
Thus dear adieu, whom I expect ere long:
So having said, away she softly past:
Weep Shepherd weep, to make mine vndersong.
3 So often as I record those piercing words,
Which yet are deep engraven in my breast,
And those last deadly accents, which like swords
Did wound my heart and rend my bleeding chest,
With those sweet sugared speeches do compare,
The which my soul first conquered and possessed,
The first beginners of my endless care;
And when those pallid cheeks and ashie hew,
In which sad death his pourtraiture had writ,
And when those hollow eyes and deadly view,
On which the cloud of ghastly night did sit,
I match with that sweet smile and cheerful brow,
Which all the world subdued unto it;
How happy was I then, and wretched now?
How happy was I, when I saw her lead
The Shepherds daughters dancing in arownd?
How trimly would she trace and softly tread
The tender grass with rosye garland crowned?
And when she list advance her heavenly voice,
Both Nymphs and Muses nigh she made astownd,
And flocks and shepherds caused to rejoice.
But now ye Shepherd lasses, who shall lead
Your wandering troops, or sing your virelayes?
Or who shall dight your bowres, since she is dead
That was the Lady of your holy days?
Let now your bliss be turned into bale,
And into plaints convert your joyous plays,
And with the same fill every hill and dale.
Let Bagpipe never more be heard to shrill,
That may allure the senses to delight;
Ne ever Shepherd sound his Oaten quill
Unto the many, that provoke them might
To idle pleasance: but let ghastlinesse
And drearie horror dim the cheerful light,
To make the image of true heaviness.
Let birds be silent on the naked spray,
And shady woods resound with dreadful yells:
Let streaming floods their hasty courses stay,
And parching drouth dry up the crystal wells;
Let the earth be barren and bring forth no flowers,
And the air be filled with noise of doleful knells,
And wandering spirits walk untimely hours.
And Nature nurse of every living thing,
Let rest her self from her long weariness,
And cease henceforth things kindly forth to bring,
But hideous monsters full of ugliness:
For she it is, that has me done this wrong,
No nurse, but Stepdame, cruel, merciless,
Weep Shepherd weep to make my vndersong.
4 My little flock, whom erst I loved so well,
And wont to feed with finest grass that grew,
Feed ye henceforth on bitter Astrofell,
And stinking Smallage, and unsavory Rue;
And when your mawes are with those weeds corrupted,
Be ye the pray of Wolves: ne will I rue,
That with your carcasses wild beasts be glutted.
Ne worse to you my silly sheep I pray,
Ne sorer vengeance wish on you to fall
Than to my self, for whose confusde decay
To careless heavens I do daily call:
But heavens refuse to hear a wretches cry,
And cruel death does scorn to come at call,
Or grant his boon that most desires to dye.
The good and righteous he away does take,
To plague th'vnrighteous which alive remain:
But the ungodly ones he does forsake,
By living long to multiply their pain:
Else surely death should be no punishment,
As the great Judge at first did it ordain,
But rather riddance from long languishment.
Therefore my Daphne they have taken away;
For worthy of a better place was she:
But me unworthy willed here to stay,
That with her lack I might tormented be.
Since then they so have ordered, I will pay
Penance to her according their decree,
And to her ghost do service day by day.
For I will walk this wandering pilgrimage,
Throuhout the world from one to other end,
And in affliction waste my better age.
My bread shall be the anguish of my mind,
My drink the tears which fro mine eyes do rain,
My bed the ground that hardest I may find:
So will I wilfully increase my pain.
And the my love that was, my Saint that is,
When she beholds from her celestial throne,
(In which she ioyeth in eternal blis)
My bitter penance, will my cafe bemone,
And pity me that living thus do die:
For heavenly spirits have compassion
On mortal men, and rue their misery.
So when I have with sorrow satisfyde
Th'importune fates, which vengeance on me seek,
And th'eauens with long languor pacifyde,
She for pure pity of my sufferance mecke,
Will send for me; for which I daily long,
And will tell then my painful penance ecke:
Weep Shepherd, weep to make my vndersong.
5 Henceforth I hate what ever Nature made,
And in her workmanship no pleasure find:
For they be all but vain, and quickly fade,
So soon as on them blows the Northern wind,
They tarry not, but flit and fall away,
Leaving behind them naught but grief of mind,
And mocking such as think they long will stay.
I hate the heaven, because it does withhould
Me from my love, and eke my love from me;
I hate the earth, because it is the mould
Of fleshly slime and frail mortality;
I hate the fire, because to naught it flies,
I hate the Air, because fighes of it be,
I hate the Sea, because it tears supplies.
I hate the day, because it lends light
To see all things, and not my love to see;
I hate the darkness and the dreary night,
Because they breed sad balefulnesse in me:
I hate all times, because all times do fly
So fast away, and may not stayed be,
But as aspeedie post that passes by.
I hate to speak, my voice is spent with crying:
I hate to hear, loud plaints have duld mine ears:
I hate to taste, for food withholds my dying:
I hate to see, mine eyes are dimd with tears:
I hate to smell, no sweet on earth is left:
I hate to feel, my flesh is numbd with fears:
So all my senses from me are bereft.
I hate all men, and shun all womankinde;
The one, because as I they wretched are,
The other, for because I do not find
My love with them, that wont to be their Star:
And life I hate, because it will not last,
And death I hate, because it life does mar,
And all I hate, that is to come or past.
So all the world, and all in it I hate,
Because it changes ever too and fro,
And never stands in one certain state,
But still unsteadfast round about does go,
Like a Mill wheel, in midst of misery,
Driven with streams of wretchedness and woe,
That dying lives, and living still does dye.
So do I live, so do I daily die,
And pine away in selfe-consuming pain,
Since she that did my vital powers supply,
And feeble spirits in their force maintain
Is fetched fro me, why seek I to prolong
My weary days in dolor and disdain?
Weep Shepherd weep to make my vndersong.
6 Why do I longer live in life's despite?
And do not dye then in despite of death:
Why do I longer see this loathsome light,
And do in darkness not abridge my breath,
Since all my sorrow should have end thereby,
And cares find quiet; is it so uneath
To leave this life, or dolorous to dye?
To live I find it deadly dolorous;
For life draws care, and care continual woe:
Therefore to dye must needs be ioyeous,
And wishfull thing this fad life to forgo.
But I must stay; I may it not amend,
My Daphne hence departing bad me so,
She bad me stay, till she for me did send.
Yet whilst I in this wretched vale do stay,
My weary feet shall ever wandering be,
That still I may be ready on my way,
When as her messenger does come for me:
Ne will I rest my feet for feebleness,
Ne will I rest my limbs for frailty,
Ne will I rest mine eyes for heaviness.
But as the mother of the Gods, that sought
For fair Eurydice her daughter dear
Throghout the world, with woeful heavy thought;
So will I travel whilst I tarry here,
Ne will I lodge, ne will I ever lin,
Ne when as drouping Titan draws near
To loose his teeme, will I take up my Inn.
Ne sleep (the harbenger of weary wights)
Shall ever lodge upon mine eyelids more;
Ne shall with rest refresh my fainting sprights,
Nor failing force to former strength restore,
But I will wake and sorrow all the night
With Philumene, my fortune to deplore,
With Philumene, the partner of my plight.
And ever as I see the star to fall,
And under ground to go, to give them light
Which dwell in darkness, I to mind will call,
How my fair Star (that shind on me so bright)
Fell suddenly, and faded under ground;
Since whose departure, day is turned to night,
And night without a Venus star is found.
But soon as day does show his deawie face,
And calls forth men unto their toylsome trade,
I will withdraw me to some darkesome place,
Or some dear came, or solitary shade,
There will I sigh, and sorrow all day long,
And the huge burden of my cares un lade:
Weep Shepherd, weep, to make my vndersong.
7 Henceforth mine eyes shall never more behold
Fair thing on earth, ne feed on false delight
Of ought that framed is of mortal mould,
Since that my fairest flower is faded quight:
For all I see is vain and transitory,
Ne will be held in any steadfast plight,
But in a moment loose their grace and glory.
And ye fond men, on fortunes wheel that ride,
Or in ought under heaven repose assurance,
Be it riches, beauty, or honors pride:
Be sure that they shall have no long endurance,
But ere ye be aware will flit away;
For naught of them is yours, but the only vsance
Of a small time, which none ascertaine may.
And ye true Lovers, whom desastrous chance
Has far exiled from your Ladies grace,
To mourn in sorrow and sad sufferaunce,
When ye do hear me in that desert place,
Lamenting loud my Daphnes Elegy,
Help me to wail my miserable case,
And when life parts, vouchsafe to close mine eye.
And ye more happy Lovers, which enjoy
The presence of your dearest loves delight,
When ye do hear my sorrowful annoy,
Yet pity me in your empassiond spright,
And think that such mishap, as chaunst to me,
May happen unto the most happiest wight;
For all men's states alike unsteadfast be.
And ye my fellow Shepherds, which do feed
Your careless flocks on hills and open plains,
With better fortune, than did me succeed,
Remember yet my undeserved pains,
And when ye hear, that I am dead or slain,
Lament my lot, and tell your fellow swains;
That sad Alcyon did in life's disdain.
And ye fair Damsels Shepherds dear delights,
That with your loves do their rude hearts possess,
When as my hearse shall happen to your sightes,
Vouchsafe to deck the same with Cyparesse;
And cuer sprinckleb rackish tears among,
In pity of my undeserved distress,
The which I wretch, endured have thus long.
And ye poor Pilgrims, that with resslesse toil
Weary your selves in wandering desert ways,
Till that you come, where ye your vows assoyle,
When passing by ye read these wosfull lays
On my grave written, rue my Daphnes wrong,
And mourn for me that languish out my days:
Cease Shepherd, cease, and end thy vndersong.
Thus when he ended had his heavy plaint,
The heauiest plaint that ever I heard found,
His cheeks wext pale, and sprights began to faint,
As if again he would have fallen to ground;
Which when I saw, I (stepping to him light)
Amooued him out of his stony swound,
And began him to recomfort as I might.
But he no way recomforted would be,
Nor suffer solace to approach him me,
But casting up asdeinfull eye at me,
That in his tramce I would not loath him lie,
Did rend his hair, and beat his blubbred face,
As one disposed wilfully to die,
That I sore grieved to see his wretched ^ase.
Tho when the pang was somewhat ouerpast,
And the outrageous passion nigh appeased,
I him desyrde, since day was ouercast,
And dark night fast approached, to be pleased
To turn aside unto my Cabinet,
And stay with me, till he were better eased
Of that strong stownd, which him so sore beset.
But by no means I could him win thereto,
Ne longer him entreat with me to stay,
But without taking leave he forth did go
With staggring pace and dismal looks dismay,
As if that death he in the face had seen,
Or hellish hags had met upon the way:
But what of him became I cannot ween.
FINIS.

