A Spectacle for Usurers and Succers of poor folks blood.

Whereby they may see, Gods just dislike and revenge, upon their uncharitable
and Uncivil oppression.

With a horrible murder committed by a young man, that hanged his own Mother
in August last. 1606.

depiction of usurer being devoured by rats

Imprinted at London for John Wright, and are to be sold at his shop near
Christs-Church gate. 1606.

A true treatise, declaring how miraculously an Usurer was devoured by Rats, at
Charret near to the city of Aix in Prouence, within the Kingdom of France,
on the second day of August. 1606.
According to the French Copy, printed at Lions, by Ledger Bonhomme.
AH, what a world is this, when we must have amongst us, who are baptized in
the name of Christ Jesus, and do carry the names of Christians, men so void
of all charity, and so without all humanity toward their neighbors, that they
are not ashamed by all forts of greedy covetousness and extortions, as by
unreasonable enhaunsing the price of victuals, and all other cruel and unkind
means, to oppress and utterly undo their poor Christian brethren and
sisters, without any remorse or pity to the fatherless children, or
distressed widows, as I may say, that we seem rather to live among Jews,
than Christians? Yea, it may be avouched, that the Turks and Saracins, I had
almost said, the very savage and brutish Americanes, would be ashamed to plot
and practice such horrible and accursed means, for the spoiling and pining of
poor Christians, as is daily practiced among us, who make, profession to have
been trained in Christ his school. Which might justly make to blush for shame
our Usurers, and insatiable greedy minded men, who care for nothing but
enriching themselves: although it be with the ruin and utter undoing of
infinite poor people, who^ they suffer, yea cause to perish. Whose cries
undoubtedly do ascend unto theeares of the Lord, and he being a just Judge,
will be avenged thereon. And though he punish not visibly in this life always
the unmercifulness of wicked worldlings: yet has he sundry times showed
fearful tokens of his displeasure against such dealings: Among which, mark
this notable example following.

Upon the second day of August last past, in the year of Grace 1606, at
Charret, a little town nere to the City of Aix in Prouence, within the
Kingdom of France, there dwelt a rich Usurer, named George Rolet, of the age
of about fifty years. He had three Graniers full of Corn, and two cellars
full of wine, and much cattle of his own, feeding on both sides of Aix:
besides great store of money that was owing him. And he neuerlent any money, or
money worth, to any, without sufficient pawnes, or else to men that were
wealthy. And he so dealt by lending, as every six months he would commonly
double his principal: so ungraciously had he hardened his heart by wicked
vsuryes and extortions to enrich himself.

His wife was dead, having left him no child neither had he any body, for whom
he might thus miserably strape these goods together, but one Niece: for to
enrich whom, and to fulfill his own insatiable covetousness, he omitted no
vile, and abominable practices of usury unassayed, never regarding how
wretchedly his soul were left quite abandoned of charity and al piety, whereby
it became a bondslaue to the Devil, who as a hangman or executioner of Gods
just wrath against the wicked, pay those their hire in the end, that are ruled
by him.

Now it so fell out, that this wretched Usurer had not sold any of his corn or
wine that year, staying until a time should come when he might sell it
deerer. but when he saw the year so far past, as he could hope for no
greater price, he thought it best to set open his Graniers, and to sell his
corn: which he did upon a Market day. And forthwith came hasting thither,
many people of sundry sexes and ages, for to buy Corn. Amongst others came a
poor woman a Widow, from a Village called Montalien, being a little league
distant from thence. The woman's name was Claudia Balm: who meaning to buy
corn, asked him, how he sold a bushel? He answered, five shillings. What
(said she) five shillings? Now that God bestows such plenty on us, you might
well affoard it for three shillings. I had rather (said he) be eaten up with
Rats, then I would let it go for less then five.

There withal, at the same instant, comes another poor woman, from another
Village not far off, called Werre in, to whom this Usurer had lent four
crownes-worth of cor^e, upon condition, that she must pay him a third partmore
then the price of the Market, and besides, to pay six pence a month usury for
every crown: for assistance whereof, he had received of the said woman, named
Margaret Paschall, seven rings in pawn. This foresaid day, came the said
Margaret Paschall, and said unto him, Master George Rolet, I have brought you
the money which I owe you, and I pray you give me my rings again, He answered
her, yes Gossip, you shall. Then she telling him out first the principal, and
then the interest, demands again ver rings. The Usurer takes her money and
locketh it up, and opening a cupbord* takes out a folded paper, and delivers
it unto her, saying: Lo Gossip, there be your goods. She opening the paper,
ands one of her rings wanting, where at being much grieved, she said unto him.
I have paid you your full asking. and yet I miss here one of my rings: I
beseech you deal not so hardly with met, as to keep it, but let me have it
again. He denied, that he had any mo of her then the six. The woman,
contrariwise avouched, that she had delivered to him seven, describing unto
him what manner of one it was, saying, that it was the first that ever her
deceassed husband had given her. He still denied it. The poor woman fell on
weeping, and still affirmed, that he had her said ring. He after many other
oaths and protestations, did in the end (according to his usual manner of
swearing, or rather of cursing himself) beseech God, for to suffer the Rats to
eat and devour him up, if ever he had, or received any such ring. This poor
woman sell on her knees, saying: I pray and most humbly beseech God Almighty,
that it may so come to pass, and that he show some wonderful token upon you
or me, to make manifest whether of us do swear falsely: and I verily trust,
that God who is most just, will declare miraculously, which of us holds the
truth, and which the contrary.

She had scarce made an end of her prayer, but immediately there came (a
wonderful thing to teh an innumerable sort of Rats, which set upon this
Usurer, some on one part of him, some on another. And albeit his servants
sought by all means to drive them a way, they labored in vain: for the more
they hunted them away, the mo in multitudes came still, more and more assayling
him.

His friends and kinsfolk caused him to be stripped, and so to be wrapped in
a clean cloth, and to be carried a way into another lodging. But he was no
sooner brought thither, but these vermin Rats (as just executors of Gods will)
came running thither in flocks, and gnawed his body, who had miserably sucked,
gnawed and devoured the goods of very many poor people. And apply what
remedies those that were about him could do by any means, yet could they not
stay these Rats, but that in twenty and four hours they had deprived him of
his life. So he died the second of August, in the year of our Lord 1606. about
four of the clock in the afternoon. His friends and kinsfolk thought to
make some funeral or burial of the remainder of his body, which these little
creatures had left: whereof they were deceived, for before midnight, they had
scarf left him the least show of a body, but had carried all away: so as no
man can tell what became thereof.

Thus may we learn by this wicked man's miserable end, that we are not
created for our selves alone, but to be helpers and comforters one to another:
and that we ought not by usury, oppression, and such unjust means, to catch
away, from others uncharitably and unconscionably, that which is not our own.
And much less, that we should in any wise swear by his name rashly and
falsely, who is a just judge and almighty. Neither to curse our selves but
rather to pray for Gods daily blessing. God for his mercyes sake amend us all.

A Treatise most true, of a cursed young youth of Remilly in Sauoy, who
miserably and shamefully strangled and hanged his own mother.
With his punishment for the same, on Satterday the 19. of August. 1606.
According to the French Copy printed at Toulouse by Peter Chantenefue.

NOtwithstanding that the cruel murder, committed by that first murderer
Cain on the person of his brother, be left unto all posterityes mentioned, as a
heinous wickedness much displeasing to God, and abominable before men: yet
have there been some found so inhumane and cruel, as they have imitated, if
not surpassed him in such villainy. For what shall we say of Nero, who most
unnaturally caused his own mother to be slain, and her womb to be ripped
up, that he might see the place where he lay during the time that his mother
bare him? And not much less detestably performed, will this treatise show a
parricide.

At Remilly, a little town of Sauoy, there dwelt a woman named Gasparde
Brisin, widow to one Anthony Moillon deceassed, and she had a son called
George Moillon, now come to the age of near twenty years. Her deceassed
husband, knowing her to be a thrifty howswife, had by will certain years
before, left her mistress and gouernesse of all his goods, without yielding
account thereof to any, before her son were come to the age of twenty years:
and then, if she and he did not like to dwell together any longer, she to have
her part of the land, with half of the goods, and a thousand Florins overplus.

The son now seeing himself almost twenty years old, kept ruffian like and
disordered company, which is too common a thing now a days. He then must haunt
tauerns, play, dance, and riot lustily. The mother, on the other side sought to
bridle this young colt, and would not let him have too much money, for fear
he should spoil himself, with voluptuousnes.

He still was urged by those that kept him company, to force his mother to
feed him with money, or else to sell her yarne, linen cloth, plate, or
whatsoever else he could catch, and to make money thereof. He, as pliable as
wax, to take any impression, following their counsel, was daily at his
mother for money. She, (though hardly) would now and then give him a little:
which not so soon received, but it was presently spent. He then comes for
more, which not obtaining, he falls to threatening and to offer foul speeches
unto her.

At whitsontide last, the wake being at that place then when many youths
should assemble, this young man, among all other, would be stored with money
and spend prodigally among his companions, took six of the best wether sheep
that were in his mothers pasture, and sold them to the butcher. Then during the
merriment, who but he at dansing, banketting and play: so as the last of the
three holidaies he had not a penny left him of six crowns that he had
received, and of whatsoever else he could steal from his mother. The same day
comes the shepherd, and his mistress, enquiring of her sheep, and the number
of her wethers, understood how her son had sold six of them, coming in an
evening where they were She asked her son, what he had done with the money
that he had received for the wethers. He answered, that he had what to do
therewith, and that he would sell many mo of them, giving her sundry bad words.
She takes up a cudgel to strike him. But he, being wickedly bent, can to her,
and did wring it out off her hands. Hereupon, she being very angry, goes out
into the street to his companions that brought him to disorder, willing the^
not to maintain her son any more in his lewdnes, nor to call him out to go
with the^ henceforth, and to cause him so fondly to spend his money. Her son
very angry to see that his mother had uttered his faults in the open street,
and that before young maids, who mocked him therewith, hatcheth within his mind
a mische euous imagination, and being tempted by the Devil who watches how he
may allure us to yield unto that which may work our endless woe, so possessed
this young man's mind, that he purposed one night to kill his own mother. He used
to lie in a bed by himself in his mothers chamber. This poor mother being in
bed, sighed much for grief at her sons ill husbandry and carriage. He then
watches and attends his time until she was a steep: and in the end
perceiving her fast a sleep, takes a cord, which he had prepared of purpose,
and having made a noose, he coming near his mothers bed, had at first some
remorse of conscience, as he was about to put the cord about her neck: but
remembering how the day before she had shamed him openly, and that before young
wenches, whom he esteemed more then his mother, this accursed son, possessed
with the Devil puts the cord about her neck and strangleth her. And when he
saw that she had no longer any breath left in her, he hoyseth her neck up by
the cord, making it fast to the upper part of the bedsteed and so left her
hanging. Then he takes her keys, which were under the boister of her bed, and
opens all her chests, finding there about two hundred crowns, with rings,
borders and other jewels: trusseth up altogether, and as soon as the Cock had
crowed, he commanded to have a horse sadled, ryseth, puts on his clothes,
his boots and spurs, and having shut fast the chamber door, where his mother
was, goes to horseback, and told the man servant that he had appointed with
his mother to go to Chambery.

This new Orestes, or killer of his mother, being on his way, every step that
he set forward, seems to behold burning firebrands before him: fear followed
him at the heels, and a guilty conscience of that he had done affrighted him:
the least noise that he heard, was ever and anon as an alarm unto him, so as
he knew not which ways to turn him.

In the mean time, when the morning was well up, his mothers maids, wondering
that their mistress rose not, knocked at her chamber door, calling her, but
in vain, for no body answered. At length they call in the neighbors, and
brea^e open the door, and find the woman there hanging. they fetch the Castle
keeper of the place, and straight way it is suspected to be her sons doing.
Then he was sent after in have, and being known all the way he went, was
taken at Marches, and so carried safe to Chambery, where he freely confessed
this wicked and horrible fact, and was there condemned by the Senate, to be
pin^hed his flesh off under the paps in three places of the town with pincers
red hot, and afterward to be burned to death in the market called Vernay. And
so was he executed on Satterday the nineteenth of August 1606. At his execution
he willed all youth to take example by him, and to be obedient to their fathers
and mothers, and to beware of haun^ing lewd company. When the fire was burning
about him, he cried unto God for mercy until the last gasp.

This may serve an example both for parents, to be careful how they bring up
their children in the fear of God. and in good nurture betimes, while they are
under their government: and for youth, to take heed that they eschew riotous
and lewd company, least thereby the Devil procure them to the like desperate
and damnable attempts. And so God guide us in the right way.

FINIS.

