Daphnaida.

An Elegy upon the death of the noble and virtuous Douglas Howard, Daughter
and heir of Henry Lord Howard, Viscount Byndon, and wife of Arthure Gorges
Esquier.

Dedicated to the Right honorable the Lady Helena, Marquess of Northampton.

By Ed. Sp.

AT LONDON Printed for William Ponsonby, dwelling in Paul's Churchyard at the
sign of the Bishops head 1591.

To the right Honorable and virtuous Lady Helena Marquess of North-hampton.
I Have the rather presumed humbly to offer unto your Honor the dedication of
this little Poem, for that the noble and virtuous Gentlewoman of whom it is
written, was by match near alied, and in affection greatly devoted unto your
Ladyship. The occasion why J wrote the same, was as well the great good fame
which J heard of her deceassed, as the particular good will which J bear unto
her husband Master Arthure Gorges, a lover of learning and virtue, whose house
as your Ladyship by marriage has honored, so do J find the name of them by
many notable records, to be of great antiquity in this Realm; and such as have
ever borne themselves with honorable reputation to the world, and unspotted
loyalty to their Prince and Country: besides so linially are they descended
from the Howards, as that the Lady Anne Howard, eldest daughter to John Duke of
Norfolk, was wife to Sir Edmund, mother to Sir Edward, and grandmother to Sir
William and Sir Thomas Gorges Knights. And therefore J do assure my self
that no due honor done to the white Lion, but will be most grateful to your
Ladyship, whose husband and children do so nearly participate with the blood
of that noble family. So in all duty J recommend this Pamphlet, and the good
acceptance thereof to your honorable favor and protection. London this first
of January. 1591.

Your Honors humbly ever. E. Sp.

Daphnaida.
WHat ever man he be, whose heavy mind
With grief of mournful great mishap oppressed,
Fit matter for his cares increase would find:
Let read the rufull plaint herein expressed
Of one (I ween) the wofulst man alive;
Even sad Aleyon, whose empierced breast
Sharp sorrow did in thousand pieces riue.
But who so else in pleasure finds sense,
Or in this wretched life does take delight,
Let him be banished far away from hence:
Ne let the sacred Sisters here be hight,
Though they of sorrow heavily can sing;
For even their heavy song would breed delight:
But here no tunes, save sobs and groans shall ring.
In stead of them, and their sweet harmony,
Let those three fatal Sisters, whose sad hands
Do weaue the direful threads of destiny,
And in their wrath break off the vital bands,
Approach hereto: and let the dreadful Queen
Of darkness deep come from the Stygian strands,
And grisly Ghosts to hear this doleful teene.
In gloomie evening, when the weary Sun
After his days long labor drew to rest,
And sweatie steeds now having over run
The compast sky, began water in the west,
I walked abroad to breath the freshing air
In open fields, whose flowring pride oppressed
With early frosts, had lost their beauty fair.
There came unto my mind a troublous thought,
Which daily does my weaker wit possess,
Ne lets it rest, until it forth have brought
Her long borne Infant, fruit of heaviness,
Which she conceived has through meditation
Of this worlds vainness and life's wretchedness,
That yet my soul it deeply does empassion.
So as I muzed on the misery,
In which men live, and I of many most,
Most miserable man; I did epsy
Where toward me a sorry wight did cost,
Clad all in black, that mourning did bewray:
And Iaakob staff in hand devoutly crossed,
Like to some Pilgrim come from far away.
His careless locks, vncombed and unshorn
Hong long adowne, and beard all over grown,
That well he seemd to be sum wight forlorn;
Down to the earth his heavy eyes were thrown
As loathing light: and ever as he went,
He sighed soft, and inly deep did groan,
As if his heart in pieces would have rent.
Approaching nigh, his face I vewed nere,
And by the semblant of his countenance,
Me seemd I had his person seen elsewhere,
Most like Alcyon seeming at a glaunce;
Aleyon he, the iollie Shepherd swain,
That wont full merrily to pipe and dance,
And fill with pleasance every wood and plain.
Yet half in doubt because of his disguize,
I sostlie said Alcyon? There with all
He looked a side as in disdainefull wise,
Yet stayed not: till I again did call.
Then turning back he said with hollow sound,
Who is it, that does name me, woeful thrall,
The wretchedst man that treades this day on ground?
One, whom like woefulness impressed deep
Has made fit mate thy wretched case to hear,
And given like cause with thee to wail and weep:
Grief finds some ease by him that like does bear,
Then stay Alcyon, gentle shepherd stay,
(Quoth I) till thou have to my trusty ear
Committed, what thee does so ill apay.
Cease foolish man (said he half wrothfully)
To seek to hear that which cannot be told.
For the huge anguish, which does multiply
My dying pains, no tongue can well unfold:
Ne do I care, that any should bemone
My hard mishap, or any weep that would,
But seek alone to weep, and dye alone.
Then be it so (quoth I) that thou art bent
To die alone, vnpiried, vnplained,
Yet ere thou die, it were convenient
To tell the cause, which thee theretoo constrained:
Least that the world thee dead accuse of guilt,
And say, when thou of none shall be maintained,
That thou for secret crime thy blood have spilt.
Who life dooes loath, and longs to be unbound
From the strong shackles of frail flesh (quoth he)
Naught cares at all, what they that live on ground
Deem the occasion of his death to be:
Rather desires to be forgotten quight,
Than question made of his calamity,
For hearts deep sorrow hates both life and light.
Yet since so much thou seemst to rue my grief,
And carest for one that for himself cares naught,
(Sign of thy love, though naught for my relief:
For my relief exceeds living thought)
I will to thee this heavy case relate,
Then harken well till it to end be brought,
For never did thou hear more hapless fate.
Whilome I used (as thou right well do know)
My little flock on western downs to keep.
Not far from whence Sabrinaes stream does flow,
And flowrie bancks with silver liquor steep:
Naught card I then for worldly change or chance,
For all my joy was on my gentle sheep,
And to my pype to caroll and to dance.
It there befell as I the fields did range
Fearelesse and free, a fair young Lioness,
White as the native Rose before the change,
Which Venus blood did in her leaves impresse,
I spied playing on the grassie plain
Her youthful sports and kindly wantonness.
That did all other Beasts in beawtie stain.
Much was I moved at so goodly sight;
Whose like before mine eye had seldom seen,
And began to cast, how I her compass might,
And bring to hand, that yet had never been:
So well I wrought with mildnes and with pain,
That I her caught disporting on the grene,
And brought away fast bound with silver chain.
And afterward I handled her so fair,
That though by kind she stout and saluage were,
For being borne an ancient Lions hair,
And of the race, that all wild beasts do fear;
Yet I her framed and wan so to my bent,
That she became so meek and mild of cheer,
As the least lamb in all my flock that went.
For she in field, where ever I did wend,
Would wend with me, and wait by me all day:
And all the night that I in watch did spend,
If cause required, or else in sleep, if nay,
She would all night by me or watch, or sleep;
And evermore when I did sleep or play,
She of my flock would take full wary keep.
Safe then and safest were my silly sheep,
Ne feared the Wolf, ne feared the wildest beast:
All were I drowned in careless quiet deep:
My lovely Lioness without beheast
So careful was for them and for my good,
That when I waked, neither most nor least
I found miscarried or in plain or wood.
Often did the Shepeheards, which my hap did hear,
And often their lasses which my luck enuide,
Daily resort to me from far and near,
To see my Lioness, whose praises wide
Were spread abroad; and when her worthiness
Much greater than the rude report they tri'de,
They her did praise, and my good fortune bless.
Long thus I ioyed in my happiness,
And well did hope my joy would have no end:
But oh fond man, that in worlds fickleness
Reposedst hope, or weenedst her thy friend,
That glories most in mortal miseries,
And daily does her changefull counsels bend:
To make new matter fit for Tragedies.
For whilst I was thus without dread or dout,
A cruel Satyr with his murdrous dart,
Greedy of mischief ranging all about,
Gave her the fatal wound of deadly smart:
And reft fro me my sweet companion,
And reft fro me my love, my life, my heart,
My Lioness (ah woe is me) is gone.
Out of the world thus was she reft away,
Out of the world, unworthy such a spoil;
And borne to heaven, for heaven a fitter pray:
Much fitter than the Lion, which with toil
Alcides slew, and fixed in firmament;
Her now I seek throughout this earthly soil,
And seeking miss, and missing do lament.
Therewith he began afresh to wail and weep,
That I for pity of his heavy plight.
Could not abstain mine eyes with tears to steep:
But when I saw the anguish of his spright
Some deal alaid, I him bespake again.
Certes Alcyon, painful is thy plight,
That it in me breeds almost equal pain.
Yet does not my dull wit well understand
The riddle of thy loved Lioness;
For rare it seems in reason to be skand
That man, who does the whole worlds rule possess
Should to a beast his noble heart embase,
And be the vassal of his vassalesse:
Therefore more plain aread this doubtful case.
Then sighing sore, Daphne thou knew (quoth he)
She now is dead; ne more endured to say:
But fell to ground for great extreamitie,
That I beholding it, with deep dismay
Was much appald, and lightly him vprearing,
Revoked life that would have fled away,
All were my self through grief in deadly drearing.
Then began I him to comfort all my best,
And with mild counsel strove to mitigate
The stormy passion of his troubled breast,
But he thereby was more empassionate:
As stubborn steed, that is with curb restrained,
Becomes more fierce and ferue nt in his gate;
And breaking forth at last, thus dearnelie plained.
1 What man henceforth, that breaths vital air,
Will honor heaven, or heavenly powers adore?
Which so unjustly do their judgments share;
Among earthly wightes, as to afflict so sore
The innocent, as those which do transgress,
And do not spare the best or fairest more,
Than worst or fowlest, but do both oppress.
If this be right, why did they then create
The world so fair, since fairness is neglected?
Or why be they themselves immaculate,
If purest things be not by them respected?
She fair, she pure, most fair most pure she was,
Yet was by them as thing impure rejected:
Yet she in pureness, heaven it self did pas.
In pureness and in all celestial grace,
That men admire in goodly womankinde,
She did excel and seemed of Angels race
Living on earth like Angel new diuinde,
Adorned with wisdom and with chastity:
And all the dowries of a noble mind,
Which did her beauty much more beautify.
No age has bred (since fair Astraea left
The sinful world) more virtue in a wight,
And when she parted hence, with her she reft
Great hope; and robbed her race of bounty quight:
Well may the shepherd lasses now lament,
For dubble loss by her has on them light;
To loose both her and bounties ornament.
Ne let Elisa royal Shepherdess
The praises of my parted love envy,
For she has praises in all plenteousnesse
Powered upon her like showers of Castaly
By her own Shepherd, Colin her own Shepherd,
That her with heavenly hymns does deifie,
Of rustic muse full hardly to be betterd.
She is the Rose, the glory of the day,
And mine the Primrose in the lowly shade,
Mine, ah not mine; amiss I mine did say:
Not mine but his, which mine awhile her made:
Mine to be his, with him to live for ay:
O that so fair a flower so soon should fade,
And through untimely tempest fall away.
She fell away in her first ages spring,
Whilst yet her leaf was green, and fresh her rind,
And whilst her branch fair blossoms forth did bring,
She fell away against all course of kind:
For age to dye is right, but youth is wrong;
She fell away like fruit blown down with wind:
Weep Shepherd weep to make my vndersong.
2 What heart so stony hard, but that would weep,
And pour forth fountains of incessant tears?
What Timon, but would let compassion creep
Into his breast, and pierce his frosen ears?
In stead of tears, whose brackish bitter well
I wasted have, my heart blood dropping wears,
To think to ground how that fair blossom fell.
Yet fell she not, as one enforst to dye,
Ne did with dread and grudging discontent
But as one toyld with travail down does lie,
So lay she down, as if to sleep she went,
And closde her eyes with careless quietness;
The whiles soft death away her spirit hent,
And soul assoyld from sinful fleshlinesse.
Yet ere that life her lodging did forsake,
She all resolved and ready to remove,
Calling to me (ay me) this wise bespake;
Alcyon, ah my first and latest love,
Ah why does my Alcyon weep and mourn,
And grieve my ghost, that ill mote him behoue,
As if to me had chanst some evil turn?
I, since the messenger is come for me,
That summons souls unto the bridale feast
Of his great Lord, must needs depart from thee,
And straight obey his sovereign beheast:
Why should Alcyon then so sore lament,
That I from misery shall be releast,
And freed from wretched long imprisonment?
Our days are full of dolor and disease,
Our life afflicted with incessant pain,
That naught on earth may lessen or appease.
Why then should I desire here to remain?
Or why should he that loves me, sorry be
For my deliverance, or at all complain
My good to hear, and toward joys to see?
I go, and long desired have to go,
I go with gladness to my wished rest,
Whereas no worlds sad care, nor wasting woe
May come their happy quiet to molest,
But Saints and Angels in celestial thrones
Eternally him praise, that has them blessed,
There shall I be amongst those blessed ones.
Yet ere I go, a pledge I leave with thee
Of the late love, the which betwixt us past,
My young Ambrosia, in lieu of me
Love her: so shall our love for ever last.
Thus dear adieu, whom I expect ere long:
So having said, away she softly past:
Weep Shepherd weep, to make mine vndersong.
3 So often as I record those piercing words,
Which yet are deep engraven in my breast,
And those last deadly accents, which like swords
Did wound my heart and rend my bleeding chest,
With those sweet sugared speeches do compare,
The which my soul first conquered and possessed,
The first beginners of my endless care;
And when those pallid cheeks and ashy hew,
In which sad death his pourtraicture had writ,
And when those hollow eyes and deadly view,
On which the cloud of ghastly night did sit,
I match with that sweet smile and cheerful brow,
Which all the world subdued unto it;
How happy was I then, and wretched now?
How happy was I, when I saw her lead
The Shepherds daughters dancing in a rownd?
How trimly would she trace and softly tread
The tender grass with rosy garland crowned?
And when she list advance her heavenly voice,
Both Nimphs and Muses nigh she made astownd,
And flocks and shepherds caused to rejoice.
But now ye Shepherd lasses, who shall lead
Your wandering troops, or sing your virelayes?
Or who shall dight your bowres, since she is dead
That was the Lady of your holy days?
Let now your bliss be turned into bale,
And into plaints convert your joyous plays,
And with the same fill every hill and dale.
Let Bagpipe never more be heard to shrill,
That may allure the senses to delight;
Ne ever Shepherd sound his Oaten quill
Unto the many, that provoke them might
To idle pleasance: but let ghastlinesse
And drery horror dim the cheerful light,
To make the image of true heaviness.
Let birds be silent on the naked spray,
And shady woods resound with dreadful yells:
Let streaming floods their hasty courses stay,
And parching drougth dry up the crystal wells;
Let the earth be barren and bring forth no flowers,
And the air be filled with noise of doleful knells,
And wandering spirits walk untimely hours.
And Nature nurse of every living thing,
Let rest her self from her long weariness,
And cease henceforth things kindly forth to bring,
But hideous monsters full of ugliness:
For she it is, that has me done this wrong,
No nurse, but Stepdame cruel merciless,
Weep Shepherd weep to make my under song.
4 My little flock, whom erst I loved so well,
And wont to feed with finest grass that grew,
Feed ye henceforth on bitter Astrofell,
And stinking Smallage, and unsavory Rue;
And when your mawes are with those weeds corrupted,
Be ye the pray of Wolves: ne will I rue,
That with your carcasses wild beasts be glutted.
Ne worse to you my silly sheep I pray,
Ne sorer vengeance wish on you to fall
Than to my self, for whose confusde decay
To careless heavens I do daily call:
But heavens refuse to hear a wretches cry,
And cruel death does scorn to come at call,
Or grant his boon that most desires to dye.
The good and righteous he away does take,
To plagueth unrighteous which alive remain:
But the ungodly ones he does forsake,
By living long to multiply their pain:
Else surely death should be no punishment,
As the great Judge at first did it ordain,
But rather riddance from long languishment.
Therefore my Daphne they have taken away;
For worthy of a better place was she:
But me unworthy willed here to stay,
That with her lack I might tormented be.
Since then they so have ordered, I will pay
Penance to her according their decree,
And to her ghost do service day by day.
For I will walk this wandering pilgrimage
Throughout the world from one to other end,
And in affliction wast my better age.
My bread shall be the anguish of my mind,
My drink the tears which fro mine eyes do rain,
My bed the ground that hardest I may find;
So will I wilfully increase my pain.
And she my love that was, my Saint that is,
When she beholds from her celestial throne,
(In which she ioyeth in eternal blis)
My bitter penance, will my case bemone,
And pity me that living thus do die:
For heavenly spirits have compassion
On mortal men, and rue their misery.
So when I have with sorrow satisfide
Th'importune fates, which vengeance on me seek,
And th'eauens with long languor pacifide,
She for pure pity of my sufferance meek,
Will send for me; for which I daily long,
And will tell then my painful penance eeke:
Weep Shepherd, weep to make my under song.
5 Henceforth I hate what ever Nature made,
And in her workmanship no pleasure find:
For they be all but vain, and quickly fade,
So soon as on them blows the Northern wind,
They tarry not, but flit and fall away,
Leaving behind them naught but grief of mind,
And mocking such as think they long will stay.
I hate the heaven, because it does withhold
Me from my love, and eke my love from me;
I hate the earth, because it is the mold
Of fleshly slime and frail mortality;
I hate the fire, because to naught it flies,
I hate the Air, because sighs of it be,
I hate the Sea, because it tears supplies.
I hate the day, because it lends light
To see all things, and not my love to see;
I hate the darkness and the drery night,
Because they breed sad balefulnesse in me:
I hate all times, because all times do fly
So fast away, and may not stayed be,
But as a speedy post that passes by.
I hate to speak, my voice is spent with crying:
I hate to hear, loud plaints have duld mine ears:
I hate to taste, for food withholds my dying:
I hate to see, mine eyes are dimd with tears:
I hate to smell, no sweet on earth is left:
I hate to feel, my flesh is numbd with fears:
So all my senses from me are bereft.
I hate all men, and shun all womankinde;
The one because as I they wretched are,
The other for because I do not find
My love with them, that wont to be their Star:
And life I hate, because it will not last,
And death I hate, because it life does mar,
And all I hate, that is to come or past.
So all the world, and all in it I hate,
Because it changes ever too and fro,
And never stands in one certain state,
But still unsteadfast round about does go,
Like a Mill wheel, in midst of misery,
Driven with streams of wretchedness and woe,
That dying lives, and living still does dye.
So do I live, so do I daily die,
And pine away in selfe-confuming pain,
Since she that did my vital powers supply,
And feeble spirits in their force maintain
Is fetched fro me, why seek I to prolong
My weary days in dolor and disdain?
Weep Shepherd weep to make my under song.
6 Why do I longer live in life's despite?
And do not dye then in despite of death:
Why do I longer see this loathsome light,
And do in darkness not abridge my breath,
Since all my sorrow should have end thereby,
And cares find quiet; is it so uneath
To leave this life, or dolorous to dye?
To live I find it deadly dolorous;
For life draws care, and care continual woe:
Therefore to dye must needs be ioyeous,
And wishfull thing this sad life to forgo.
But I must stay; I may it not amend,
My Daphne hence departing bad me so,
She bad me stay, till she for me did send.
Yet whilst I in this wretched vale do stay,
My weary feet shall ever wandering be,
That still I may be ready on my way,
When as her messenger does come for me:
Ne will I rest my feet for feebleness,
Ne will I rest my limbs for frailty,
Ne will I rest mine eyes for heaviness.
But as the mother of the Gods, that sought
For fair Eurydice her daughter dear
Throghout the world, with woeful heavy thought;
So will I travel whilst I tarry here,
Ne will I lodge, ne will I ever lin,
Ne when as drouping Titan draws near
To loose his teeme, will I take up my Innne.
Ne sleep (the harbenger of weary wights)
Shall ever lodge upon mine ey-lids more;
Ne shall with rest refresh my fainting sprights,
Nor failing force to former strength restore,
But I will wake and sorrow all the night
With Philumene, my fortune to deplore,
With Philumene, the partner of my plight.
And ever as I see the stars to fall,
And under ground to go, to give them light
Which dwell in darkness, I to mind will call,
How my fair Star (that shinde on me so bright)
Fell suddenly, and faded under ground;
Since whose departure, day is turned to night,
And night without a Venus star is found.
But soon as day does show his deawie face,
And calls forth men unto their toylsome trade,
I will withdraw me to some darksome place,
Or some deep cave, or solitary shade;
There will I sigh and sorrow all day long,
And the huge burden of my cares unlade:
Weep Shepherd, weep, to make my vndersong.
7 Hence forth mine eyes shall never more behold
Fair thing on earth, ne feed on false delight
Of ought that framed is of mortal moulde,
Since that my fairest flower is faded quight:
For all I see is vain and transitory,
Ne will be held in any steadfast plight,
But in a moment loose their grace and glory.
And ye fond men on fortunes wheel that ride,
Or in ought under heaven repose assurance,
Be it riches, beauty, or honors pride:
Be sure that they shall have no long endurance,
But ere ye be aware will flit away;
For naught of them is yours, but the only vsance
Of a small time, which none ascertaine may.
And ye true Lovers, whom desastrous chance
Has far exiled from your Ladies grace,
To mourn in sorrow and sad sufferaunce,
When ye do hear me in that desert place
Lamenting loud my Daphnes Elegy,
Help me to wayle my miserable case,
And when life parts, vouchsafe to close mine eye.
And ye more happy Lovers, which enjoy
The presence of your dearest loves delight,
When ye do hear my sorrowful annoy,
Yet pity me in your empassiond spright,
And think that such mishap, as chaunst to me,
May happen unto the most happiest wight;
For all men's states alike unsteadfast be.
And ye my fellow Shepherds, which do feed
Your careless flocks on hills and open plains,
With better fortune, than did me succeed,
Remember yet my undeserved pains,
And when ye hear, that I am dead or slain,
Lament my lot, and tell your fellow swains,
That sad Alcyon did in life's disdain.
And ye fair Damsels Shepherds dear delights,
That with your loves do their rude hearts possess,
When as my hearse shall happen to your sightes,
Vouchsafe to deck the same with Cyparesse;
And ever sprinckle brackish tears among,
In pity of my undeserved distress,
The which I wretch, endured have thus long.
And ye poor Pilgrims, that with restless toil
Weary your selves in wandering desert ways,
Till that you come, where ye your vows assoyle,
When passing by ye read these woeful lays
On my grave written, rue my Daphnes wrong,
And mourn for me that languish out my days:
Cease Shepherd, cease, and end thy vndersong.
Thus when he ended had his heavy plaint,
The heauiest plaint that ever I heard sound,
His checkes wext pale, and sprights began to faint,
As if again he would have fallen to ground;
Which when I saw, I (stepping to him light)
Amooued him out of his stony swound,
And began him to recomfort as I might.
But he no way recomforted would be,
Nor suffer solace to approach him nie,
But casting up asdeinfull eye at me,
That in his trance I would not let him lie,
Did rend his hair, and beat his blubbred face
As one ^^^osed wilfully to die,
That I sore ^^^u'd to see his wretched case.
Tho when the pang was somewhat ouerpast,
And the outrageous passion nigh appeased,
I him desirde, since day was ouercast,
And dark night fast approached, to be pleased
To turn aside unto my Cabinet,
And stay with me, till he were better eased
Of that strong stownd, which him so sore beset.
But by no means I could him win thereto,
Ne longer him entreat with me to stay,
But without taking leave, he forth did go
With staggring pace and dismal looks dismay,
As if that death he in the face had seen,
Or hellish hags had met upon the way:
But what of him became I cannot ween.
FINIS.

